CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF SALINE, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted October 4, 1993 
Effective October 16, 1993 
Republished 2004 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SALINE, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Patrick J. Little 
Mayor 
____________ 
Hubert Beach 
Gretchen Driskell 
Gary L. Hahn 
Carol A. Klomp 
John (Wes) Langer 
Randall C. Roberts 
City Council 
____________ 
David M. White 
City Administrator 
____________ 
Allan W. Grossman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dianne S. Hill 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
SALINE, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLIICATION 
____________ 
Gretchen Driskell 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dean B. Girbach 
Mary L. Hess 
Rick Kuss 
Patrick J. Little 
Phyllis Martin 
Alicia Ping 
City Council 
____________ 
Larry Stoever 
City Manager 
____________ 
Allan W. Grossman 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dianne S. Hill 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Saline, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the republication of the Code were the 1993 recodification of the 1968 Code, as supplemented through February 24, 2003, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLES SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Allen Z. Paul, Supervising Editor, and Laura Johnson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Brian C. Taylor, Supervising Editor, and Aline True, Integrity Coordinator, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Dianne S. Hill, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida  
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
CITY OF SALINE 
WASHTENAW COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 516 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SALINE, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CITY OF SALINE ORDAINS: 
    SECTION 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Saline, Michigan" published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    SECTION 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before March 15, 1993, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    SECTION 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    SECTION 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or both fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the City may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    SECTION 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    SECTION 6. Ordinances adopted after March 15, 1993, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    SECTION 7. That the Saline City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance and cause the same to be published in the manner required by law; and this ordinance shall take full force and effect ten (10) days after the date of its publication. 
    A TRUE COPY OF SAID "CODE OF ORDINANCES, CITY OF SALINE, MICHIGAN" CAN BE INSPECTED AND/OR OBTAINED AT THE OFFICE OF THE SALINE CITY CLERK AT 100 N. HARRIS STREET, SALINE, MICHIGAN 48176, DURING REGULAR WORKING HOURS. 
    Moved by Councilmember Hahn supported by Councilmember Driskell that the foregoing Ordinance No. 516 be adopted. 
AYES: Little, Beach, Driskell, Hahn, Roberts 
NAYS: None 
ABSENT: Klomp, Langer 
    Ordinance No. 516 declared adopted at a Regular meeting of the Saline City Council held on October 4, 1993. 
/s/   
      Patrick J. Little, Mayor   /s/   
      Dianne S. Hill 
      Saline City Clerk       I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true and exact copy of the ordinance adopted by the Saline City Council at a Regular meeting held on October 4, 1993, and was published in The Saline Reporter on October 6, 1993. 
/s/   
      Dianne S. Hill, Clerk   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 732 12-20-10 Include 9 734  6-20-11 Include 9 735 12- 5-11 Include 9 737  2-27-12 Include 9 739  5-21-12 Include 9 740  5-21-12 Include 9 743  6- 4-12 Include 9 736 12-17-12 Include 10 736-1 12-17-12 Include 10 738 10- 1-12 Include 10 744  6-18-12 Include 10 745 10- 1-12 Include 10 746 11-13-12 Include 10 747 11-13-12 Include 10 748  7- 1-13 Include 11 749  7-15-13 Omit 11 750  9-30-13 Include 11 751 11-18-13 Include 11 752 11- 4-13 Include 11 753 12-16-13 Include 11 754  1-13-14 Include 11 755  4- 7-14 Include 11 756  9- 8-14 Include 11 757  9- 8-14 Include 11 758 11-10-14 Omit 11 759 11-17-14 Include 11 760  3-16-15 Include 11 761  3-16-15 Include 11 762  3-16-15 Include 11 763  3-16-15 Include 11 764  3-16-15 Include 11 765  3-16-15 Include 11 766  3-16-15 Include 11 767  3-16-15 Include 11 768  3-16-15 Include 11 770  7- 6-15 Omit 11 771  6-15-15 Include 11 772  8-10-15 Include 11 773  8-17-15 Include 11 774  8-17-15 Include 11 775  8-17-15 Include 11 776  8-17-15 Include 11 777  8-17-15 Include 11 778  9-14-15 Omit 11 779  2- 2-16 Omit 11 781  2-29-16 Omit 11 782  4- 4-16 Omit 11 783  5- 2-16 Include 11 784  7-11-16 Omit 11 785  7-11-16 Include 11 786  6-20-16 Include 11 787  9-19-16 Include 12 788  9-19-16 Include 12 789 11-14-16 Omit 12 790  5-15-17 Include 12 791  6-19-17 Include 12 792  9-18-17 Omit 12 793  3- 5-18 Include 12 794 12- 4-17 Include 12 795 12-18-17 Include 12 796  2- 5-18 Include 12 797  2- 5-18 Include 12 799  2- 5-18 Include 12 800  2-12-18 Include 12 798  5- 7-18 Include 13 801  5- 7-18 Include 13 802  4-16-18 Include 13 803  4- 5-18 Include 13  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
PREAMBLE 
    We, the People of the City of Saline, County of Washtenaw, State of Michigan, pursuant to the authority granted by the Constitution and the Statutes of the State of Michigan, in order to establish a City government, and to provide for and maintain the essential interest and welfare of all our people, do hereby ordain and establish this Charter of the City of Saline, Michigan. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Saline, as adopted by the electors on November 6, 1962, and effective on January 1, 1963. Amendments to the Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq.; power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

CHAPTER 1. - NAME AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1.1. - Name and boundaries. 
    The municipal corporation now existing is known as the "City of Saline" and comprises all those tracts of land situated in the townships of Saline, York, Pittsfield and Lodi in the County of Washtenaw and described as follows, to wit:...all in Washtenaw County, State of Michigan, shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of City of Saline, and include the territory above described, together with such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto, and less such territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom, in accordance with law. 
Editor's note- The description of the boundaries of the city has been omitted from this publication by the editors since it is subject to change by annexation ordinances. 
CHAPTER 2. - CORPORATE POWERS 

Sec. 2.1. - General powers. 
    The city shall have power to exercise any and all of the powers which cities are and/or may hereafter be permitted to exercise under the constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, as fully and completely as though the powers were specifically enumerated herein, and no enumeration of particular powers of the city in this charter shall be held to be exclusive. 
State Law reference- Permissible that charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
CHAPTER 3. - ELECTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq.; mandatory that charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c). 

Sec. 3.1. - Qualification of electors. 
    The residents of the city having the qualifications of electors in the State of Michigan, and no others, shall be electors of the city. 
State Law reference- Qualifications for registration as elector, MCL 168.492. 
Sec. 3.2. - Election procedure. 
    The election of all city officers shall be on a nonpartisan basis. The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to registration and city elections except as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and except as otherwise provided in this charter. The whole of the City of Saline shall be one ward for election purposes. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Sec. 3.3. - Election date and terms of office; compensation. 
    A regular city election shall be held each year on the Tuesday following the first Monday in November for the purpose of electing three councilmen for terms of two years each; provided, however, that in even numbered years, in addition to the election of said three councilmen, a mayor shall be elected for a term of two years. All officers so elected shall serve their respective terms from the first Monday in January following their election and shall receive a salary of three hundred dollars ($300.00) each per year payable quarterly in equal installments. In addition to the salary for a councilman, the mayor shall receive a salary of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per year payable quarterly in equal installments, excepting the incumbent mayor. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-3-70) 
Editor's note- A local officers' compensation commission has been formed to determine salaries. See section 2-271 et seq. 
Sec. 3.4. - Special elections. 
    Special elections shall be held when called by resolution of the city council at least thirty (30) days in advance of the election, or when required by this charter or the general laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639. 
Sec. 3.5. - Petitions for nomination. 
    Every person desiring to become a candidate for any elective office under this charter shall, not later than the Tuesday following the first Monday in August, except as otherwise provided by law, file with the city clerk a petition signed by not less than fifty (50) registered electors of the city. Blank petitions shall be furnished by the city clerk. The city clerk shall immediately determine the sufficiency of such petitions, and when he finds any petition insufficient, shall forthwith notify the candidate, who may file an amended petition not later than the fifteenth day prior to the election. All such petitions not circulated by the candidate named therein must be accompanied by the candidate's written consent to nomination. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-8-88; Am'd by electors, 11-2-93) 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Sec. 3.6. - Form of ballot. 
    The ballots for all elections under this charter shall contain the names of the candidates arranged under the several offices, with a square at the left of each name, and a notation above each office-group of the number to be voted for, without any party designation, or mark, or anything indicating what the opinion of the candidates are or may be. 
State Law reference- Arrangement of ballot, MCL 168.706. 
Sec. 3.7. - Canvass of votes. 
    The council shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes cast at all city elections. The council shall meet at 8:00 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on the first Thursday after such election and publicly canvass the election returns. The candidate or candidates, where more than one are to be elected to the same office, who shall receive the greatest number of votes shall be elected. In case of a tie vote for any office, the council shall decide by lot which of the persons who are tied shall be elected. 
State Law reference- Canvass of returns, MCL 168.323. 
Sec. 3.8. - Notice of election; acceptance of office. 
    Notice of the election or appointment of any officer of the city, and of the requirements of any official bond to be given by any officers, shall be given him within five days after election or appointment, by the city clerk. If within fifteen days from the date of notice, such officer shall not take, subscribe and file with the city clerk his oath of office, or shall not execute and file with the mayor the required bond, such neglect shall be deemed a refusal to serve and the office shall thereupon be deemed vacant. 
CHAPTER 4. - GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 4.1. - The city council. 
    The government of the city, and the powers granted by this charter thereto, except as otherwise provided by this charter, shall be vested in a council of seven members, including a mayor who shall be the chief executive of the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a). 
Sec. 4.2. - Election of mayor pro tem. 
    The council shall on the first Monday in January following each regular city election choose one of its members to be mayor pro tem for a term of one year. 
Sec. 4.3. - Duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall be the official head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, and for the purpose of military law. He shall preside at all council meetings and appoint all council committees. The mayor shall submit a written legislative program semiannually, at the first council meeting of January and of July of each year, and recommend such measures as he shall deem expedient. He shall sign all warrants for the payment of public funds from the city treasurer. 
Sec. 4.4. - Administrative service. 
    The council shall annually, at its first regular meeting in July of each year, appoint a city clerk, city treasurer, city assessor, health officer, city superintendent, police chief, and a fire chief and may appoint a city attorney, each of whom shall hold office until a successor is appointed by the next succeeding city council. The council may create such additional offices as it may deem necessary and may combine such additional offices and the offices provided for in this charter in one or more individuals in any manner that it deems to be to the best interests of the city. Except as otherwise provided by this charter or the general laws of the state, the duties, powers and compensation of such appointed officials shall be fixed by ordinance, provided that no official may be paid by fees, except as otherwise provided by this charter and that all fees paid to any office or officer under this charter, the ordinances of the city or the general laws of the state, shall be accounted for and paid into the city treasury by the official receiving them. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-2-71) 
Sec. 4.5. - Planning and zoning. 
    The council shall maintain a city planning commission in accordance with and have [having] all the powers and duties granted by the provisions of statute relating to such commissions. 
    The council shall maintain a zoning ordinance in accordance with the provisions of statute relating to such ordinances. Insofar as may be, such ordinance shall provide that zoning be coordinated with the work of the city planning commission. 
CHAPTER 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS REGARDING OFFICERS AND PERSONNEL OF THE CITY 

Sec. 5.1. - Eligibility for office in city. 
    No person shall hold any elective office of the city unless he has been a resident of the city for at least two years immediately prior to the last day for filing petitions for such office and is also a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive city office who is in default to the city or to any other governmental unit of the state. The holding of office by any person who is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be cured within thirty days after written notice thereof by the council or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for such default. 
    Each candidate for elective office shall file with his petition his affidavit that he possesses the qualifications for such office provided in this section. Failure to provide such affidavit shall invalidate his petition. 
    The council shall be the sole judge of the election and qualification of its own members. 
    Each member of a city board or commission created by, or pursuant to, this charter shall have been a resident of this city for at least two years prior to the day of his appointment and shall be a qualified and registered elector of the city on such day and throughout his tenure of office. 
    All administrative and appointive officers shall be United States citizens and freeholders. 
    No incumbent elective city officer shall become a candidate for any elective city office, except to succeed himself, without first resigning from his then incumbent elective city office. Provided, that the provisions hereof shall not apply to any incumbent elective city officer whose term of office will expire with the election at which he is to be a candidate for another elective city office. 
Sec. 5.2. - Vacancies in office; removal from office. 
    Any vacancy on the council shall be filled by appointment by a majority of the remaining members of the council within sixty (60) days after such vacancy occurs; any vacancy in any other elective office and every office to be filled by appointment by the council shall be filled by the affirmative vote of four (4) councilmen. Any appointive officer may be removed by the affirmative vote of four (4) councilmen. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-6-73) 
Sec. 5.3. - Financial interest prohibited. 
    No person holding any elective or appointive office under the city government shall take any official action on any contract with the city or other matter in which he is financially interested, or be a bondsman or surety on any contract or bond given to the city. Any member of the council or other officer violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment, with [in] the discretion of the court. The conviction of any councilman or officer under this section shall operate in itself to forfeit his office. 
Sec. 5.4. - Surety bonds. 
    Any city officer elected or appointed by authority of this charter may be required to give bond to be approved by the council for the faithful performance of the duties of his office, in such sum as the council by ordinance or resolution shall determine and such officers who handle substantial sums of money shall be bonded. All official bonds, except those of the justices of the peace, which shall be the same as provided by state law for justices of the peace in the townships, shall be surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be payable by the city. All official bonds shall be filed with the mayor. 
CHAPTER 6. - THE COUNCIL: PROCEDURE AND MISCELLANEOUS POWERS AND DUTIES 

Sec. 6.1. - Meetings; attendance at meetings. 
    The council shall meet on the first Monday in January following each regular city election and shall hold at least two regular stated meetings each month for the transaction of business, at such time and place within the city as it shall prescribe. Special meetings may be called by the mayor or any two councilmen on at least twelve hours' actual notice to each member of the council, or by written notice left at their respective residences, but any special meeting at which all members of the council are present shall be a legal meeting for all purposes, without such notice. 
    Absence from three consecutive regular meetings shall operate to vacate the seat of a member, unless the absence is excused by the council, by resolution setting forth such excuse and entered in the minutes of the council meeting. The council may by a majority vote of those present compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its meetings and enforce orderly conduct therein. 
Editor's note- Open meetings act requires 18 hours notice, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Sec. 6.2. - Quorum; rules and organization. 
    A majority of the councilmen shall be a quorum for the transaction of business, but a less number may adjourn from time to time. Every ordinance and resolution shall be adopted or passed by the affirmative vote of four councilmen. Unless by affirmative vote of four councilmen, no office shall be created or abolished, no tax or assessment be imposed; street, alley or public ground be vacated, real estate or any interest therein be sold or disposed of, private property be taken for public use, any vote of the council be reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting, nor any money appropriated. No councilman shall vote on any question in which he is financially interested or any question concerning his own official conduct; but on all other questions every councilman present shall vote. On all votes which are not unanimous, the yea and nay vote of each member shall be recorded and published in the regular proceedings of the meeting. The council shall determine the rules of its proceedings, and keep a journal thereof in the English language. The proceedings of each council meeting shall be published within two weeks in a local newspaper selected by the council, but each item of business shall be condensed to a statement of its substance by the clerk, under the direction of the council, unless otherwise provided by this charter or the general laws of the state, and except that any pertinent points of any resolution shall not be omitted, nor any vote of the council; provided, that if there be no newspaper published in the city, publication of the proceedings shall not be required. All sessions of the legislative body and all records of the municipality shall be public. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal of every session, MCL 117.3(m). 
Sec. 6.3. - Investigations. 
    The council shall have authority, for the purpose of hearing or investigating charges against any officer, or making any other investigations of any character, to require the mayor or any justice of the peace to issue subpoenas or process by warrant to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and papers or any records before the council or any committee thereof. In case charges are made against any officer he shall be entitled to have subpoenas issued in his behalf, to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers and records. Whenever the council, or any committee of the members thereof, is authorized to compel the attendance of witnesses for a hearing or investigation, the presiding officer of the council or the chairman of the committee for the time being, shall have power to administer the necessary oaths; and the council or the committee shall have the same power to compel the witnesses to testify as is conferred on justices of the peace. 
Sec. 6.4. - Compensation of council committees. 
    No compensation shall be granted for service on council committees or other official committees. 
Sec. 6.5. - Public notices. 
    When by this charter any officer is required to give publication to any notice, such notice shall be published once in a newspaper selected by the council, printed and circulated in the city; and if there be no newspaper published in the city, such notice shall be printed and posted in at least five public places within the city. 
Sec. 6.6. - Employee welfare benefits. 
    The council shall have the power to adopt and make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards any recognized standard plan of group life, hospital, health or accident insurance or any recognized retirement plan. 
Sec. 6.7. - Public health and safety. 
    The council shall enact such laws as are necessary for the protection of the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property. 
Sec. 6.8. - Naming of parks and regulation of sale thereof. 
    From time to time the city council may, after recommendation by the planning commission, and a public hearing, designate by resolution certain parcels of city-owned property as a park and name the same. Such parcels, after having been so designated and named, shall not be sold, traded, or transferred, unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-6-73) 
CHAPTER 7. - LEGISLATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, art. VII, § 22. 

Sec. 7.1. - Ordinances; effective dates. 
    The style of all ordinances passed by the council shall be: "The City of Saline ordains...." No ordinance shall be revised, altered or amended by reference to its title only, but the section or sections of the ordinance revised, altered, or amended shall be reenacted, and published in full. The effective date of any ordinance shall be prescribed therein and shall not be earlier than one week after its adoption, unless the council shall, upon attaching a declaration of emergency affecting the public peace, health or safety, fix an earlier date; but no ordinance imposing a penalty shall take effect until at least ten days after publication, and no measure making or amending a grant, renewal or extension of a franchise or other special privilege shall ever be passed as an emergency measure. 
Sec. 7.2. - Publication and recording of ordinances. 
    All ordinances when legally enacted shall be recorded by the clerk in a book to be called "The Ordinance Book" and it shall be the duty of the mayor and the clerk to authenticate such records by their official signatures. All ordinances when legally enacted shall be immediately published by the clerk in the same manner as provided for publication of notices in section 6.5. of this charter, and the clerk shall enter his certificate as to the manner and date of publication under such ordinance in the ordinance book, provided, that publication of any ordinance with the regular council proceedings shall be sufficient and that if any ordinance is published in full in advance of publication of the council proceedings, it need not again be published in full with the regular council proceedings. Any ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number and title only, or any section of any ordinance may be repealed by reference to the number and title of the ordinance and the number of the section to be repealed. If the council shall order a general revision and compilation of all ordinances, the printing and binding of not less than one hundred copies of [the] compilation shall be deemed sufficient publication, and all ordinances published in said compilation shall be read and received in evidence in all courts without further proof. It shall be the duty of the council every five years, or oftener if deemed necessary by the council to review all ordinances and bring them up to date. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k). 
Sec. 7.3. - Codification of ordinances. 
    Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the commission shall direct the compilation or codification in printing in looseleaf or pamphlet form of all ordinances of the city then in force. Such compilation or codification shall be completed within one year thereafter. If a codification is completed it shall be maintained thereafter in current form; if a compilation is completed, a recompilation shall be completed at least once in every year thereafter. Any codification may include provisions not previously contained in the ordinances of the city. All requirements for publication of such compilation or codification and of the ordinances contained therein, other provisions of this charter notwithstanding, may be met by making copies thereof available for inspection by, and distribution to, the public at a reasonable charge and by publishing notice of the printing and availability thereof before the effective date thereof. The copies of the ordinances and of any compilation, code or codes referred to in the charter may be certified by the clerk and when so certified shall be competent evidence in all courts and legally established tribunals as to the matter contained therein. 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.56. 
Sec. 7.4. - Initiative and referendum procedure. 
    Ordinances may be initiated by petition. Within sixty days after certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a petition, the council shall take action either by passing the initiated ordinance without alteration, or in amended form, or by rejecting it. If the council shall pass the ordinance without alteration or in amended form, it shall become law; but if the initiated ordinance is adopted in amended form, it shall not take effect if the committee of petitioners named in the petition certify to the clerk within ten days after the measure is adopted that they require submission of the initiated ordinance without alteration to the vote of the electors; and if the initiated ordinance so submitted be approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, the ordinance as passed by the council shall stand repealed. If the council rejects the initiated ordinance outright, it shall be submitted without alteration to the vote of the people. Whenever an initiated ordinance is required by this charter to be submitted to the people, the council shall call a special election within sixty days, but not within thirty days, after action has been taken by the council in accordance with the provisions of this section, unless a regular city or state election or primary is fixed within ninety days, but not within thirty days; and if approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, it shall be deemed enacted and shall be recorded and authenticated as are other ordinances. The repeal of any ordinance may be initiated as here provided for the adoption of ordinances. 
State Law reference- Charter may provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(6). 
Sec. 7.5. - Suspension and repeal of an ordinance. 
    If within thirty days after the passage of any ordinance by the council a petition shall be filed with the city clerk protesting against the ordinance, or any part of it, the protested ordinance or part shall be suspended from going into operation, and where an ordinance has already gone into effect as an emergency measure, its further operation shall be suspended. At the next meeting of the council after certification by the clerk of the sufficiency of a petition, the council shall vote upon whether the protested ordinance or part shall be repealed. If not repealed by the council, it shall be submitted to the electors at the next regular city or state election or primary, or at a special election which may be called for this purpose at the discretion of the council; and unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, it shall stand repealed. 
Sec. 7.6. - Initiatory and referendary petitions. 
    To be effective, initiative and referendum petitions shall be signed only by qualified and registered electors of the city to a number equal to that required for initiatory petitions to place charter amendments on the ballot, and attached to every signature shall be added the date of signing and the place of residence of the signer, the street and number, or other adequate description. The signatures need not be made by one paper, but all petition papers circulated with reference to any ordinance shall be uniform in character. The circulator of each paper shall make an affidavit that each signature appended to the paper was made in his presence and is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be. Signatures shall be in ink or indelible pencil. Initiative petitions shall contain the purported ordinance in full and initiative and referendum petitions alike shall name five persons as a committee to represent the signers. 
    All papers comprising an initiative or referendum petition shall be filed with the city clerk. The clerk shall proceed immediately to determine the sufficiency of the petition, and upon completion of the examination shall attach his certificate of the result. If the petition is defective, the clerk shall show by his certificate in what respect, and shall at once notify the committee of the petitioners of his finding. The petition may be amended within ten days after the making of the certificate by the clerk by the filing of a supplementary petition upon additional papers, which shall be examined and certified by the clerk as before. If the certificate of the clerk shows the petition still insufficient, proceedings thereon shall be terminated, without prejudice to the filing of a new petition for the same purpose. The clerk shall cause any ordinance or proposition which is required to be submitted to the electors, to be published in full, with the notice of election therefor. 
Sec. 7.7. - Referendum ballots. 
    The ballot used when voting upon an ordinance submitted to the electors shall contain a ballot title, which may be distinct from the legal title, and which shall be prepared by the city clerk in a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, of the substance of the ordinance. Below the title shall appear on the ballot the following propositions one below the other, in the order indicated: "For the Ordinance" and "Against the Ordinance." Immediately to the left of each proposition shall be a square, in which by making a cross (x) mark the elector may vote for or against the ordinance or part. 
Sec. 7.8. - Action on conflicting ordinances. 
    If the provisions of two or more ordinances or propositions adopted at the same election be inconsistent, the measure receiving the highest affirmative vote shall prevail in so far as it or its provisions are inconsistent with any other ordinance or proposition adopted at the same election. No ordinance which has been adopted by vote of the electors shall be repealed or amended within two years except by vote of the electors. The council may itself submit propositions for the repeal or amendment of any ordinance at any city election. 
Sec. 7.9. - [Availability.] 
    Initiative and referendum procedures shall be available, to the full extent permitted by law, including but not limited to section 4(i) of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended, to all matters within the scope of the powers of the city exercised by the city council or by any board, commission, department or agency thereof, except as hereinafter provided. The effect of any such action shall be suspended pending referendum if, within thirty (30) days after official public notice thereof, a petition shall be filed with the city clerk, signed by not less than ten percent (10%) of the registered electors of the city, protesting said action and requesting referendum thereon. Upon certification by the clerk of such a petition for referendum, the city action which is the subject of the petition shall be submitted to the electors in the manner required by section 25 of Act No. 279, as amended, being the Home Rule City Act, and unless approved by a majority of the electors voting thereon, such action shall stand repealed, and shall not be reenacted within two (2) years except by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon. Services essential to the peace and safety of the city, emergency services, receipt and expenditure of regular budgeted items, and purchases of less than $5,000.00 shall be excepted from the initiative and referendum procedures herein established. Unless otherwise herein specified, the procedures applicable to initiative and referendum as set forth in section 25 of the Home Rule City Act shall apply. 
(Am'd. by electors, 11-4-75) 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE, BUDGET, AUDIT, PURCHASING 

Sec. 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the City of Saline shall begin with the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year. 
State Law reference- Uniform budgeting and accounting act, MCL 141.421 et seq. 
Sec. 8.2. - Preparation of budget. 
    Before the third Monday in April each other city officer shall submit to the city clerk an itemized estimate of the expenditures for the next fiscal year, of the department or departments under his control. The clerk shall prepare a complete itemized budget for the next fiscal year, and shall submit it to the council on or before the first Monday in May. 
Sec. 8.3. - Budget control. 
    All budget accounts shall be separated as to maintenance and capital expenditures, and every important item in each account shall be listed separately. Once the budget is established, no account can be overdrawn, and no account can be increased except by five-sevenths vote of the council, and any item of any account which is not expended must be turned over to the general fund at the end of each fiscal year, except that the council may transfer unexpended funds, or funds which prove to be in excess of needs, from any account or department to any account or department appropriation which the council may decide to increase as above provided. 
Sec. 8.4. - Adoption of budget. 
    On or before the first Monday in June, the budget for all municipal expenditures for the next fiscal year shall be adopted by resolution for a levy of the amount necessary to be raised by taxation. Upon adoption of the annual tax levy, the assessor shall prepare a tax roll which he shall deliver to the treasurer on or before the twentieth day of June. The taxes thus assessed shall become at once a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed, and the amounts assessed, together with all charges thereon, shall on the first day of July become a lien on the property assessed, of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes until paid. 
Sec. 8.5. - Independent audit; annual report. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all city accounts at least annually, and more frequently if deemed necessary by the council. Such audit shall be made by certified public accountants experienced in municipal accounting selected by the council. The clerk, or such other officers as the council may designate, shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city including a financial report which shall be available for inspection at the office of the clerk, and shall be published annually. 
Sec. 8.6. - System of accounts. 
    The council shall require that the system of accounts maintained by the City of Saline shall conform to such uniform system as may be required by law. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Sec. 9.1. - Tax day; tax roll. 
    The thirty-first day of December shall be the tax day in the City of Saline. The taxable status of persons and real and personal property shall be determined as of the tax day. The subjects of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under the general law. Each year the city assessor shall, on or before the first Monday in March, make and complete an assessment roll of taxable property in the city, and shall submit the roll over his certificate to the council. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection during the week of the second Monday in March, and notice to that effect shall be published by the clerk in advance. Within this period any person may file in writing with the clerk a complaint of any assessment, stating specifically the grounds of the complaint. 
State Law reference- Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Sec. 9.2. - Board of review. 
    In the year of the adoption of this charter the council shall appoint three members to the board of review for one-year, two-year, and three-year terms respectively (terms to begin in January after adoption of this charter), and in January of each succeeding year thereafter for a term of three years, to replace the member whose term expires that year. The council shall fix the compensation of the members of the board. 
    The board of review shall be composed of three freeholders who are qualified and registered electors of this city who during their term of office shall not be city officers or employees or be nominees or candidates for elective city office. The filing by a member of the board of review of his nomination for an elective city office or the filing of a consent thereto shall constitute a resignation from the board of review. 
    The board of review shall annually in February elect its own chairman for the ensuing year, and the assessor shall be clerk of the board and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. 
    Proceedings of the board of review shall be fixed by ordinance which shall provide, among other things deemed necessary by the council, for notice of meetings, notice of assessment changes, confirmation of assessment roll. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a). 
Sec. 9.3. - Meeting of board of review. 
    The board of review shall meet on the third Monday in March to review the roll and to consider any complaints which property owners may make in person, or by attorneys; the board may continue its meeting on such successive days as may be necessary to hear all complaints. Notice of the meeting of the board of review shall be published by the clerk in advance. Before the first Monday in April the board shall complete its review of the roll, which shall, during the next fiscal year be the basis for the levy and collection of all general taxes in the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i). 
Sec. 9.4. - Taxes due; notification thereof. 
    Taxes levied by the city shall be due and payable on the first day of July. The treasurer shall give notice by publication of the collection of the taxes before that date. A collection fee of one percent shall be charged on all taxes collected including taxes collected for other governmental agencies, and in addition after the first day of September, a penalty of three percent and interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month shall be collected on all municipal taxes which shall be delinquent. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Sec. 9.5. - Special assessments. 
    Whenever the council shall determine that the whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement shall be defrayed by an assessment on the owners of the land to be benefited thereby, it shall cause the expense of such improvement to be estimated and shall declare by an entry in its journal whether the whole or what portion thereof shall be assessed to such owners and occupants, specifying the sum to be assessed, the number of installments in which it may be paid, and the portion of the city which it deems to be benefited; provided, however, that the said number of installments shall not be spread over a period greater than ten years. The council shall cause the assessment of the sum to be assessed to be made upon all lands within the designated portion of the city according to benefit, which shall be measured, in case of all street improvements, by front footage. The assessment roll shall be open to public inspection for a period of seven days before the council shall meet to review the roll and hear complaints. The clerk shall give notice in advance by publication of the opening of the roll to public inspection and of the meeting of the council to hear complaints. The clerk shall also give notice to each owner or party in interest by mailing such notice in accordance with the provisions of the statutes in such case made and provided. If at or prior to the hearing the owners of more than one-half of the property to be assessed shall object in writing to the improvement, the assessment shall not be made without unanimous vote of the council. Every special assessment ratified and confirmed by the council after such hearing shall be final and conclusive. Should any special assessment prove insufficient to pay for the improvement and related costs of the project for which it was levied, the council may make an additional pro-rata assessment. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by less than five percent, the council may place the excess in the city treasury; if more than five percent, the excess shall be refunded pro-rata to payments. Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon shall from the date of confirmation of the roll be and remain a lien created by general law for state and county taxes, until paid. Interest at the rate of six percent per annum shall be collected on deferred installments and interest at the rate of three-fourths of one percent per month shall be collected on delinquent installments of such assessments from such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, and in addition to such interest, a penalty of three percent shall be collected on any installment not paid within the time prescribed for its payment. 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5; notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq.; deferment for older persons, MCL 211.761 et seq. 
Sec. 9.6. - Unpaid taxes. 
    The city shall have the right to sell personal property for unpaid taxes and the council may provide for judicial sale of such property. 
    The council may provide by ordinance or resolution that the clerk or treasurer shall bid in for the city any lot of land or premises at any sale for taxes or assessments levied or assessed by the city. 
    The council may sell or lease in such manner and under such conditions as it may by resolution provide, any property of the city, whether acquired by purchase at the tax sales or otherwise, that is not devoted to public use. 
Sec. 9.7. - State, county and school taxes. 
    The levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes shall be in conformity with the general laws of the state. 
CHAPTER 10. - BORROWING POWER[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Charter may provide for borrowing, MCL 117.4a. 

Sec. 10.1. - Grant of authority to borrow. 
    Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this charter, the council, by proper ordinance 
or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and the issuance of bonds of the city or other evidences of indebtedness therefor, and may pledge the full faith, credit, and resources of the city for the payment of the obligation created thereby. The council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general laws of the state, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination of special assessments, and to issue bonds therefor. Such special assessment bonds may be an obligation of the special assessment district or districts or may be both an obligation of the special assessment district or districts and a general obligation of the city. All collections on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall be used for no other purpose. 
    When the city is authorized to acquire, own or operate any public utility, it may, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 23, 24 and 25 of Article VIII of the Michigan Constitution of 1908, issue mortgage bonds therefor beyond the general limit of bonded indebtedness prescribed by law in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Constitution of 1908 pertaining thereto. Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued and it shall be unlawful for any officer of the city to use the proceeds for any other purpose, except that whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or any part thereof, shall remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the council may, by affirmative vote of a majority of the members elect [elected], authorize the use of such unexpended or unencumbered funds for the retirement of such bond issue, or, if such bond issue shall have been fully retired or if any of such funds remain after such retirement, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the city. All bonds and other evidence of indebtedness issued by the city shall be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the clerk under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the mayor and clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall be kept by the clerk. Upon payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled." Any officer who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office. 
Editor's note- Article VII, § 24 of the Constitution of 1963 is comparable to Art. VIII, § 23 of the 1908 Constitution. Article VII, § 25 of the 1963 Constitution is comparable to Art. VIII, § 25 of the 1908 Constitution. Article VIII, § 24 of the 1908 Constitution is omitted from the 1963 Constitution. 
Sec. 10.2. - Issuance and sale of bonds; limits of borrowing powers. 
    The issuance and sale of bonds and other obligations, the limit of bonded indebtedness of the city, and the limitation on borrowing in anticipation of taxes or on delinquent taxes shall be governed by state law, and the limit of taxation for municipal purposes shall be one and one-half (11/2) per centum of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
CHAPTER 11. - JUSTICE COURT[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is obsolete. The justice court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 

Sec. 11.1. - Establishment of court. 
    There is hereby established a justice court in the city presided over by a justice of the peace elected in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
Sec. 11.2. - Powers of the justice of the peace. 
    The justice of the peace of the city shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction, powers and duties as are or may be conferred upon or required of justices of the peace in townships by statute and shall be subject to such general laws with respect to such justices, except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
Sec. 11.3. - Jurisdiction in charter and ordinance cases. 
    The justice of the peace shall have authority to hear, try and determine all suits and prosecutions for the recovery and enforcing of fines, penalties and forfeitures imposed by this charter and the ordinances of the city, and to punish offenders for the violation of such charter and ordinances as in the charter or ordinances prescribed and directed. 
Sec. 11.4. - Extended jurisdiction. 
    The justice of the peace shall also have: 
(a)  Jurisdiction to the amount of $500.00 in all civil matters ex contractu and ex delicto with such exceptions and restrictions as are provided by law. 
(b)  Such power and authority as can, under Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1909 (MCL 117.1 et seq., MSA 5.2071 et seq.), as amended, be conferred by this charter to set aside the verdict or judgment in any civil cause, and grant a new trial therein, to be exercised in such manner and on such conditions as provided in said act. The filing of a motion for new trial or to set aside a verdict or judgment shall have such an effect on the time for taking an appeal from any judgment and upon the issuance and levy of execution or other similar process and sale thereunder and on other proceedings in said cause as provided in said act. 
(c)  Such additional powers and authority as may now or hereafter be conferred upon city justices of the peace by statute. 
Sec. 11.5. - Procedure in justice court. 
    The proceedings in all suits and actions before the justice and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of him shall, except as otherwise provided in this charter, be according to and governed by the statutes applicable to justice courts and to the proceedings before such courts. 
Sec. 11.6. - Place and conduct of court. 
    The council shall furnish necessary supplies and a suitable place for conducting of court by the justice. It may regulate the hours of court of said justice and may make other necessary and proper rules and regulations for the conduct of the business of the court which are not inconsistent with this charter or the statutes. 
Sec. 11.7. - Transfer of cases. 
    In the case of absence, disability or disqualification of the justice, any other justice of the peace, or municipal judge who is qualified to act may act in the place of and for the justice in the performance of any of the duties imposed upon him by statute or this charter. 
    The council shall by ordinance fix the compensation to be paid any such justice or judge for such services and the procedure to be followed in calling upon him so to act. Unless the council shall so provide by ordinance, no such justice shall so act or be entitled to compensation therefor. 
Sec. 11.8. - Compensation of the justice. 
    The justice of the peace shall receive as his compensation the usual fees of this office provided by statute. The council may, however, by ordinance, whenever it deems that the best interests of the city will be served thereby, provide that the justice of the peace be paid an annual salary. Any salary provided shall be in lieu of all fees, costs and charges to which such justices would be entitled but for the provision of this section, except those for the performance of marriage ceremonies. 
Sec. 11.9. - Fees, fines and penalties; prosecution of state penal cases. 
    At such time as the council may fix an annual salary for the justice of the peace, all fees and all fines, penalties, forfeitures and monies collected or received by the court shall be paid over to the city treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after the collection or receipt thereof; and the court shall take the receipt of the treasurer therefor and file the same with the clerk. Failure of the presiding officer to comply with the foregoing provisions shall constitute misconduct in office. 
    If the justice be paid an annual salary, all fees and all fines, penalties and forfeitures and monies collected in city ordinance and charter cases shall be credited to the general fund of the city. All costs and fines recovered for the violations of the penal laws of the state shall be paid to the county treasurer as provided by statute. 
    The expenses of prosecution before the justice for violation of penal laws of the state, and in punishing the offender, shall be paid as provided by statute. 
Sec. 11.10. - Docket. 
    The justice of the peace shall keep, at the place of holding court, a docket in the manner required by statute. Failure to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct in office. 
Sec. 11.11. - Violations bureau. 
    The council shall have power and authority to establish, by ordinance, a traffic violations bureau within the court for the handling only of violations of ordinance[s] and regulations of the city restricting the parking of vehicles. The creation of such a bureau by the council shall not operate so as to deprive any person of a full and impartial hearing in court should such person so choose. 
CHAPTER 12. - SCHEDULE 

Sec. 12.1. - Election on adoption of charter. 
    This charter as revised by the Saline City Charter Revision Commission elected for this purpose by vote of the electors of the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan, on November 8, 1960, shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified and registered electors of the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan, at the Regular City Election to be held on November 6, 1962. 
Sec. 12.2. - Procedure governing election. 
    In all respects not otherwise provided for in Chapter 3 of this charter, the election procedure shall be in accordance with the provisions of the other chapters of this charter. 
Sec. 12.3. - Effective date of charter. 
    For all purposes not otherwise provided for in this charter, this charter shall take effect on January 1, 1963, except as hereinafter stated: Whenever there is a variance in the qualifications of elective officers, the status of incumbent elective officers shall not be affected by this charter. 
Sec. 12.4. - Continuation of ordinances. 
    All ordinances in effect prior to the effective date of this charter shall continue in full force and effect after said effective date, except to the extent that the provisions thereof are in conflict with the provisions of this charter. 
Resolution of the Adoption of the Revised Charter of the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, State of Michigan 
    At a regularly called meeting of the Charter Revision Commission of the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan, held on the 11th day of July, 1962, at 8:00 o'clock p.m. of said day, the following action was taken: 
    It was moved by Commissioner Walter MacArthur, Sr., and supported by Commissioner Elmer Houghton that the following resolution be adopted: 
    RESOLVED: That the Charter Revision Commission of the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan, does hereby adopt the foregoing proposed Charter, as revised, for the City of Saline, and the Secretary of the Charter Revision Commission be and hereby is directed to transmit a copy of this Charter to the Governor of the State of Michigan for his approval in accordance with statute, and to file with the City Clerk a copy of this Charter on July 16, 1962, and to cause this proposed revised Charter to be published in The Saline Reporter on the 3rd and/or 10th day of October, 1962, when so approved. 
    Carried by the following votes: 
Ayes-7 
Nays-0 
Absent-2 
    Commissioners: 
Don Ford 
Elmer Houghton 
Esther Landwehr 
Bessie Collins 
Alwin Gross 
Walter MacArthur 
Erwin Schmid 
    Absent: 
Robert Estes 
Francis Lockwood 
    The Chairman of the Charter Commission declared the Resolution adopted and requested the members of the Charter Commission to authenticate said resolution and also the copies of the Charter to be presented to the Governor of the State of Michigan and filed with the City Clerk by affixing their signatures thereto: 
    Signatures affixed: 
Don M. Ford-Chairman 
Elmer Houghton-Vice Chairman 
Esther Landwehr-Secretary 
Bessie Collins-Commissioner 
Robert Estes-Commissioner 
Alwin Gross-Commissioner 
Francis Lockwood-Commissioner 
Walter V. MacArthur, Sr.-Commissioner 
Erwin Schmid-Commissioner 
    Commissioners absent from the meeting indicated their approval of the adoption of this Revised Charter by affixing their signatures as above indicated. 
    Approved as Amended by the Saline City Charter Revision Committee at a special meeting held August 16, 1962. 
(Signed) John B. Swainson 
Governor of Michigan.  
September 7, 1962. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Referendum 
 Date  Section 
this Charter 11- 6-62 1.1-12.4 11- 3-70 3.3 11- 2-71 4.4 11- 6-73 5.2 6.8 11- 4-75 7.9 11- 8-88 3.5 11- 2-93 3.5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
  

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Saline, Michigan," or as the "Saline City Code," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1968, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification of ordinances authorized, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
    Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
    Charter. "Charter" shall mean and refer to the Home Rule Charter of the City of Saline, as amended. 
    City. "City" means the City of Saline, Michigan. 
    City council. "City council" means the council of the City of Saline. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. 
    County. Whenever the words "the county" or "this county" are used they shall refer to Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer or head of a department of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or head of the department to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males, unless the context clearly requires a literal construction. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of the Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general provisions imposed by the Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers sitting as a body unless otherwise specifically provided. 
    Month. "Month" means a calendar month. 
    Name or title of officer, board, commission or agency. The name or title of any officer, board, commission or agency, when appearing alone herein, shall be construed as if the words "of Saline, Michigan," followed it. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing, unless the context requires a literal construction. 
    Oath. The term "oath" includes affirmation. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to buildings or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
    Person. "Person" includes any individual, copartnership, association, unincorporated club, joint adventure and corporation; and any other group or combination of persons, acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting the same and the fiduciary of any estate or trust. 
    Personal property. "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidence of debt. 
    Preceding, following. "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. "Property" includes both real and personal property. 
    Public place. "Public place" means any public way, park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto; any public lake or stream; and any place or business open to the use of the public in general. 
    Real estate and real property. "Real estate" and "real property" include lands, tenements and hereditaments, and all rights thereto, and interests therein, equitable as well as legal. 
    Sidewalk. "Sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. A "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark, the name being written near the mark and witnessed. 
    State. "State" means the State of Michigan. 
    Street. "Street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
    Tenant. The words "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Writing. The words "writing" and "written" include printing, typesetting, engraving, lithography and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
    Year. "Year" means a calendar year, unless otherwise expressed. 
(Code 1968, § 1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1968, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1968, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and words of this Code are severable, and if any word, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining words, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section ____________ of the Saline City Code, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The provisions shall be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Saline City Code is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered ____________ , which section reads as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed shall be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1968, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever, except by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the council, which will cause the law of Saline to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1968, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this Code, or in any amendment thereof, a person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code or the commission of any act declared to be a misdemeanor by this Code shall be punished by a fine, which fine shall not exceed $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation, and every day upon which such violation shall occur or continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  This Code may be enforced by suit for injunction action for damages or any other legal process appropriate to enforcement thereof. 
(Code 1968, § 1-8) 
Sec. 1-9. - Aiding and abetting violations. 
    Whenever any act or omission to act is a violation of this Code, or of any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, any person who causes, secures, aids or abets such violation may be prosecuted, and any conviction thereof, shall be punished as if he had directly committed such violation. 
(Code 1968, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code, when not inconsistent with this Code, shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Affecting the boundaries of the city; 
(2)  Vacating, abandoning, or accepting any street, alley or easement; 
(3)  Relating to any specific local improvement; 
(4)  Authorizing, directing or ratifying any purchase or sale; 
(5)  Approving or accepting any subdivision or plat; 
(6)  Authorizing or directing the issuance of any bonds or other evidence of indebtedness; 
(7)  Authorizing or directing the making of any investment; 
(8)  Making or otherwise affecting any appropriations; 
(9)  Levying or otherwise affecting any taxes, not inconsistent herewith; 
(10)  Relating to franchises; 
(11)  Pertaining to zoning or rezoning; 
(12)  Regulating or restricting traffic to parking on particular streets or in particular locations in the city; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. Such ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. No offense committed or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of the Code shall be affected. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; human relations, ch. 46; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 58-31 et seq.; parks and recreation, ch. 62; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; taxation, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Surety bonds required; premiums. 
(a)  Surety bonds shall be furnished as required by the city council. 
(b)  Premiums for surety bonds furnished to the city shall be paid out of city funds. If additional bonds are required from time to time to cover the collection of county and state taxes as prescribed by law, such bonds shall be furnished and the premiums paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 9, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-3) 
Charter reference- Surety bonds, § 5.4. 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-26. - Date of regular meetings. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the council, the council shall meet on the first and third Mondays of each month, which meetings shall be regular stated meetings. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 2, 9-19-57; Code 1968, § 2-1) 
Charter reference- Regular stated meetings required, § 6.1. 
Sec. 2-27. - Time, place of meetings. 
    The council shall determine by resolution the time and place of regular and special meetings of the council. 
(Ord. No. 139, § 3, 9-19-57; Code 1968, § 2-2) 
Charter reference- Authority to designate meeting time and place, § 6.1. 
Secs. 2-28-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 795 , § 1, adopted Dec. 18, 2017, repealed the former Div. 1, §§ 2-51-2-53, and enacted a new Div. 1 as set out herein. The former Div. 1 pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for a complete derivation of the former provisions. 

Sec. 2-51. - Combination of offices and annual appointment of officers and deputies. 
(a)  The following offices are combined in the office of city manager pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter: city administrator, city clerk, city treasurer, city assessor, city superintendent, department of public works director, building official, parks and recreation director, and pollution control superintendent. Once appointed, individuals holding these at-will positions shall serve indefinitely, in accordance with the personnel policies of the City of Saline, as amended. 
(b)  In accordance with an organizational plan approved by the city council, the city manager shall appoint directors, deputies, and other city staff to carry out the functions the city manager deems necessary. Those persons appointed by the city manager shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. 
(c)  The city council shall appoint all department heads of the City of Saline. Those persons appointed by the city council shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. Positions designated as department heads include the following: city administrator, city clerk, city treasurer, city assessor, city superintendent, department of public works director, parks and recreation director, and pollution control superintendent. 
(d)  The city manager shall set the salaries of the directors, department heads, and deputies appointed pursuant to this section. The directors, department heads, and deputies appointed pursuant to this section shall be under the supervision of, and report to, the city manager. 
(e)  The police chief will be appointed by the city council and shall serve at the pleasure of the city council. The police chief shall be under the supervision of, and report to, the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 791 , § 1, 6-19-17; Ord. No. 795 , § 1, 12-18-17) 
Sec. 2-52. - Salary of city manager and police chief. 
(a)  The salary of the city manager and police chief shall be set, and may be modified from time to time, by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Payment of fringe benefits to the city manager and police chief, and any additional terms and conditions of employment, shall be as set forth in an employment agreement. 
(Ord. No. 795 , § 1, 12-18-17) 
Secs. 2-53-2-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ADMINISTRATOR 

Sec. 2-66. - Office created. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of section 4.4 of the charter, there is hereby created the office of city administrator which shall be filled by council appointment in accordance with the provisions of section 4.4 of the charter. 
(Code 1968, § 2-11; Ord. No. 350, § 1, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 2-67. - Administrative position; qualifications. 
    The city administrator shall be the administrative agent of the city and shall perform such duties of his office as may be delegated to him by the council and the mayor, and shall be accountable to the council and the mayor for the performance of his duties. He shall be chosen on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Code 1968, § 2-12; Ord. No. 350, § 2, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 2-68. - Duties. 
    The duties of the city administrator shall include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Direct, supervise and coordinate the work of all existing city departments and staff and such additional administrative units as the council may from time to time designate. 
(2)  Assume the duties of any administrative officer who is required to be appointed upon his recommendation, when so directed by the council. 
(3)  Maintain an employment office and central personnel service for the several administrative units and make recommendations for appointment to the council. 
(4)  Keep informed concerning the administration of the several administrative units; to that end, the heads of all administrative units shall furnish him such information and periodical or special reports as he may deem necessary. 
(5)  In case of conflict of authority between administrative units, or in case of absence of administrative authority occasioned by inadequacy of charter or ordinance provisions, resolve the conflict or supply the necessary authority, so far as may be consistent with law, the charter, and the ordinances of the city, and direct the necessary action to be taken in conformance therewith, making a full report immediately to the mayor and the council of the problem and his action thereon, with his recommendation for corrective legislation. 
(6)  Attend all open meetings of the council-with the right to take part in all discussions, but without the right to vote-and such executive sessions as otherwise requested. 
(7)  Recommend to the mayor and the council, from time to time, such measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the city or its services. 
(8)  Possess such further powers and perform such additional duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time, by the council, so far as may be consistent with state law and the charter. 
(9)  Do everything necessary and proper to execute the foregoing powers in accordance with the policies adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 2-13; Ord. No. 350, § 3, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 424, § 1, 2-1-88) 
Sec. 2-69. - Authority. 
    The city administrator shall have the following authority in relation to department heads: 
(1)  If there is a vacancy in any department head position responsible to the city administrator, the city administrator may assume all the functions of the department head until the vacancy is filled. When so authorized by the city council or the appropriate supervising board or commission, the city administrator may assume the duties of any department head of the city. 
(2)  The city administrator may set aside any action taken by any department head responsible to him and may supersede any such officer in any or all assigned functions, to the extent consistent with state law and the charter. 
(3)  The city administrator may direct any department or division or bureau thereof to perform the work of any other city department, division or bureau or the administrator may delegate to any officer or employee within such department, any duties other than those established for such division or bureau except in those instances where the department or activity does not report directly to the city administrator, in which cases prior authorization by the city council or governing commission or board, as appropriate, would be required. 
(Code 1968, § 2-14; Ord. No. 350, § 4, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 2-70. - Authorization to adopt administrative regulations. 
    The city administrator is authorized to adopt such administrative regulations in addition to, but not inconsistent with, the charter and this Code, as he shall deem necessary and proper to provide for the adequate functioning of all departments. Such regulations shall be subject to the approval of the mayor and the council and when so adopted and approved, shall comprise the administrative manual. 
(Code 1968, § 2-15; Ord. No. 350, § 5, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 2-71. - Approval of legal documents. 
    The city administrator shall approve as to substance all legal documents which are required to be signed by the mayor and clerk. 
(Code 1968, § 2-16; Ord. No. 350, § 6, 7-7-80) 
Sec. 2-72. - Authority in relation to employees; termination hearings. 
(a)  The city administrator shall have the authority to employ, assign, discipline, suspend and terminate all city employees except city officers appointed by the council. 
(b)  Opportunity for informal hearing prior to termination. Prior to termination of employment for cause, the city administrator shall give notice in writing to the employee of intent to terminate for the reasons set forth in the notice and shall provide an opportunity to the employee to respond to the reasons at an informal hearing to be held before a hearing panel consisting of the city administrator, the department head of the employee, the mayor and a member of the city council to be selected by the mayor. The findings of the hearing panel shall be stated in writing and delivered to the council for informational purposes and to the employee so terminated. 
(Code 1968, § 2-16.1; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 7-1-85) 
Sec. 2-73. - Title. 
    The city administrator shall also be known as and referred to as "city manager". 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 1-6-97) 
Secs. 2-74-2-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-86. - Duty to keep journal of council proceedings; reading, approval, signing. 
    The city clerk shall be the clerk of the council and shall keep the journal of council proceedings, each installment of which shall be read and approved at the next succeeding council meeting. The approval of the council shall be noted in the proceedings, with the date, and signed by the mayor and clerk. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-17) 
Sec. 2-87. - Annual reports required. 
    The clerk shall submit an annual statement of the activities of his office for the previous year at the first meeting of the council in each new fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-20) 
Charter reference- Fiscal year defined, § 8.1. 
Sec. 2-88. - Custody of records. 
    The clerk shall have the care and custody of all city records not otherwise under the direction and care of other department heads. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-22) 
Sec. 2-89. - Appointment, duties of deputies. 
    The city clerk may, with the approval of the council, appoint such deputies as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-23) 
Sec. 2-90. - Additional duties. 
    The clerk shall perform such other duties as are prescribed by the city charter, the general laws of the state or by the council. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-24) 
Secs. 2-91-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 2-101. - Retainer for city attorney. 
    The City Attorney shall be paid a six month retainer of $70,200.00. 
(Code 1968, § 2-5; Ord. No. 216, § 2, 2-2-70; Ord. No. 224, § 2, 8-2-71; Ord. No. 245, § 2, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 259, § 2, 7-9-73; Ord. No. 274, § 2, 7-1-74; Ord. No. 291, § 2, 7-7-75; Ord. No. 306, § 2, 7-6-76; Ord. No. 334, § 2, 7-10-78; Ord. No. 340, § 2, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 351, § 2, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 370, § 2, 7-12-82; Ord. No. 381, § 2, 12-5-83; Ord. No. 388, § 2, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 395, § 2, 7-1-85; Ord. No. 407, § 2, 9-8-86; Ord. No. 412, § 2, 7-20-87; Ord. No. 428, § 2, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 447, § 2, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 467, § 2, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 486, § 2, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 504, 12-21-92; Ord. No. 519, § 2, 1-17-94; Ord. No. 542, § 2, 9-19-94; Ord. No. 573, § 2, 7-22-96; Ord. No. 583, § 2, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 594, § 2, 6-1-98; Ord. No. 616, § 2, 6-21-99; Ord. No. 631, § 2, 6-5-00; Ord. No. 643, § 2, 6-4-01; Ord. No. 657, § 2, 6-3-02; Ord. No. 666, § 2, 6-16-03; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 6-21-04; Ord. No. 687, § 2, 6-20-05; Ord. No. 694, § 2, 6-19-06; Ord. No. 708, § 2, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 710, § 2, 12-3-07; Ord. No. 716, § 2, 6-23-08; Ord. No. 721, § 2, 6-15-09; Ord. No. 729, § 2, 6-21-10; Ord. No. 744, § 2, 6-18-12; Ord. No. 771 , § 2, 6-15-15; Ord. No. 786 , § 2, 6-20-16; Ord. No. 791 , § 2, 6-19-17) 
Sec. 2-102. - Duties. 
    The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the city council and all officials of the city with reference to matters pertaining to the city. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 8, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-6) 
Charter reference- Appointment of attorney authorized, § 4.4. 
Secs. 2-103-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ASSESSOR[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of assessor required, § 4.4. 

Sec. 2-116. - Duty to assess property, spread taxes. 
    The city assessor is charged with estimating the value of taxable real and personal property in the city, with making the assessment roll and with spreading upon the roll any and all taxes duly certified to him by order of the council, or by other proper authority. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-35) 
Charter reference- Preparation of assessment roll, § 9.1. 
Sec. 2-117. - Duty to make special assessments. 
    The assessor is charged with making any special assessment ordered by the council, in such manner and on such basis as the council may direct. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 2, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-36) 
Charter reference- Special assessments, § 9.5. 
Secs. 2-118-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - TREASURER[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of treasurer required, § 4.4. 

Sec. 2-131. - Charged with custody of funds. 
    The city treasurer is charged with the custody of all money of the city and all other public funds coming into his hands as city treasurer. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-132. - Duty to collect, receive, disburse funds. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, the treasurer shall collect, receive and, upon warrant issued by his office, disburse all public money of the city, and shall also receive and disburse all other public money coming into his hands as city treasurer, in pursuance of such regulations as may be prescribed by the authorities having lawful control over such funds. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 3, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-48; Ord. No. 442, § 2, 9-11-89) 
Sec. 2-133. - Deposit of funds. 
    The treasurer shall make daily deposits of all public moneys received in his office in such bank or banks as may be selected by the council as the city depository, and shall cause a duplicate copy to be maintained as part of the account receivable records of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2-49; Ord. No. 442, § 2, 9-11-89) 
Sec. 2-134. - Financial responsibilities. 
(1)  Under the direction of the city administrator or his designee, participates in the preparation of each annual budget proposal and general appropriations act for the ensuing year. 
(2)  Keep account of all funds collected by each administrative unit. 
(3)  Authorizes checks or warrants for the disbursement of funds from the city's treasury. 
(4)  Under the general direction of the city administrator, audits the financial records of each administrative unit to ensure compliance with the current fiscal year appropriation act. 
(5)  Establish and maintain a general accounting plan for the city government, which shall conform to any uniform system of accounting as required by law. 
(6)  Keep a separate account of each item within all budgetary centers for expenditure control of appropriations made by the council, for administrative units and other governmental units and agencies, to the extent and in the manner requested by the city administrator and required by law. 
(7)  Prescribe and supervise the keeping of detailed accounting records by administrative units of the city. 
(8)  Submit to the city council, through the city administrator, by the 15th working day of each month, a statement showing the balances at the close of the preceding month, in all funds and budget items, the amount of the city's known liabilities and budget items to which the same are to be charged, and all other information necessary to show the city's financial condition. 
(9)  Prepare and coordinate for the city administrator, within 60 days following the end of each fiscal year, a financial statement and report of the city's financial condition as of the end of the fiscal year. 
(10)  The city treasurer shall be the chief accounting official of the city and shall keep all budgetary accounts, reporting monthly through the city administrator to the city council on the financial condition of the city. 
(11)  The city treasurer shall submit an annual statement of the financial condition of the city by arranging for the conducting of and representation of the required annual audit. 
(12)  Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by charter, ordinance and resolutions of the council. 
(Code 1968, § 2-50; Ord. No. 442, § 3, 9-11-89; Ord. No. 572, § 1, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 747, § 1, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 2-135. - Appointment, duties of deputies. 
    The city treasurer may, with the approval of the council, appoint such deputies as he deems necessary. 
(Code 1968, § 2-51; Ord. No. 442, § 3, 9-11-89) 
Secs. 2-136-2-138. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 572, § 2, adopted June 17, 1996, repealed former §§ 2-136-2-138, relative to duties to make purchases, accounting and monthly reports and annual report, which derived from Code 1968, §§ 2-52-2-54 and Ord. No. 442, § 3, Sept 11, 1989. 
Sec. 2-139. - Duty to issue orders for payment. 
    The city treasurer shall prepare and countersign all warrants or other orders for payment of money out of city funds and shall take proper receipts therefor. 
(Code 1968, § 2-55; Ord. No. 442, § 3, 9-11-89) 
Sec. 2-140. - Title. 
    The city treasurer shall also be known as and referred to as "city treasurer/collector." 
(Ord. No. 572, § 3, 6-17-96) 
Secs. 2-141-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - CITY SUPERINTENDENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Charter reference- Appointment of superintendent required, § 4.4. 

Sec. 2-151. - Areas of responsibility generally. 
    The city superintendent shall be responsible for the care, maintenance and operation of the streets, water and sewer systems, walks, alleys and cemeteries, including the handling of delinquent water accounts; and he shall be responsible for the maintenance of the fire apparatus and for the condition of hydrants for fire service, but not for the operation of the fire department. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-60) 
Sec. 2-152. - Purchasing recommendations. 
    The city superintendent shall recommend to the city clerk or the council what equipment, materials and supplies shall be purchased for the several departments of which he has charge. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-61) 
Sec. 2-153. - Assistance. 
    The city superintendent shall secure such assistance as he may need at any time in the handling of his duties, subject to approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 4, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 2-62) 
Secs. 2-154-2-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 747, § 2, adopted Nov. 13, 2012, repealed Art. III, Div. 8, §§ 2-160-2-165, which pertained to accounting supervisor and derived from Ord. No. 572, § 4, adopted Jun 17, 1996. 

Secs. 2-160-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING 

Sec. 2-166. - Policies. 
    The following policies shall be in effect regarding the purchasing of and contracting for materials, supplies, capital outlay, or services necessary for maintenance, repair and operation of city facilities within the City of Saline. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 2-167. - Authority. 
    Authority granted to city administrator without further council action: 
(1)  The city administrator is hereby granted the authority to purchase and contract for materials, supplies, capital outlay, or services necessary for maintenance, repair and operation of city facilities under the following conditions: 
a.  The amount per order does not exceed $15,000.00. Repetitive orders of less than $15,000.00 shall not be used to circumvent this limitation. 
b.  Appropriate funds are available for this purchase. 
(2)  The city administrator is hereby granted the authority to approve contract change orders that do not exceed $15,000.00 or ten percent of the project budget, whichever is less, provided that appropriate funds are available to cover said change order. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 695, § 1, 7-10-06) 
Sec. 2-168. - Council approval required. 
    The approval of the city council is required under the following conditions notwithstanding the authority granted in section 2-167 above: 
(a)  The purchase of any bid over $15,000.00 which is not the low responsive bid. 
(b)  The purchase of an item as a single source if over $15,000.00. 
(c)  Purchases which continue for a term longer than the current annual budget if the multiyear total is over $15,000.00. 
(d)  Any other situation wherein the city treasurer, city administrator, city attorney, or internal auditor deems it appropriate to have formal action by city council. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 695, § 2, 7-10-06) 
Sec. 2-169. - Requirements of competition. 
(a)  Except for professional services, the following are requirements for competitive bidding, request for proposal or substantiation to the city administrator as a "sole source" procurement. Purchases in one budget year should not be broken into smaller parts to avoid the following procedures: 
(1)  Below $999.00 by good business practice. 
(2)  $1,000.00 to $4,999.00 on an informal competitive basis such as handwritten record of telephone calls to three sources, to be placed in file. 
(3)  $5,000.00 to $14,999.00 through written quotations sought from at least three sources. 
(4)  $15,000.00 or more through competitive bidding. 
(b)  A written record of completing the proper purchasing procedure should be kept for financial audit purposes with the purchase order, which will subsequently be connected with the resulting expenditures to fulfill invoices received. Evaluation will be made whether a responding vendor is responsible and responsive, as well as on price which must be closely competitive. A judgment will be made regarding the choice which will most benefit the city as a whole with all criteria taken into consideration. 
(c)  The city council may approve exceptions to the above competitive bidding requirements if it determines doing so is in the city's best interests. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96; Ord. No. 695, § 3, 7-10-06; Ord. No. 788 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 2-170. - Inclusion of local vendors. 
    The city wants to choose the "best bid" which is not necessarily the lowest bid. For this reason local vendors, recycled resources and local professional services may be allowed a small price advantage for small routine purchases. Obtaining goods and services locally may be better in terms of efficiency, flexibility of returning goods, speed of delivery on change orders, better communications, etc. 
    Local tradesmen should also be provided relevant bid notices or requests for proposals. However they must have a record of employment of appropriate levels of personnel and equipment which can fulfill the requirements with good workmanship, without an undue amount of subcontracting, in order to be judged responsible. In order to be judged responsive they must commit to meeting all of the requirements in a timely manner. Their price must be closely competitive. The chosen vendor will be the one judged to most benefit the city, with all criteria taken into consideration. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96) 
Sec. 2-171. - Emergency procedures. 
    The city administrator may, if requested by a department head, and/or deemed appropriate due to emergency situations that may affect the health, safety or welfare of the city, approve the purchase of necessary materials and supplies without the above requirements. However, such purchase action must be reported to the city council at its next regular meeting, where that purchase exceeds $5,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 572, § 5, 6-17-96) 
Secs. 2-172-2-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-176. - Enforcement of rules, regulations set by boards and commissions; penalty. 
(a)  All boards and commissions of the city which are authorized by ordinance to make rules and regulations pertaining to the use of the real and personal property under their jurisdiction shall have the authority to give notice to the public of such rules and regulations by whatever means are deemed by such boards and commissions to be necessary and reasonable to inform the public of such rules and regulations; provided, however, that no such rules and regulations shall become effective until they have received the approval of the city council by resolution duly adopted. 
(b)  All persons shall obey all rules and regulations referred to in subsection (a) in all cases where notice thereof has been given in such a manner that an ordinarily observant person would have been made aware of such rules and regulations. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate such rules and regulations, after being duly notified thereof as hereinabove provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties therefor provided by law. 
(Code 1968, § 2-8; Ord. No. 293, §§ 1-3, 11-17-75) 
Secs. 2-177-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - INDUSTRIAL AND BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-186. - Created; members. 
    There is hereby created in and for the city a commission for industrial and business development, consisting of nine members to be appointed by the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. Such members shall, insofar as is practical, represent a cross section of the economic and geographic composition of the city, and shall be selected because of their interest in the development of commercial and industrial opportunities in the city, and shall include one member of the city council to be appointed annually with full voting rights. Of the remaining members first appointed, four shall be appointed to serve a term of one year and four for two years, and thereafter each member shall be appointed for a two-year term. Each member shall serve without pay and shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and qualified. The council shall annually appoint one member of the city staff to attend all meetings as a liaison officer without voting rights. The commission shall designate from its members a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary. The city council may remove from office any members for cause. 
(Code 1968, § 2-71; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 8-23-71; Ord. No. 313, § 1, 5-17-77) 
Sec. 2-187. - Purpose; duties generally. 
    It shall be the purpose of the industrial and business development commission to foster and encourage industrial and commercial development programs designed to broaden and strengthen the economy of the city, and to provide specific leadership. In the following instances, among others, the commission shall: 
(1)  Encourage the location of new industrial and commercial enterprises within the city by appropriate legitimate methods. 
(2)  Support and assist the efforts of local industrial and commercial committees, labor organizations and other similar public and private agencies and corporations, individuals and partnerships to obtain new, and foster the expansion of existing industrial, and commercial facilities or enterprises. 
(3)  Investigate, assemble, develop and study or cause to have investigated, assembled, developed and studied, all pertinent information regarding the industrial opportunities and possibilities of the city and its economic resources and the particular divisions thereof, including raw materials and products that may be produced therefrom, power and water resources, transportation facilities and rates available, markets and the marketing limitations of the state and city, the availability of labor and those persons with technical and professional skills, the availability of industrial and commercial sites, the advantages of the city as a whole and the particular sections thereof as industrial locations, and such other fields of research and study as the commission and city council may deem necessary. 
(4)  Formulate and maintain coordinated plans for the economic and resource development of the city in order to promote the economic welfare of the people of the city. Such plans shall include description of the development objectives and a statement of recommended means for achieving such objectives. The plans shall be coordinated with the city, state, county or regional planning programs, and with national planning. 
(5)  Investigate, study and undertake ways and means to promote and develop markets for industrial products. 
(6)  Encourage the formation of local development committees throughout the city and make available to such committees, private groups, organizations, associations and agencies such facts, data and information as may be useful and desirable in their efforts to encourage the location of industries and commercial enterprise within the city and in other ways to cooperate with the commission in carrying out the purposes of this division. 
(7)  Provide advice and assistance to business and labor in the city and bring to the attention of the city administrator and city council by reports to be made at least annually, such significant problems as may be relieved by action of the city. 
(8)  Perform such other related acts as shall be, in the judgment of the city council, necessary and proper to carry out the objectives of this division. 
(Code 1968, § 2-72; Ord. No. 225, § 2, 8-23-71) 
Sec. 2-188. - Promotion of new economic enterprises. 
    The industrial and business development commission shall provide coordinated services to aid the city and local groups in the promotion of new economic enterprises and shall conduct such publicity and promotional activities as are desirable to stimulate all facets of the economy, and to this end shall: 
(1)  Collect and disseminate information regarding the advantages of locating and developing industrial and commercial enterprises in the city. 
(2)  Serve as the official city liaison agency between persons interested in locating new economic enterprises in the city and the city council. In this respect, the commission shall aid committees in the city in organizing for obtaining new business or expanding existing business. 
(3)  Encourage public and private agencies or bodies to publicize the facilities and attractions of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2-73; Ord. No. 225, § 3, 8-23-71) 
Sec. 2-189. - Access to records, data, information of city departments, etc. 
    So far as may be practicable in the performance of its duties in connection with collecting and assembling of information, the industrial and business development commission shall make use of pertinent data as may be secured from the departments, boards, commissions, agencies and institutions of the city. The commission shall have access to all records, data, information and statistics of all departments, boards, commissions, agencies and institutions of the city except such records or information as are required by law to be kept confidential. 
(Code 1968, § 2-74; Ord. No. 225, § 4, 8-23-71) 
Secs. 2-190-2-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 

Sec. 2-201. - Approval, adoption of application and related documents. 
    The application dated December 9, 1977, and articles of incorporation and bylaws for the economic development corporation of the city are hereby approved and adopted. 
(Code 1968, § 2-78; Ord. No. 326, § 1, 2-6-78) 
Sec. 2-202. - Authorization to incorporate. 
    A certified copy of this division is directed to be filed in accordance with section 5 and section 31 of Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), as amended, and the applicants in the application dated December 9, 1977, are thereafter authorized to incorporate the economic development corporation of the city as a public corporation pursuant to Act No. 338 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1974 (MCL 125.1601 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 2-79; Ord. No. 326, § 1, 2-6-78) 
Secs. 2-203-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - HISTORIC DISTRICT ORDINANCE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 588, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998, repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 2-216-2-230, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1968, §§ 2-80-2-94; Ord. No. 243, §§ 1-14, 2-19-73; Ord. No. 299, § 1, 4-5-76; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 7-24-89; Ord. No. 463, §§ 1, 2, 9-24-90; and Ord. No. 470, §§ 1, 2, 12-17-90. 

Sec. 2-216. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division: 
    Alteration means work that changes the detail of a resource but does not change its basic size or shape. 
    Bureau means the bureau of history of the Michigan department of state. 
    Certificate of appropriateness means the written approval of a permit application for work that is appropriate and that does not adversely affect a resource. 
    Commission means the historic district commission created by the Saline City Council pursuant to this division. 
    Committee means a historic district study committee appointed by the Saline City Council pursuant to section 2-218 or section 2-229. 
    Demolition means the razing or destruction, whether entirely or in part, of a resource and includes, but is not limited to, demolition by neglect. 
    Demolition by neglect means neglect in maintaining, repairing, or securing a resource that results in deterioration of an exterior feature of the resource or the loss of structural integrity of the resource. 
    Denial means the written rejection of a permit application for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource. 
    Historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that contains one resource or a group of resources that are related by history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic preservation means the identification, evaluation, establishment, and protection of resources significant in history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
    Historic resource means a publicly or privately owned building, structure, site, object, feature, or open space that is significant in the history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture of this state or a community within this state, or of the United States. 
    Local unit means a county, city, village, or township. 
    Notice to proceed means the written permission to issue a permit for work that is inappropriate and that adversely affects a resource, pursuant to a finding under section 2-220(6). 
    Open space means undeveloped land, a naturally landscaped area, or a formal or man-made landscaped area that provides a connective link or a buffer between other resources. 
    Ordinary maintenance means keeping a resource unimpaired and in good condition through ongoing minor intervention, undertaken from time to time, in its exterior condition. Ordinary maintenance does not change the external appearance of the resource except through the elimination of the usual and expected effects of weathering. Ordinary maintenance does not constitute work for purposes of this division. 
    Proposed historic district means an area, or group of areas not necessarily having contiguous boundaries, that has delineated boundaries and that is under review by a committee or a standing committee for the purpose of making a recommendation as to whether it should be established as a historic district or added to an established historic district. 
    Repair means to restore a decayed or damaged resource to a good or sound condition by any process. A repair that changes the external appearance of a resource constitutes work for purposes of this division. 
    Resource means one or more publicly or privately owned historic or nonhistoric buildings, structures, sites, objects, features, or open spaces located within a historic district. 
    Standing committee means a permanent body established by the Saline City Council pursuant to section 2-229 to conduct the activities of a historic district study committee on a continuing basis. 
    Work means construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, or demolition." 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-217. - Historic preservation as public purpose; purpose of ordinance. 
    Historic preservation is declared to be a public purpose and the city council may by ordinance regulate the construction, addition, alteration, repair, moving, excavation, and demolition of resources in historic districts within the limits of the city. The purpose of the ordinance shall be to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Safeguard the heritage of the local unit by preserving one or more historic districts in the local unit that reflect elements of the unit's history, architecture, archaeology, engineering, or culture. 
(2)  Stabilize and improve property values in each district and the surrounding areas. 
(3)  Foster civic beauty. 
(4)  Strengthen the local economy. 
(5)  Promote the use of historic districts for the education, pleasure, and welfare of the citizens of the city and of the state. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-218. - Historic districts; establishment; study committee; duties; public hearing; notice; actions; availability of writings to public. 
(a)  A city may, by ordinance, establish one or more historic districts. The historic districts shall be administered by a commission established pursuant to section 2-219. Before establishing a historic district, the city council shall appoint a historic district study committee. The committee shall contain a majority of persons who have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation, and shall contain representation from one or more duly organized local historic preservation organizations. The committee shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Conduct a photographic inventory of resources within each proposed historic district following procedures established or approved by the bureau. 
(2)  Conduct basic research of each proposed historic district and the historic resources located within that district. 
(3)  Determine the total number of historic and nonhistoric resources within a proposed historic district and the percentage of historic resources of that total. In evaluating the significance of historic resources, the committee shall be guided by the selection criteria for evaluation issued by the United States Secretary of the Interior for inclusion of resources in the national register of historic places, as setforth in 36 C.F.R. part 60, and criteria established or approved by the bureau, if any. 
(4)  Prepare a preliminary historic district study committee report that addresses at a minimum all of the following: 
a.  The charge of the committee. 
b.  The composition of the committee membership. 
c.  The historic district or districts studied. 
d.  The boundaries for each proposed historic district in writing and on maps. 
e.  The history of each proposed historic district. 
f.  The significance of each district as a whole, as well as a sufficient number of its individual resources to fully represent the variety of resources found within the district, relative to the evaluation criteria. 
g.  Transmit copies of the preliminary report for review and recommendations to the local planning body, to the bureau, to the state historical commission, and to the state historic preservation review board. 
h.  Make copies of the preliminary report available to the public pursuant to subsection (b), below. 
(b)  Not less than 60 calendar days after the transmittal of the preliminary report, the committee shall hold a public hearing in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being MCL 15.261-15.275. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. Written notice shall be mailed by first-class mail not less than 14 calendar days before the hearing to the owners of properties within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city. 
(c)  After the date of the public hearing, the committee and the city council shall have not more than one year, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, to take the following actions: 
(1)  The committee shall prepare and submit a final report with its recommendations and the recommendations, if any, of the local planning body to the city council. If the recommendation is to establish a historic district or districts, the final report shall include a draft of a proposed ordinance or ordinances. 
(2)  After receiving a final report that recommends the establishment of a historic district or districts, the city council, at its discretion, may introduce and pass or reject an ordinance or ordinances. If the city passes an ordinance or ordinances establishing one or more historic districts, the city shall file a copy of that ordinance or those ordinances, including a legal description of the property or properties located within the historic district or districts, with the register of deeds. A city shall not pass an ordinance establishing a contiguous historic district less than 60 days after a majority of the property owners within the proposed historic district, as listed on the tax rolls of the city, have approved the establishment of the historic district pursuant to a written petition. 
(d)  A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by a committee in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being sections 15.231 to 15.246 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-219. - Historic district commission; establishment; appointment, qualifications; terms of members; vacancy. 
    There is hereby created and established a commission to be called the historic district commission. Each member of the commission shall reside within the city. The membership of the historic district commission shall consist of seven members. A majority of the members shall have a clearly demonstrated interest in or knowledge of historic preservation. The members shall be appointed by the mayor, with the approval of the city council. Initial members shall be appointed within six months after the adoption of this division. Members shall be appointed for three-year terms except the initial appointments of some of the members shall be for less than three years so that the initial appointments are staggered and that subsequent appointments do not recur at the same time. Members shall be eligible for reappointment. A vacancy on this commission shall be filled within 60 calendar days by appointment made by the appointing authority. An appointment shall be terminated by the appointing authority for three consecutive absences from duly scheduled meetings of the commission which have not been excused by a majority of the members of the commission. At lease one member of the commission shall be appointed from a list of citizens submitted by one or more duly organized local historical preservation organizations. The commission shall also include as a member, if available, a graduate of an accredited school of architecture who has two years of architectural experience or who is an architect registered in this state. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-220. - Permit requirement. 
(a)  A permit shall be obtained before undertaking any work described in subsection (d) below. The person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government proposing to do that work shall file an application for a permit with the inspector of buildings, the commission, or other duly delegated authority. If the inspector of buildings or other authority receives the application, the application shall be immediately referred together with all required supporting materials that make the application complete to the commission. A permit shall not be issued and proposed work shall not proceed until the commission has acted on the application by issuing a certificate of appropriateness or a notice to proceed as prescribed in this act. The city may charge a reasonable fee, as established by the city council from time to time, to process a permit application. 
(b)  An applicant aggrieved by a decision of the commission concerning a permit application may file an appeal with the state historic preservation review board of the state historical commission. A applicant aggrieved by the decision of the state historic preservation review board may then appeal the decision to the circuit court in Washtenaw County. 
(c)  In reviewing plans, the commission shall follow the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings, as set forth in 36 C.F.R. part 67. Design review standards and guidelines that address special design characteristics of historic districts administered by the commission may be followed if they are equivalent in guidance to the secretary of interior's standards and guidelines and are established or approved by the state agency authorized to give such approval. The commission shall also consider all of the following: 
(1)  The historic or architectural value and significance of the resource and its relationship to the historic value of the surrounding area. 
(2)  The relationship of any architectural features of the resource to the rest of the resource and to the surrounding area. 
(3)  The general compatibility of the design, arrangement, texture, and materials proposed to be used. 
(4)  Other factors, such as aesthetic value, that the commission finds relevant. 
(5)  Whether the applicant has certified in the application that the property where work will be undertaken has, or will have before the proposed project completion date, a fire alarm system or a smoke alarm complying with the requirements of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, as amended, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 
(d)  The commission shall not disapprove an application due to considerations not prescribed in subsection (c), above. The commission shall review and act only upon proposals for work involving: 
(1)  Exterior changes requiring a building permit. 
(2)  Exterior changes requiring a demolition permit, including both complete or partial demolition. 
(3)  Installation or removal of fences. 
(4)  Installation or removal of sheds, barns, garages, carriage houses, or other accessory buildings. 
(5)  Installation or removal of windows, window awnings, or window components (including window sashes and storm windows). 
(6)  Installation or removal of siding. 
(7)  Installation or removal of exterior doors and storm/screen doors. 
(8)  Installation or removal of roofing. 
(9)  Changes to the alignment, width, material or elevation of driveways. 
(10)  Landscaping proposals that result in more than a de minimis change in the contouring or elevations of a property, or that incorporate the use of paving and retaining walls. Review is not needed for the selection, placement or movement of plantings. 
(11)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as requiring commission review of activities constituting ordinary maintenance. 
(e)  If an application is for work that will adversely affect the exterior of a resource the commission considers valuable to the city, state, or nation, and the commission determines that the alteration or loss of that resource will adversely affect the public purpose of the city, state, or nation, the commission shall attempt to establish with the owner of the resource an economically feasible plan for preservation of the resource. 
(f)  Work within a historic district shall be permitted through the issuance of a notice to proceed by the commission if any of the following conditions prevail and if the proposed work can be demonstrated by a finding of the commission to be necessary to substantially improve or correct any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The resource constitutes a hazard to the safety of the public or to the structure's occupants. 
(2)  The resource is a deterrent to a major improvement program that will be of substantial benefit to the community and the applicant proposing the work has obtained all necessary planning and zoning approvals, financing, and environmental clearances. 
(3)  Retaining the resource will cause undue financial hardship to the owner when a governmental action, an act of God, or other events beyond the owner's control created the hardship, and all feasible alternatives to eliminate the financial hardship, which may include offering the resource for sale at its fair market value or moving the resource to a vacant site within the historic district, have been attempted and exhausted by the owner. 
(4)  Retaining the resource is not in the interest of the majority of the community. 
(g)  The business that the commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, 1976 PA 267, as amended, MCL 15.261 et seq., and public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting shall also be given in the manner required under the act. A meeting agenda shall be part of the notice and shall include a listing of each permit application to be reviewed or considered by the commission. 
(h)  The commission shall keep a record of its resolutions, proceedings, and actions. A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, as amended, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
(i)  The commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall adopt design review standards and guidelines for resource treatment to carry out its duties under this section. 
(j)  The commission may delegate the issuance of certificates of appropriateness for specified minor classes of work to its staff, to the inspector of buildings, or to another delegated authority. The commission shall provide to the delegated authority specific written standards for issuing certificates of appropriateness under this subsection. On at least a quarterly basis, the commission shall review the certificates of appropriateness, if any, issued for work by its staff, the inspector, or another authority to determine whether or not the delegated responsibilities should be continued. 
(k)  Upon a finding by a commission that a historic resource within a historic district or a proposed historic district subject to its review and approval is threatened with demolition by neglect, the commission may do either of the following: 
(1)  Require the owner of the resource to repair all conditions contributing to demolition by neglect. 
(2)  If the owner does not make repairs within a reasonable time, the commission or its agents may enter the property and make such repairs as are necessary to prevent demolition by neglect. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. The commission or its agents may enter the property for purposes of this section upon obtaining an order from the circuit court. 
(l)  When work has been done upon a resource without a permit, and the commission finds that the work does not qualify for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission may require an owner to restore the resource to the condition the resource was in before the inappropriate work or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply with the restoration or modification requirement within a reasonable time, the commission may seek an order from the circuit court to require the owner to restore the resource to its former condition or to modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness. If the owner does not comply or cannot comply with the order of the court, the commission or its agents may enter the property and conduct work necessary to restore the resource to its former condition or modify the work so that it qualifies for a certificate of appropriateness in accordance with the court's order. The costs of the work shall be charged to the owner, and may be levied by the city as a special assessment against the property. When acting pursuant to an order of the circuit court, a commission or its agents may enter a property for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 757 , § 1, 9-8-14) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 757 , § 1, adopted Sept. 8, 2014, amended § 2-220 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The former § 2-220 pertained to permit required; completed application; certificate of appropriateness or notice to proceed; issuance; permit fee; appeal to review board and circuit court; plan review standards, guidelines and considerations; scope of review; preservation plan; approval; conditions; public meeting; availability of writings to public; rules of procedure; approval of minor work; finding of demolition by neglect; restoration or modification of work done without permit, and derived from Ord. No. 588, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998. 
Sec. 2-221. - Grants and gifts; benefit programs. 
    The city council may accept state or federal grants for historic preservation purposes, may participate in state and federal programs that benefit historic preservation, and may accept public or private gifts for historic preservation purposes. The city council may make the historic district commission, a standing committee, or other agency its duly appointed agent to accept and administer grants, gifts, and program responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-222. - Historic resource; acquisition by the city council. 
    If all efforts by the historic district commission to preserve a resource fail, or if it is determined by the city council that public ownership is most suitable, the local legislative body, if considered to be in the public interest, may acquire the resource using public funds, public or private gifts, grants, or proceeds from the issuance of revenue bonds. The acquisition shall be based upon the recommendation of the commission or standing committee. The commission or standing committee is responsible for maintaining publicly owned resources using its own funds, if not specifically designated for other purposes, or public funds committed for that use by the city council. Upon recommendation of the commission or standing committee, the city may sell resources acquired under this section with protective easements included in the property transfer documents, if appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-223. - County historic district commission; coordination with township and city. 
    The jurisdiction of a county shall be the same as that provided in Act No. 183 of the Public Acts of 1943, as amended, being MCL 125.201-125.232, or as otherwise provided by contract entered into between the county and a city, village or township. If a county historic district commission is in existence, coordination between the county historic district commission and township and municipality historic district commissions shall be maintained. The overall historic preservation plans of cities, villages and townships shall be submitted to the county historic district commission for review, and county plans submitted to cities, villages, and townships having historic district commissions. Day-to-day activities of a commission shall not be reviewed unless the activities affect resources of importance to another commission. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-224. - Historic district commission; filings with delegated authority; duties of local public officials, employees, and bureau of history. 
(a)  The commission shall file certificates of appropriateness, notices to proceed, and denials of applications for permits with the inspector of buildings or other delegated authority. A permit shall not be issued until the commission has acted as prescribed by this act. If a permit application is denied, the decision shall be binding on the inspector or other authority. A denial shall be accompanied with a written explanation by the commission of the reasons for denial and, if appropriate, a notice that an application may be resubmitted for commission review when suggested changes have been made. The denial shall also include notification of the applicant's rights of appeal to the state historic preservation review board and to the circuit court. The failure of the commission to act within 60 calendar days after the date a complete application is filed with the commission, unless an extension is agreed upon in writing by the applicant and the commission, shall be considered to constitute approval. 
(b)  Local public officials and employees shall provide information and records to committees, commissions, and standing committees, and shall meet with those bodies upon request to assist with their activities. 
(c)  The bureau shall cooperate with and assist local units, committees, commissions, and standing committees in carrying out the purposes of this act and may establish or approve standards, guidelines, and procedures that encourage uniform administration of this act in this state but that are not legally binding on any individual or other legal entity. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-225. - Construction of act. 
    Nothing in this act shall be construed to prevent ordinary maintenance or repair of a resource within a historic district, or to prevent work on any resource under a permit issued by the inspector of buildings or other duly delegated authority before the ordinance was enacted. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-226. - Appeal of decisions. 
    Any citizen or duly organized historic preservation organization in the city, as well as resource property owners, jointly or severally aggrieved by a decision of the historic district commission may appeal the decision to the circuit court, except that a permit applicant aggrieved by a decision rendered under section 2-220(a) may not appeal to the court without first exhausting the right to appeal to the state historic preservation review board under section 2-220(b). 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-227. - Effect of ordinance as to existing legislation and historical commission. 
    This division shall not affect the membership or prior actions of the existing historic district commission, except to conform its membership, structure, and actions, to the provisions of Michigan Local Historic Districts Act, Act 169 of 1970, as amended by Act 230 of 1986 and Act 96 of 1992. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-228. - Powers and duties of historic district commission. 
(a)  The city may prescribe powers and duties of the historic district commission, in addition to those prescribed in Michigan Local Historic District Act, as amended, that foster historic preservation activities, projects, and programs in the city. The intent of the Saline Historic District Commission (HDC) in establishing local historic districts is to preserve the unique character of each district as an integral part of the Saline community. The goal of the HDC's design review is to retain the historic integrity of the resource while allowing for the owner's individuality and creativity. The design guidelines adopt the U.S. Secretary of the Interior Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Structures, and are meant to aid the property owner in making educated decisions about historic resources. 
(b)  It is not the intent of the historic district commission to be overly restrictive or burdensome. The process of review is one that aims to assist the property owner in the stewardship of historic resources. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98; Ord. No. 757 , § 1, 9-8-14) 
Sec. 2-229. - Establishing, modifying, or eliminating historic districts; study committee; considerations; review of applications within proposed historic district; emergency moratorium. 
(a)  The city may at any time establish by ordinance additional historic districts, including proposed districts previously considered and rejected, may modify boundaries of an existing historic district, or may eliminate an existing historic district. Before establishing, modifying, or eliminating a historic district, a historic district study committee appointed by the city council shall, except as provided in subsection (b), below, comply with the procedures set forth in section 2-218 and shall consider any previously written committee reports pertinent to the proposed action. To conduct these activities, the city may retain the initial committee, establish a standing committee, or establish a committee to consider only specific proposed districts and then be dissolved. 
(b)  If considering elimination of a historic district, a committee shall follow the procedures set forth in section 2-218 for issuing a preliminary report, holding a public hearing, and issuing a final report but with the intent of showing one or more of the following: 
(1)  The historic district has lost those physical characteristics that enabled establishment of the district. 
(2)  The historic district was not significant in the way previously defined. 
(3)  The historic district was established pursuant to defective procedures. 
(c)  Upon receipt of substantial evidence showing the presence of historic, architectural, archaeological, engineering, or cultural significance of a proposed historic district, the city council may, at its discretion, adopt a resolution requiring that all applications for permits within the proposed historic district be referred to the commission as prescribed in sections 2-220 and 2-224. The commission shall review permit applications with the same powers that would apply if the proposed historic district was an established historic district. The review may continue in the proposed historic district for not more than one year, or until such time as the city approves or rejects the establishment of the historic district by ordinance, whichever occurs first. 
(d)  If the city council determines that pending work will cause irreparable harm to resources located within an established historic district or a proposed historic district, the city council may by resolution declare an emergency moratorium of all such work for a period not to exceed six months. The city council may extend the emergency moratorium for an additional period not to exceed six months upon finding that the threat of irreparable harm to resources is still present. Any pending permit application concerning a resource subject to an emergency moratorium may be summarily denied. 
(Ord. No. 588, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Sec. 2-230. - Violation; fine; payment of costs. 
(a)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this division is responsible for a civil violation and may be fined not more than $500.00 for each violation. 
(b)  A person, individual, partnership, firm, corporation, organization, institution, or agency of government that violates this division may be ordered by the court to pay the costs to restore or replicate a resource unlawfully constructed, added to, altered, repaired, moved, excavated, or demolished. 
Secs. 2-231-2-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-241. - Established. 
    There is hereby created an environmental commission which shall be composed of seven members appointed annually by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The commission shall meet at least once annually and other times as necessary. Minutes of the proceedings shall be kept and distributed to appropriate city staff. Commission meetings shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised, and shall be open to the public in accordance with the provisions of the state open meetings act. 
(Code 1968, § 2-100; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 2-4-91; Ord. No. 614, § 1, 2-22-99) 
Sec. 2-242. - Duties. 
    The environmental commission shall review all matters of environmental importance to the city such as site plans, ordinances and other matters referred to it by the council, and shall make recommendations thereon to the city council. The commission shall also be charged with providing environmental information to the city council and shall investigate solutions to environmental problems and report thereon to the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 2-101; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 2-4-91) 
Sec. 2-243. - Council appropriations. 
    The council shall make the necessary appropriations annually to provide suitable quarters, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry out the work of the environmental commission. 
(Code 1968, § 2-102; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 2-4-91) 
Sec. 2-244. - Termination. 
    This division is made in the interest of public health and welfare and is designed to serve the public convenience and shall continue in force and effect until repealed. The effectiveness of this division shall be annually reviewed and evaluated by the city council which shall annually make a determination to repeal this division or to continue it in full force and effect. 
(Code 1968, § 2-103; Ord. No. 473, § 1, 2-4-91) 
Secs. 2-245-2-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - SPECIAL PROJECTS COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 536, § 1, adopted May 2, 1994, repealed former Div. 6, §§ 2-256-2-260, relative to the urban design commission, and enacted a new Div. 6 to read as herein set out. The provisions of former Div. 6 derived from Code 1968, §§ 2-108-2-112; Ord. No. 317, § 1, adopted Aug. 1, 1977; Ord. No. 328, § 1, adopted Feb. 6, 1976; and Ord. No. 480, § 1, adopted April 15, 1991. 

Sec. 2-256. - Established. 
    There is hereby created a special projects commission which shall be composed of nine members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and shall include two members of the historic district commission, two members of the parks and beautification commission, two members of the economic development units (EDC, EDTF, LDFA, or TIFA), one member of the environmental commission, and two of which shall be the mayor and the member of council selected by it to serve on the planning commission, ex officio, with full voting rights. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall also appoint one member of the city staff to attend commission meetings as a liaison without voting rights. The commission shall meet a minimum of two times a year and other times as necessary. Minutes of the proceedings shall be kept and distributed to appropriate city staff. Commission meetings shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 655, § 1, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 2-257. - Areas of special concern. 
    The special projects commission shall recommend to the city council designation of "Areas of Special Concern" (ASC) which shall include those areas of open space and special areas of concern, which have special architectural, historical or aesthetic interest or potential, the character of which is desirable to maintain and enhance. The purpose of this designation shall be to call the attention to public sectors to their existence and importance. The special projects commission will assist in the coordination of plans, efforts and projects that the various city commissions are engaged in to insure a unity of purpose and an economy of effort. As needed the special projects commission will meet to review items of mutual concern at the direction of the mayor and city council and assist in the development of projects that involve multiple commissions. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Sec. 2-258. - Effect of designation as ASC. 
    Upon designation of an "Area of Special Concern" by the city council, the following rules and regulations shall become effective: 
(1)  All departments and commissions of the City of Saline must acknowledge the designation of ASC. No public plans, contracts or improvement work in the "Areas of Special Concern" shall commence without prior consultation with the special projects commission, except for emergency city services. 
(2)  All city budget requests affecting the character of ASC areas shall be submitted for review by the special projects commission. In formulating both annual and capital improvement budgets, all departments shall consider the impact of budget requests on designated "Areas of Special Concern." Technical and design advice shall be provided by the special projects commission. 
(3)  All public maintenance work shall conform with plans and policies approved by special projects commission in designated "Areas of Special Concern," subject to the adoption of such plans and policies by the city council. 
(4)  All master plan revisions shall contain references to designated "Areas of Special Concern" and the policies adopted by the special projects commission. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Sec. 2-259. - Coordination of city commissions. 
    The special projects commission may obtain from all city commissions a written description of the annual plans of each commission for review and discussion for the purpose of coordinating the activities of all city commissions. Upon completion of such review and discussion, the special projects commission shall prepare and deliver to the city council a written report of its findings and recommendations with a copy of such report to all city commissions. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 655, § 2, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 2-260. - Review of tax abatement applications. 
    The special projects commission shall review all tax abatement applications and make recommendations to the city council for action thereon. The special projects commission chairperson (or other officially designated reviewer) shall promptly review the analysis by city staff along with the complete application for tax abatement, whereupon the chairperson (or designated reviewer) shall either sign a recommendation for full approval of the requested tax abatement or call a meeting of the special projects commission to further discuss the request. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94; Ord. No. 655, § 3, 5-6-02) 
Sec. 2-261. - Work on special projects. 
    The special projects commission shall work on all other special projects assigned to it by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Sec. 2-262. - Council appropriations. 
    The council shall make the necessary appropriations annually to provide suitable quarters, facilities, equipment and personnel to carry out the work of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Sec. 2-263. - Termination. 
    This ordinance is made in the interest of public health and welfare and is designed to serve the public convenience and shall continue in force and effect until repealed The effectiveness of this ordinance shall be annually reviewed and evaluated by the city council which shall annually make a determination to repeal this ordinance or to continue it in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Sec. 2-264. - Severability. 
    If any phrase, clause, sentence or section of this ordinance should be declared illegal by any court of competent jurisdiction, this ordinance shall be deemed to have been adopted without such illegal phrase, clause, sentence or section and shall continue in full force and effect without such illegal portion. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 5-2-94) 
Secs. 2-265-2-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-271. - Created; membership. 
    A local officers compensation commission is created which shall determine the salaries of each local elected official. The commission shall consist of five members. The members shall be registered electors of the city, appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving in the city council. The terms of office shall be five years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. The first members shall be appointed within 30 days after the effective date of Ordinance No. 468. Members other than the first members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. A member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of government or a member of the immediate family of a member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of government shall not be a member of the commission. 
(Code 1968, § 2-121; Ord. No. 468, § 1, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-272. - Duties and procedures. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall determine the salary of each local elected official. The determination shall be the salary unless the city council, by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the council, rejects it. The determination of the commission shall be effective 30 days following its filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the council. If the determination is rejected, the existing salary shall prevail. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 1968, § 2-122; Ord. No. 468, § 2, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-273. - Meetings; quorum; organization; compensation. 
    The local officers compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in each odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days after its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members. As used in this section, "session day" means a calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall not receive compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
(Code 1968, § 2-123; Ord. No. 468, § 3, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-274. - Open meetings; notice. 
    The business which the local officers compensation commission may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the commission held in compliance with Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended. Public notice of the time, date, and place of the meeting of the commission shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 2-124; Ord. No. 468, § 4, 11-19-90) 
Sec. 2-275. - Records. 
    A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the local officers compensation commission in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 2-125; Ord. No. 468, § 5, 11-19-90) 
Secs. 2-276-2-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - LOCAL ACCESS TELEVISION COMMISSION[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 545, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 20, 1995, has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Div. 8, §§ 2-291 and 2-292. 
Cross reference- Community antenna television system, ch. 30. 

Sec. 2-291. - Created; membership; meetings. 
    There is hereby created a local access cable television commission which shall be composed of two members to be appointed annually by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council; and three members appointed annually by the Saline Area School Board, one of which shall be a resident of the city and be subject to the approval of the city council. The commission shall meet quarterly, a minimum of four times per year and such other times as the chairperson shall deem necessary. Minutes of the proceedings shall be kept and distributed to appropriate city staff. Commission meetings shall be governed by Roberts Rules of Order, newly revised, and shall be open to the public in accordance with the provisions of the state open meetings act. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 2-20-95; Ord. No. 582, § 1, 8-4-97; Ord. No. 723, § 1, 11-2-09) 
Sec. 2-292. - Duties. 
    The commission is charged with oversight of the local access channels assigned to the City of Saline by the Cable TV Franchise Ordinance and shall assist in providing local access television services to the community and making such recommendations to the city council as it deems appropriate from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 2, 2-20-95) 
Secs. 2-293-2-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - SALINE Y0UTH COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-301. - Established. 
    There is established a city youth council, whose mission is to serve as a conduit between the local government and its younger constituents. Voice will be given to teenagers to bring all issues, great and small, to the forefront. Conversely, the youth council will bring the government's voice to teenagers, showing all the opportunities to enrich the teenagers of the city. Bringing youth and the government together gives both more power to better the community. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Sec. 2-302. - Authority; duties. 
    The youth council is charged with the authority and responsibility of making recommendations to the city concerning the needs and concerns of youth and the community and the appropriate means by which public and private agencies in cooperation with volunteer efforts may address such needs and concerns. All programs and activities will be sent to the city council for approval. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Sec. 2-303. - Members; appointment. 
    The youth council shall consist of 13 members who shall be selected from the high school age students who reside in the Saline Area School District. Members shall be appointed by the mayor of the city subject to the approval by a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Sec. 2-304. - Terms of office. 
    Members of the youth council shall hold office for a one-year term and until their successors are appointed and qualified; however, members may serve for more than one term. Appointments shall be made to coincide with the academic calendar in order to facilitate greatest student involvement. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Sec. 2-305. - Organization; meetings. 
(a)  The youth council shall conduct the election of a chairperson, vice chairperson, vice chairperson and secretary shall be one year with eligibility for reelection; however, a member shall not be eligible to serve more than two successive terms as chairperson. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings but shall have no other duties not in common with other members. The youth council may create and fill such other offices as it may deem necessary or expedient. 
(b)  The youth council shall meet regularly as necessary to conduct business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. Three unexcused absences in the course of a term shall subject a member to removal from office in the sole discretion of the mayor. The youth council may appoint high school students as associate members to serve on committees advising it on various matters. Associate members may participate in all discussions but shall not have a vote. 
(Ord. No. 649, § 1, 2-4-02) 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[1] 
  
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 760 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, amended chapter 6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 6, §§ 6-1-6-24, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 151, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 1960; Ord. No. 193, §§ 1-10, adopted Jan. 23, 1967; Code 1968, §§ 3-1-3-14; Ord. No. 242, §§ 1, 2, 4, adopted June 19, 1972; Ord. No. 304, § 1, adopted July 19, 1976; Ord. No. 345, §§ 1-3, adopted Jan. 21, 1980; Ord. No. 404, §§ 1, 2, adopted April 21, 1986; Ord. No. 557, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 1995; Ord. No. 575, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 1996; Ord. No. 591, § 1, adopted April 20, 1998; Ord. No. 658, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 2003; Ord. No. 698, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 2016; and Ord. No. 732, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 2010. 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Liquor control act, MCL 436.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - LIQUOR LICENSING 

Sec. 6-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Liquor licensing ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-2. - Statement of purpose. 
    This article is intended to allow the city to establish and administer a policy for issuance and transfer of liquor licenses, to determine when denial, nonrenewal or revocation are appropriate, to provide for the enforcement of liquor law, and to limit the number of liquor licenses in the city. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-3. - Licensing policy. 
    No person or entity to operate an establishment in the city may sell alcoholic liquor for on-premises consumption (including micro brewers, brewpubs, and wine makers) without the city council's express approval. The city council shall have sole discretion when considering applications for new licenses, transfer of ownership of existing licenses, transfers into the city of new licenses, relocation of an existing licensed establishment, or expansion of an existing licensed establishment by more than 500 square feet or ten percent. The city council shall establish by resolution the maximum number of licensed establishments in the city, which shall in no case exceed the maximum number of establishments permitted by state law. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-4. - Application. 
    Prior to or simultaneously with the submission of any corresponding application to the state liquor control commission, each applicant for a new license or the transfer of a license, and any applicant seeking to relocate an existing license premises or expand the physical structure of an existing licensed premises by more than 500 square feet or ten percent shall submit a written application to the city clerk, which application shall include the following information: 
(a)  The name, age, Social Security number, address and driver's license number of the applicant in the case of an individual. In the case of a partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof. In the case of a corporation or limited liability company, the purposes for which the entity is organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his or her nominee, the name and address of such person and a list of the names of the shareholders; 
(b)  The citizenship of the applicant, the applicant's place of birth, and if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of the applicant's naturalization; 
(c)  The character of business of the applicant, and in the case of a corporation, the purpose for which it is formed; 
(d)  The length of time the applicant has been in business of that character or, in the case of a corporation, the date when it was incorporated; 
(e)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license; 
(f)  A statement whether the applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application; 
(g)  A statement that applicant, its partners, members, officers and directors have never been convicted of a felony; 
(h)  A statement that the applicant has met all of the qualifications necessary to obtain a license as set forth in this chapter and state laws, rules and regulations; 
(i)  The application shall be accompanied by building and plat plans showing the entire structure and premises and, in particular, the specific areas where the license is to be utilized. The plan shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal, screening and noise control; 
(j)  The proposed hours and days of the week the premises will be open to the public; 
(k)  Whether food will be available to the patrons for purchase. If so, the type of food and proposed hours available to the public; 
(l)  Whether entertainment will be provided. If so, the type of entertainment and proposed hours; 
(m)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been denied an application for a liquor license by the state liquor control commission. If so, the reason for the denial. 
(n)  A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been the holder of a liquor license which has been revoked or not renewed. If so, the reason for the revocation or nonrenewal. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-5. - Review procedures. 
(a)  New license unavailable. The city shall not be obligated to take any action on an application for a new liquor license when there is no such license available pursuant to state law or the terms of this article. The city may, at its discretion, retain the application on file to consider it in the event that a new liquor license becomes available in the future. 
(b)  City departmental review. Upon receiving an application for an available new license, for the transfer of a license, or for the relocation or alteration of the size of the physical structure of existing licensed premises, the clerk will refer the application to the city manager, police chief, fire chief, public works director, and city treasurer, who shall review and investigate the application. The investigation shall include, but not be limited to, reviewing the complete history of the applicant's past business experience and liquor law violations, and also inspecting the proposed premises. The applicant shall provide all requested information to, and fully cooperate with, all city departments requesting any and all additional information. The findings resulting from such review and investigation shall be reported to the city council. 
(c)  Public hearing/review. 
(1)  Hearing required. The city council shall hold a public hearing upon all applications for an available new license, for the transfer of a license, or for the relocation or alteration of the size of the physical structure of existing licensed premises. 
(2)  Notice and appearance. The applicant shall be given notice of the hearing and the city council may, at its discretion, require the applicant to appear at the hearing and make a written and/or oral presentation concerning the request. 
(3)  Grounds for denial. An application for an available new license, for the transfer of a license, or for the relocation or alteration of the size of the physical structure of existing licensed premises, may be denied if: 
a.  The applicant was the holder of a liquor license, in the state, which has been revoked or not renewed, by reason of applicant's prior violations; 
b.  The applicant has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law or city ordinance concerning the manufacturing, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or controlled substances; 
c.  The applicant does not own the premises for which such a license is sought or does not have a lease thereof for a full period for which the license is issued, or if the applicant does not have the financial assets to carry on or maintain the business; 
d.  The applicant is a law enforcing public official or any member of the city council, no such official shall be interested in any way, either directly or indirectly, in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor; 
e.  There exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations, or any other applicable city ordinance, county regulation, state or federal law or regulation; 
f.  It is determined by a majority of the city council that the premises do not or will not, reasonably soon after commencement of operations, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control, or where a nuisance does or will exist; 
g.  The city council determines and finds that the proposed location is unreasonably detrimental and injurious to the surrounding properties and persons, and/or does not have appropriate provision for: traffic safety, accessibility to the site from abutting roads, capability of abutting roads to accommodate the commercial activity, distance from inconsistent neighboring zoning districts, capacity to control and monitor noise and amplified music, accessibility from primary roads or state highways and distance from public or private schools; 
h.  The applicant is a partnership and there would be grounds for denying a license to any partner if he or she applied for a license as an individual; 
i.  The applicant is a corporation or limited liability company, and there would be grounds for denying a license to any officer, manager, effective manager, or director thereof, or stockowner or stockholders owning an aggregate of more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, if such person applied for a license as an individual; 
j.  The applicant's place of business is conducted by a manager or agent and there would be grounds for denying a license to such manager or agent if he or she applied for a license as an individual; and 
k.  The city council determines for any other reason that granting the application would adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare. 
(4)  Competing applications. Where there are competing applications for an available liquor license, the city council shall use criteria including, but not limited to, the following in determining which application, if any, should be granted: 
a.  Zoning of the parcel and adjacent parcels; 
b.  Availability of utilities; 
c.  Proposed utilities to be conducted with the license; 
d.  Traffic on adjacent streets and the existence of any traffic hazards in the area or produced by the applicant's proposed use; 
e.  Economic backing of applicant sufficient to conduct the proposed use; 
f.  Design and layout of improvements of the proposed use; 
g.  Effect upon existing adjacent uses and uses in the vicinity; 
h.  Location of other licensed establishments as relates to potential traffic effects or hazards; and 
i.  Any information contained in the application or requirements of this chapter. 
(d)  Approval by resolution. The approval of liquor-related applications shall be by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-6. - Annual license review. 
(a)  The city council may undertake an annual review of any license for the purpose of making a recommendation to the state liquor control commission regarding license renewal. The city council shall consider whether a licensed establishment has been operated in a manner consistent with the provisions of this article, including without limitation, section 6-8, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  Each year, the city manager shall cause an investigation to be made regarding each existing on-premises licensed establishment. The investigation may include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is in compliance with all applicable city and state codes. 
(2)  An inspection of the premises to determine whether the licensee is in compliance with the license itself, its approved site plan and plan of operation, as well as any conditions imposed by the city or state liquor control commission or representations made by the licensee at the time of issuance or transfer of the license. 
(3)  An inspection to determine the general condition of the premises, both interior and exterior. 
(4)  An inspection of city records to determine whether all taxes and other monies due the city are timely paid. 
(5)  An inspection of police files or other sources of information to determine total calls for service and whether any activity in connection with the licensed premises is in violation of the law, disturbs the public peace and tranquility, constitutes a nuisance, or contributes to the disruption of the normal activities of those in the neighborhood of the licensed premises. 
(6)  A review of the operation of the licensed establishment to determine whether the business is being operated in compliance with any and all representations made by the licensee to the city. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-7. - Revocation and nonrenewal. 
(a)  Authority to make request. Each establishment within the city for which a liquor license is granted shall be operated and maintained in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations. Upon any violation of this article, including the criteria in section 6-8, the city commission may, after notice and hearing, request that the state liquor control commission revoke a liquor license. 
(b)  Notice. Before filing an objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission, the city shall serve the licensee by certified mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Notice of the proposed action; 
(2)  Reasons for the proposed action; 
(3)  Date, time and place of the hearing; and 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
(c)  Written statement. Upon completion of the hearing, the city council shall submit to the licensee and the state liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-8. - Criteria for nonrenewal, suspension or revocation. 
    The city council may recommend nonrenewal, suspension or revocation of a license or permit to the state liquor control commission upon a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at the hearing that any of the following exists: 
(a)  Existence of any of the grounds for denial set forth in section 6-5; 
(b)  Fraudulent information provided on the original application or the application for renewal; 
(c)  The consumption of spirits, if licensed to sell only beer or wine, or both beer and wine; 
(d)  Any disorderly conduct or action which disturbs the peace and good order of the neighborhood; 
(e)  Any incidents of prostitution, solicitation for prostitution, or larceny; 
(f)  Any gambling activity or the placing or using of any gambling apparatus or paraphernalia therein; 
(g)  Any unlawful possession, sale or use of any controlled substance; 
(h)  Use of interior lighting which is insufficient to enable a person with average vision to clearly see all persons within the premises; 
(i)  Any violation of any other provision of the city code, or any violation of applicable laws, rules, regulations, order or directives of any governmental entity or agency; 
(j)  Any violation of the state liquor control act or any rule or regulation promulgated by the state liquor control commission; 
(k)  Nonpayment of any federal, state or local tax or special assessment; 
(l)  Nonpayment of bills outstanding and owing to the city; 
(m)  Any failure by the licensee, or the licensee's agents or employees, to fully cooperate with any federal, state, county or city official; or 
(n)  Any failure by the licensee, or the licensee's agents or employees, to fully cooperate with the sheriff, or any deputy sheriff, police officer or state police. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-9. - Termination of escrowed licenses. 
    The city council may, by resolution, request that the state liquor control commission terminate an on-premises license that has been placed in escrow for more than one year after its expiration. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-10. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for a new license or permit, for transfer of an existing license or permit, for expansion of an existing establishment, and for renewal of an existing license or permit shall pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Secs. 6-11-6-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROHIBITED CONDUCT 

Sec. 6-20. - Disorderly conduct on premises. 
    No person having the management, ownership or control of any premises in the city in which alcoholic liquors are sold for consumption on the premises shall permit by talking, laughing, boisterous conduct or in any other manner the disturbance of the peace and good order of the neighborhood; nor shall any person or persons frequenting such premises wherein alcoholic liquors are sold for consumption on the premises make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion, by which the peace and good order of the neighborhood is disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-21. - Prohibition on employees drinking with patrons. 
    No person having the management, ownership or control of any premises wherein alcoholic liquors are sold for consumption on the premises shall permit an employee making or serving drinks to, during the course of the employee's shift, drink alcoholic liquors with any of the patrons of the establishment. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-22. - Consumption in public. 
    No alcoholic liquor shall be consumed in any public place in the city, or on private parking lots open to the public, except under permit granted by the chief of police pursuant to applicable laws and regulations adopted by the police department. No person who owns or controls any private parking lot open to the public shall permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor thereon without having first obtained all required permits from the city and state liquor control commission. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-23. - Possession of open container in public. 
    No person shall possess any alcoholic liquor in a container which is open, uncapped or upon which the seal is broken in any public place in the city, or on private parking lots open to the public, not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. However, this provision shall not apply when the city and state liquor control commission have approved consumption on the property through the issuance of all required permits. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-24. - Selling, furnishing to minors. 
(a)  Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a person unless the person has attained 21 years of age. A person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or who fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action under this section. 
(Ord. No. 760 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 6-25. - Purchase, consumption, and possession of alcoholic beverages by minors prohibited. 
(a)  A person less than 21 years of age shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  This section does not prohibit a person less than 21 years of age from engaging in any of the following: 
(1)  Possessing alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed to sell or transport alcoholic liquor, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption; 
(2)  Consuming alcoholic liquor in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member if the purpose of the possession or consumption is solely educational and is a necessary ingredient of the course; 
(3)  Consuming alcoholic liquor, including sacramental wine, in connection with religious services at a place of worship; 
(4)  Possessing alcoholic liquor in an undercover operation under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer sponsored internal enforcement action; 
(5)  Possessing alcoholic liquor in an undercover operation under the direction of the state police, the liquor control commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action. 
(6)  In a prosecution for the violation of subsection (a) concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(c)  The penalty for a violation of this section shall be as follows: 
(1)  For the first violation, a person shall be guilty of a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. The court may also order community service, participation in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230 and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, and substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c)(4) below. A person may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection. 
(2)  If a violation of section (a) occurs after one prior judgment, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $200.00, or, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction of juvenile adjudication, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c)(4) below. 
(3)  If violation of section (a) occurs after two or more prior judgments, a person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction of juvenile adjudication, by imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in section 6230 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office of substance abuse services, to perform community service, to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (c)(4) below. 
(4)  A court may order an individual found responsible for, or convicted of, violating this section to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency as designated by the department-designated community mental health entity as defined in Section 100a of the Mental Health Code, 1974 PA 258, MCL 330.1100a, to determine whether the individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs. A court may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of this section to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, may request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of the probation. 
(5)  An individual who pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of subsection (c)(2), or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (c)(2), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has committed the offense, and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation. The terms and conditions of that probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions in subsection (c)(3), payment of the costs including minimum state cost as provided for in section 18m of chapter XIIA of the probate code of 1939, 1939 PA 288, MCL 712A.18m, and section 1j of chapter IX of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 769.1j, and the costs of probation as prescribed in section 3 of chapter XI of the code of criminal procedure, 1927 PA 175, MCL 771.3. If a court finds that an individual violated a term or condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing this subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law. If an individual fulfills the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal under this subsection shall be without adjudication of guilt or without a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has committed the offense and is not a conviction or juvenile adjudication for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime. An individual may obtain only one discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a discharge and dismissal under this subsection. The secretary of state shall retain a nonpublic record of a plea and of the discharge and dismissal under this subsection. These records shall be furnished to any of the following: 
a.  To a court, prosecutor, or police agency on request for the purpose of determining if an individual has already utilized this subsection. 
b.  To the department of corrections, a prosecutor, or a law enforcement agency, on the department's, a prosecutor's, or a law enforcement agency's request, subject to all of the following conditions: 
1.  At the time of the request, the individual is an employee of the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency, or an applicant for employment with the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency. 
2.  The record is used by the department of corrections, the prosecutor, or the law enforcement agency only to determine whether an employee has violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets criteria for employment. 
(6)  A misdemeanor violation of subsection (c) successfully deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (c)(5) is considered a prior judgment for the purposes of subsection (c)(3). 
(d)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a state civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(e)  A law enforcement agency, on determining that an individual who is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, or purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of subsection (a) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The law enforcement agency shall notify the parent, guardian, or custodian not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the individual who allegedly violated subsection (a) is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The law enforcement agency may notify the parent, guardian, or custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first-class mail. If an individual less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating subsection (a), his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(f)  The following individuals are not considered to be in violation of subsection (a): 
(1)  A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(2)  A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of the following criteria: 
a.  Has consumed alcoholic liquor. 
b.  Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of sections 520b to 520g of the Michigan penal code, 1931 PA 328, MCL 750.520b to 750.520g, committed against a minor. 
(3)  A minor who initiates contact with a peace officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern. 
(g)  If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, MCL 722.1 to 722.6, voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for treatment or for observation as provided under subsection (f), the health facility or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the health facility or agency. 
(h)  As used in this section: 
(1)  "Alcoholic liquor" means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, powder, beer, wine, spirits, alcoholic liquids, and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume, which are fit for use for food purposes or beverage purposes as defined and classified by the liquor control commission according to alcoholic content as belonging to one of the varieties defined in MCL Chapter 436. 
(2)  "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(3)  "Emergency medical services personnel" means that term as defined in section 20904 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20904. 
(4)  "Health facility or agency" means that term as defined in section 20106 of the public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.20106. 
(5)  "Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for any of the following, whether under a law of this state, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of this state, a law of the United States substantially corresponding to a law of this state, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of this state: 
a.  This section or MCL 436.1701, 436.1703, or 436.1707. 
b.  Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan vehicle code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.624a, 257.624b, and 257.625. 
c.  Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the natural resources and environmental protection act, 1994 PA 451, MCL 324.80176, 324.81134, and 324.82127. 
d.  Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan penal code, 1939 PA 328, MCL 750.167a and 750.237. 
(6)  "Sacramental wine" means wine containing not more than 24 percent of alcohol by volume which is used for sacramental purposes. 
(Ord. No. 794 , § 1, 12-4-17) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 794 , § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2017, repealed the former § 6-25 and enacted a new § 6-25 as set out herein. The former § 6-25 pertained to purchase, consumption, possession by a person less than 21 years of age and derived from Ord. No. 760, § 1, adopted March 16, 2015. 
Sec. 6-26. - Furnishing or using fraudulent identification. 
(a)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than 21 years of age is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00 or both. 
(b)  A person who uses fraudulent identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, or to enter a business where alcoholic liquor is sold, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 794 , § 2, 12-4-17) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DANCES 

Sec. 10-26. - Exemptions. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to persons holding dances in private homes or in connection with school, church or municipal entertainment programs. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 5, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-11) 
Sec. 10-27. - Children under 17 permitted. 
    It shall be lawful to permit minor children under the age of 17 to attend dances where no spirituous or intoxicating liquor is sold, given away or consumed in the dance area, subject to the regulations established by this article. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 1, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-12) 
Sec. 10-28. - License required; duration. 
    The person controlling the premises where dances are held at which children under 17 years of age are permitted shall apply for and obtain a license to hold such dances. Such license shall be granted by the city council to any person who shall be willing and able to comply with the regulations herein established, and shall be valid for a period of one year from the date granted, unless sooner revoked for cause as hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 2, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-13) 
Sec. 10-29. - License fee. 
    The fee for licenses required by this article shall be as established by resolution of the city council and shall be paid to the city clerk before delivery of the license. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 2, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-14) 
Sec. 10-30. - Regulations. 
    All licensees under this article shall be responsible for the enforcement of the following rules and regulations governing dances at which children under 17 years of age are permitted: 
(1)  A responsible adult shall be present at all times. 
(2)  No indecent language or conduct shall be permitted. 
(3)  No minor child under the age of 12 shall be permitted to enter or remain on the premises after 10:00 p.m., unless accompanied by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 3, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-15) 
Sec. 10-31. - License revocation. 
    The council may revoke licenses for dances at which children under 17 are permitted at any time if, in the opinion of the council, the licensee is not willing or able to enforce the regulations established in this article; provided, however, that no such license shall be revoked until after the licensee shall have had an opportunity to be heard at the next regular council meeting after notice has been served on such licensee that the council is considering the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. 166, § 4, 7-1-63; Code 1968, § 4-16) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 761 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2016, amended chapter 14 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 14, §§ 14-1-14-45, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 116, §§ 1-5, adopted April 12, 1948; Code 1988, §§ 5-1-5-5, 5-16-5-27, 5-29-5-31; Ord. No. 143, §§ 1-9; Ord. No. 264, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 24, 1974; Ord. No. 275, § 1, adopted July 15, 1974; Ord. No. 634, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 18, 2000; and Ord. No. 635, § 1, adopted Oct. 16, 2000. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall mean the following when used in this chapter: 
(1)  Animal means any animal, including without limitation, any cat, dog, bird, reptile, fish or any other creature, of any age. 
(2)  Animal shelter means any animal shelter maintained or contracted for by the city, a humane society or Washtenaw County. 
(3)  At large means off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner, the owner's agent, or some member of the owner's family by leash, cord, chain, or other restraint up to six feet in length, or by leash up to 25 feet in length which is attached to a retracting mechanism held by the owner, his agent, or some member of the owner's family. Electronic controls are not adequate constraints for purposes of this chapter. A dog shall not be considered to be at large when being watched by the owner, owner's agent, or some member of the owner's family in a dog park or other area designated and posted for unleashed use. 
(4)  Impound means taking an animal for transport to and leaving it with an animal shelter or other place as may be legally provided. 
(5)  Owner means any person who has a right of property in an animal, harbors an animal, has an animal in his or her care, or allows an animal to remain on or about the property or premises occupied by such person. 
(6)  Without justification means an action taken by an animal if: (a) the recipient of the action was not trespassing on the property of the animal's owner; (b) the recipient of the action was not tormenting the animal; or (c) the animal was not responding in a manner that an ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a person engaged in lawful activity. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-2. - License and inoculation tags required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own any dog over the age of six months within the city that does not at all times wear a collar with a license tag attached thereto as provided for by state law, and with a required rabies inoculation tag. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-3. - Prohibition on keeping excessive numbers of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor more than a total of three dogs or cats, or combination thereof, over two months' of age, in any single dwelling within the city, except as otherwise permitted in the city code or zoning ordinance. For purposes of this section, the term "dwelling" means a building or portion thereof which is used as a residence and provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-4. - Ownership of certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep, harbor, or have charge of any animal when any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The animal has a dangerous or ferocious disposition, shows vicious habits, or has without justification molested any person lawfully in or upon any public street or place; 
(2)  The animal has without justification attacked or bitten any person or animal, or has destroyed any property or any animal not posing a threat to the offending animal; 
(3)  The animal appears to be suffering from rabies, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease. However, an owner shall not be deemed to be in violation of this subsection if the animal is under the care of a licensed veterinarian for the condition and is properly quarantined; 
(4)  The animal is of a type prohibited in the zoning district in which the owner's property is located; unless the owner has obtained a permit for keeping such animal pursuant to the zoning ordinance; or 
(5)  The animal is of a species otherwise unfit for keeping in the city either because of a tendency toward viciousness, including, but not limited to, lions, tigers, apes, alligators, etc. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-5. - Animals at large. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner to: 
(1)  Intentionally permit an animal to be at large within the limits of the city. The owner of any animal found at large shall be responsible for a violation of this section, regardless of whether such owner resides in the city. 
(2)  House an animal in a manner so as to accidently allow an animal to escape and be at large, if such animal causes injury or damage to the person or property of another. 
(3)  House an animal in a matter so as to accidently allow an animal to be at large two or more times. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-6. - Reasonable control of dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  Any person having control of a dog by leash, cord, chain, or other restraint, or any person supervising a dog in a dog park, to allow the dog to defecate on or upon any premises other than his or her own, or the premises where the dog resides, unless the person cleans up the resulting feces. 
(2)  Any person having control of a dog by leash, cord, chain, or other restraint to allow the dog to damage property or injure any person. 
(3)  An owner of a dog to fail or refuse to immediately remove the dog's feces deposited on public walks, rights-of-way, public sidewalks, public recreation areas, or other public property, or deposited on private property other than his or her own private property. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16; Ord. No. 799 , § 1, 2-5-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 799 , § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, amended the title of § 14-6 to read as set out herein. The former § 14-6 title pertained to reasonable control of animals. 
Sec. 14-7. - Foul odors and disturbing noises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person owning an animal to allow that animal to disturb the quiet enjoyment of one or more neighboring properties by: 
(1)  Producing foul odors; 
(2)  Barking, howling, bleating, quacking, crowing, or producing any other noise that prevents the quiet enjoyment of one or more neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-8. - Duty to report dangerous and rabid animals. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any person owning an animal which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or animal showing symptoms of rabies to immediately notify a police officer or animal control officer. 
(b)  It shall also be the duty of any person having knowledge of a vicious or dangerous animal to report such animal to a police officer or animal control officer. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-9. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Police officers or other persons designated by the chief of police or city council are authorized to impound: 
(1)  Animals that are at large; 
(2)  Animals that have bitten or threatened other humans or animals; 
(3)  Animals that appear to be suffering from rabies, mange or other infectious or dangerous disease; or 
(4)  Animals that are making noises that can be heard off the premises of the owner. 
(b)  Any animal impounded shall be released to the owner only if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The owner has paid the applicable impounding fee. 
(2)  The owner has paid the cost of boarding the animal, if the animal was impounded for more than 24 hours. 
(3)  The owner has presented proof of all required immunizations and licenses. 
(4)  Release from impoundment will not immediately result in a violation of section 14-2. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Sec. 14-10. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    Any violation of this chapter shall be a municipal civil infraction, and each day that a violation remains or occurs shall be separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 761 , § 1, 3-16-16) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; planning, ch. 66; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Findings and purpose. 
    It is declared to be essential that building codes be adopted and enforced to protect the health, safety, welfare, comfort and security of the residents of this city, but buildings should be permitted to be constructed at the least possible cost consistent with recognized standards of health and safety. Among the factors inducing high costs of construction are various laws, ordinances, rules, regulations, and codes regulating the construction of buildings and the use of materials therein. Many such requirements are obsolete and unnecessarily complex. They serve to increase cost, without providing corrective benefits or safety to owners, builders, tenants and users of buildings. It is the purpose of this chapter to institute the adoption of codes of building construction to provide, so far as may be practicable, basic and uniform performance standards. Thus, while establishing reasonable safeguards for the security, welfare and safety of the occupants and users of buildings, the use of modern methods, devices, materials and techniques will be encouraged. This should be effective in lowering construction costs. Because it is essential that any such codes be readily adaptable to changing conditions, detailed enactment of all of the provisions of such codes is impractical. 
(Code 1968, § 6-1) 
Sec. 18-2. - Violations, penalty. 
    Any person who shall violate a provision of this chapter or any code adopted hereby, or the regulations adopted pursuant hereto, or who shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall violate an approved plan or directive of the building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be punished as provided by section 1-8. 
(Code 1968, § 6-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Liabilities not affected. 
    This chapter shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person for damages to person or property, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability by reason of the inspection authorized herein, or any certificate of inspection issued as herein provided. 
(Code 1968, § 6-3) 
Sec. 18-4. - Building department created. 
    There is hereby created a building department in the city government. 
(Code 1968, § 6-4) 
Sec. 18-5. - Position of building official created; appointment, tenure. 
    The position of building official is hereby created. The building official shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure. 
(Code 1968, § 6-5) 
Sec. 18-6. - Subordinate employees of department; "inspector," "official" defined. 
    The building department shall contain such inspectors, employees and other personnel as the council may provide. Whenever the word "inspector" or "official" is used in this chapter or the codes adopted hereby, it shall mean the building official or any person authorized by him to act in his stead. 
(Code 1968, § 6-6) 
Sec. 18-7. - Duties of building official. 
    The building official shall be responsible for the operation of the building department and shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and the codes adopted hereby. 
(Code 1968, § 6-7) 
Sec. 18-8. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 640, § 1, adopted February 26, 2001, repealed §§ 18-8-18-14 in their entirety and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 18-8-18-14 pertained to the regulatory authority of official, the creation, membership, qualifications of members, the chairman, the compensation, and duties of the advisory board, and the powers and duties of the advisory board to be board of appeals, and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 6-8-6-14. 
Sec. 18-9. - Construction board of appeals; creation, membership, jurisdiction, meetings, freedom of information. 
    There is hereby created a construction board of appeals consisting of three members. The members of the board of appeals shall be appointed for two-year terms by the chief executive officer of the city. A member of the board of appeals shall be qualified by experience or training to perform the duties of members of the board of appeals. A person may serve on the board of appeals of more than one governmental subdivision. If the city refuses to grant an application for a building permit, or if the city makes any other decision pursuant or related to the State Construction Code Act, as amended, an interested person, or the person's authorized agent, may appeal in writing to the board of appeals. The board of appeals shall hear the appeal and render and file its decision with a statement of reasons for the decision with the enforcing agency from whom the appeal was taken not more than 30 days after submission of the appeal. Failure of the board of appeals to hear an appeal and file a decision within the time limit is a denial of the appeal for the purposes of authorizing the institution of an appeal to the State Construction Code Commission. A copy of the decision and statement of the reasons for the decision shall be delivered or mailed, before filing, to the party taking the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See the editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-10. - Same-Powers and duties of construction board of appeals. 
    The construction board of appeals shall have all the powers and duties granted by the State Construction Code Act, and such additional powers and duties not inconsistent with said act as the city may grant to it. The construction board of appeals shall have the power to make rules establishing its own procedures which do not conflict with said act, unless otherwise provided by said act, or by other laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-11. - Same-Meetings, Open Meetings Act. 
    The business which the board of appeals may perform shall be conducted at a public meeting of the board of appeals held in compliance with Act No. 267 of Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 15.261 et seq.). Public notice of the time, date and place of the meeting shall be given in the manner required by Act No. 267 of Public Acts of 1976. 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-12. - Same-Records, Freedom of Information Act. 
    A record of decisions made by the board of appeals, properly indexed, and any other writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by the board of appeals in the performance of an official function shall be made available to the public in compliance with Act No. 442 of Public Acts of 1976 (MCL 15.231 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-13. - Same-Compensation. 
    Members of the construction board of appeals shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary and actual expenses incurred in their official service. Such reimbursement shall be paid solely from funds allocated by the city for the administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-14. - Same-Joint administration. 
    The city council with approval of the Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry Services may provide by intergovernmental agreement that the jurisdiction and functions of a construction board of appeals be jointly administered by the construction board of appeals of another local government. 
(Ord. No. 640, § 1, 2-26-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note at § 18-8. 
Sec. 18-15. - Registration of contractors licensed by state. 
    All contractors who are required to be licensed by the state shall, before doing any work in the city, register with the building official by providing to said building official a copy of their state license. Such contractors shall annually provide said building official with their current address, telephone number, and certificate of insurance. The fee for such annual registration of current information shall be as prescribed by resolution of the council. 
(Code 1968, § 6-15; Ord. No. 632, § 1, 7-10-00) 
Secs. 18-16-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-36. - Property numbering system. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section property identification number means the address, when available, or lot number until address is established, which is established for developed property within the city by the building department or other recognized authority. 
(b)  Purpose. The city council hereby determines that to provide proper police, fire, health, welfare and emergency services, public or private, to residences and businesses, it is necessary to provide for property identification numbers visible from the public roadways adjacent to residences and businesses in the city. 
(c)  Requirements. 
(1)  All property upon which houses, dwellings, buildings, house trailers, businesses, and other such structures are constructed or located within the city shall be considered developed property and shall have property identification numbers which shall be posted on the face and/or other appropriate side of the house, dwelling, business or structure in a manner and location so that the identification numbers are clearly and readily readable, to a person of normal vision, from the adjacent roadway. House trailers shall have an individual space identification number at least three inches in height on the side of the trailer facing the access road. The operator of the trailer park shall be responsible for assigning such numbers. If the house, dwelling, house trailer, business or structure is located on the property so that the posted numbers are not clearly readable from the roadway, due to distance or intervening sight barriers such as, but not limited to, shrubbery, terrain features or structures, the identification numbers shall also be posted separate from the main structure (i.e., on a yard light post, entrance gate, driveway marker, mailbox, etc.) in a fashion that is clearly readable from the adjacent roadway. No identification structures shall be placed within the road right-of-way unless approved by the city council. Such additional identification numbers shall be either located centrally between the side boundaries of the property or located immediately adjacent to the driveway providing ingress to the property, and shall be located on the same side of the adjacent roadway as the property it identifies. 
(2)  The property identification number or address number heights shall be determined as follows: 
Distance from street 
 right-of-way line 
    (feet) Minimum number 
height 
(inches)     0-50 3     50-100 4    100-200 6    200-300 8  
In any case or situation the numbers shall be of sufficient size, shape and color so that the numbers are readable from the centerline of the adjacent roadway. All numbers shall face the roadway for which they are assigned by street name. 
(3)  The color of the numbers shall be in contrast with the immediate background on which they are mounted. 
(4)  In the case of multiple units, either business or residential, the property identification number of those apartments or businesses accessible through such entrance shall be clearly indicated at each entrance. The purpose of this identification is to facilitate the rapid movement of emergency units to a specific apartment or business unit in apartment buildings or business complexes which have multiple entrances bearing the same number and series of such units that are not accessible except through a specific entrance. 
(5)  The occupants of all buildings in the city used for commercial and/or industrial purposes that are connected with or located so close to other buildings as to prevent access between such buildings and which require a different route of access to the rear than that to the front of the building shall cause the correct business name and street numbers to be placed on the rear entrance door, or immediately adjacent thereto. Such names and numbers shall not be less than three nor more than six inches in height, and may consist of standard manufactured letters and/or numerals. If painted on the building or door such names and numbers shall be applied with standard-type numeral and letter stencil. The name and number shall be placed as to be plainly visible and readable from the alley, service drive, easement, parking lot or any other rear access. 
(d)  Existing structures. All existing developed property shall be identified as required in subsection 18-36(c) within 180 days after June 13, 1992, or be considered in violation hereof. The city shall have the right to correct or change addresses in order to establish a uniform and continuous address numbering system. 
(e)  New construction. All applicants for building permits for new construction of residences or businesses or other such structures shall be required to submit a plan showing the proposed location of their property identification number before any building permit will be issued and compliance with this section shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  Persons responsible for compliance. The owner, occupant, lessee or other person in control of any developed property shall each be responsible for identifying the property in compliance with this section. 
(g)  Enforcement. Ordinance enforcement officers of the city may issue citations for the violation of this section. 
(h)  Penalty. Any person or any other acting in behalf of such person violating any of the provisions of this section shall upon being found responsible for such violation be deemed to have committed a civil infraction and be subject to a civil fine and the costs of prosecution as follows: 
(1)  First infraction ..... $10.00 
(2)  Second infraction ..... 25.00 
(3)  Third infraction ..... 50.00 
The imposition of any civil penalty shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 498, §§ 1-8, 6-1-92) 
Sec. 18-37. - Building code-Adopted. 
    The city hereby assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act No. 245, P.A. 1999) within its political boundaries as authorized by MCL 125.1508b(1), and authorizes and directs its mayor to sign and return to the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, Bureau of Construction Codes, Administration, no later than June 29, 2001, the notice of intent form provided by the state, indicating that the city will administer and enforce the Michigan Building Code, the Michigan Mechanical Code, and the Michigan Plumbing Code established by said act. 
(Code 1968, § 6-25; Ord. No. 477, § 1, 3-18-91; Ord. No. 531, § 1, 4-18-94; Ord. No. 610, § 1, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 641, § 1, 6-18-01) 
Secs. 18-38, 18-39. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 641, § 1, adopted June 18, 2001, repealed §§ 18-38 and 18-39, which pertained to additions, insertions and changes to the building code, and standard construction specifications for construction not covered by BOCA Code, respectively, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 6-26 and 6-28, Ord. No. 321, §§ 1-5, adopted August 1, 1977; Ord. No. 329, § 1, adopted February 5, 1979; Ord. No. 331, § 1, adopted August 21, 1978; Ord. No. 477, § 1, adopted March 18, 1991; Ord. No. 531, § 1, adopted April 18, 1994; Ord. No. 539, § 7, adopted August 15, 1994; Ord. No. 610, § 1, adopted February 1, 1999. 
Sec. 18-40. - Security lighting. 
    No person shall construct or establish a parking space, driveway or parking lot, after April 1, 1986, for use in connection with any individual dwelling and/or rooming unit which shares a common wall and/or roof with any other individual dwelling and/or rooming unit, or for use in connection with any leased dwelling and/or rooming unit or any commercial or industrial use, without first obtaining a permit from the building department which shall require compliance, on a continuing basis, with the following standards: 
(1)  During periods of use, such area shall be illuminated from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise to an illumination level at any unobstructed point of not less than one footcandle. Facilities for such illumination must be shown on plans submitted for obtaining the required permit. 
(2)  Illumination of such area must be designed and maintained so that it does not unnecessarily shine, glare or reflect into any premises used for residential purposes and so that it does not adversely affect the vision of motorists on public streets. 
(Code 1968, § 6-29; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 411, § 2, 7-20-87; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 2-1-88) 
Sec. 18-41. - Security devices on exterior windows and doors. 
    All individual dwelling and/or rooming units which share a common wall and/or roof with any other individual dwelling and/or rooming unit, and all leased dwelling and/or rooming units, shall be equipped with the following minimum security devices: 
(1)  Doors. Doors shall be equipped with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt locks shall be operated only by turning a knob or a key and shall have a lock throw of not less than one inch. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's specifications and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this section shall be designed and installed in such a manner as to be operable inside of the dwelling unit without the use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or effort. 
(2)  Windows. Operable windows located in whole or in part within six feet above ground level or a walking surface below, that provide access to a dwelling unit shall be equipped with a window sash locking device. 
(3)  Basement hatchways. Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry. 
(Code 1968, § 6-30; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 411, § 3, 7-20-87; Ord. No. 690, § 1, 4-17-06) 
Sec. 18-42. - Compliance inspection. 
    No occupancy permit shall be issued to the owner of any premises subject to the provisions of section 18-40 and section 18-41 above until the city, by its duly authorized agent, has inspected such premises and has certified in writing to the building official that such premises are in full compliance with the provisions of section 18-40 and section 18-41. 
(Code 1968, § 6-31; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-7-86) 
Sec. 18-43. - Annual inspection. 
    The owner of any premises subject to the provisions of section 18-40 and section 18-41 shall be responsible for making, or causing to be made, annually during the month of September, an inspection of such security lighting and security devices on exterior doors and windows to determine that they are in good working order and to make such repairs as are necessary to bring such security systems up to the required standards. In the event that an inspection of the premises is performed by the city at any given time, citations will be issued for any violation of these sections. 
(Code 1968, § 6-32; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 690, § 2, 4-17-06) 
Sec. 18-44. - Notice of owners' responsibilities. 
    The city clerk shall annually in the first week of September publish in The Saline Reporter, or other newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice setting forth the owners' responsibilities under sections 18-40 through 18-43, and shall annually mail such notice by first class mail to the owners of all premises subject to the provisions of sections 18-40 and 18-41. 
(Code 1968, § 6-36; Ord. No. 403, § 1, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 690, §§ 3, 4, 4-17-06) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 690, § 3, adopted April 17, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former § 18-44. Former § 18-44 pertained to affidavit of compliance by owner; and derived from the Code of 1968, § 6-33; and Ord. No. 403, adopted April 7, 1986. Ord. No. 690, § 4, renumbered former § 18-47 as a new § 18-44. 
Secs. 18-45-18-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 690, § 3, adopted April 17, 2006, amended the Code by repealing former §§ 18-45 and 18-46. Former § 18-45 pertained to inspection by city and cost; and derived from the Code of 1968, § 6-34; and Ord. No. 403, adopted April 7, 1986. Former § 18-46 pertained to revocation of certificate of occupancy; and derived from the Code of 1968, § 6-35; and Ord. No. 403, adopted April 7, 1986. Ord. No. 690, § 5, amended the Code by repealing former § 18-48. Former § 18-48 pertained to violation and penalties; and derived from the Code of 1968, § 6-37; and Ord. No. 403, adopted April 7, 1986. 
ARTICLE III. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 18-71. - Adoption of code. 
    The city hereby assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of the Michigan Electrical Code as established by the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act No. 245, P.A. 1999), within its political boundaries. 
(Code 1968, § 6-38; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 2-6-78; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 565, § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 641, § 2, 6-18-01) 
Sec. 18-72. - Enforcing agency. 
    The city hereby designates the building official as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under this article. 
(Code 1968, § 6-39; Ord. No. 325, § 1, 2-6-78) 
Secs. 18-73-18-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 18-96. - Adoption of code. 
    The city hereby assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of the Michigan Plumbing Code as established by the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act No. 245, P.A. 1999), within its political boundaries. 
(Code 1968, § 6-94; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 5-4-92; Ord. No. 566, § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 611, §§ 1, 2, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 641, § 3, 6-18-01) 
Secs. 18-97-18-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ENERGY 

Sec. 18-116. - Code adopted. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), the Michigan Energy Code (ASHRAE Standard 90-75, Energy Conservation in New Building Design), together with such supplements and subsequent editions as may from time to time be issued, is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Code 1968, § 6-144; Ord. No. 319, § 1, 9-12-77) 
Secs. 18-117-18-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-136. - Adoption of code. 
    The city hereby assumes responsibility for administration and enforcement of the Michigan Mechanical Code as established by the Stille-DeRossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act (Act No. 245, P.A. 1999), within its political boundaries. 
(Code 1968, § 6-151; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 6-1-81; Ord. No. 452, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 509, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 567, § 1, 2-19-96; Ord. No. 612, §§ 1, 2, 2-1-99; Ord. No. 641, § 4, 6-18-01) 
Sec. 18-137. - Enforcing agency. 
    The city hereby designates the building official as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibilities of the city under this article. 
(Code 1968, § 6-152; Ord. No. 359, § 2, 6-1-81) 
ARTICLE VII. - FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT 

Sec. 18-138. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the public Acts of 1972, as amended, the building official of the City of Saline is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Saline under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of Saline assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout the corporate limits of the community adopting this article. 
(Ord. No. 737, § 1, 2-27-12) 
Sec. 18-139. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of Saline. 
(Ord. No. 737, § 1, 2-27-12) 
Sec. 18-140. - Designation of regulated floodprone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance study (FIS) Entitled "Washtenaw County, Michigan (All Jurisdictions)" and dated April 3, 2012, and the flood insurance rate map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) 26161C, 0384E, 0391E, 0392E, 0393E, and 0394E dated April 3, 2012, are adopted by reference for the purposes of administration of the Michigan Construction Code, and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code, and to provide the content of the "Flood Hazards" section of Table R301.2(1) of the Michigan Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 737, § 1, 2-27-12) 
Secs. 18-141-18-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 803 , § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 2018, set out provisions intended for use as Art. VIII, §§ 18-2-18-8. Inasmuch as said sections already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. VIII, §§ 18-161-18-168, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 18-161. - Dangerous building and structures ordinance. 
    This article is specifically authorized by the housing law, 1917 PA 167, as amended, and shall be known and cited as the City of Saline Dangerous Buildings Ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-162. - Dangerous building unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent, lessee or party in interest to keep or maintain any building or part thereof which is a dangerous building or structure as defined in this article. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-163. - Dangerous buildings defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "dangerous building" means any building or structure, residential or otherwise, which has any of the following defects or is in any of the following conditions: 
(1)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit does not conform to the requirements of the city's fire code. 
(2)  A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is significantly impaired and the structure does not meet the minimum requirements of the housing law or the Michigan Building Code for a new building or structure, purpose, or location. 
(3)  A part of the building or structure is likely to fall, become detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  A portion of the building or structure has settled to an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the housing law or the Michigan Building Code. 
(5)  The building or structure, or a part of the building or structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fall or give way. 
(6)  The building, structure, or a part of the building or structure is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, or flood, is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a nuisance or an unlawful act. 
(8)  A building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or for other reason, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety, or general welfare of people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  An unfinished building or structure for which no certificate of occupancy has been issued and for which a building permit, site plan approval, or other zoning approval: (1) has been expired for at least six months; or (2) was the subject of an extension request denied by the planning commission or building official. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-164. - Notice of dangerous building. 
(a)  The city building official may issue a notice pursuant to this section upon finding that a building or structure is a dangerous building. The notice shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee registered with the city. If an owner, agent, or lessee is not registered with the city, the notice shall be served on each owner of or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the property appears on the last local tax assessment records. 
(b)  The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building. The person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(c)  The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor to serve at his or her pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, or member of a community housing organization. An employee of the city shall not be appointed as hearing officer. The city shall file a copy of the notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer. 
(d)  The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the tax records. If a notice is served on a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-165. - Hearings and other proceedings. 
(a)  At the hearing, the hearing officer shall take testimony of the city, the owner of the property, and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(b)  If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained, the hearing officer shall enter an order that specifies what action the owner, agent, or lessee shall take and sets a date by which the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order. If the building is a dangerous building under the provisions of this article, the order may require the owner or agent, to bring and maintain the exterior of the building and adjoining grounds into compliance including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees, and shrubs. 
(c)  If the owner, agent, or lessee fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under subsection (b), the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city's construction board of appeals not more than five days after the date for compliance set in the order and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 18-164. 
(d)  The construction board of appeals shall set a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in subsection (a) for an appellate hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer. The construction board of appeals shall give notice to the owner, agent, or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 18-164 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner, agent, or lessee shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The construction board of appeals shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the construction board of appeals approves or modifies the order, the city shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. For an order of demolition, if the construction board of appeals of the city determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, deterioration, neglect, abandonment, vandalism, or other cause, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent, or lessee shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. If the estimated cost of repair exceeds the state equalized value of the building or structure to be repaired, a rebuttable presumption that the building or structure requires expedited demolition exists. 
(e)  The cost of demolition includes, but is not limited to, fees paid to hearing officers, costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the parties in interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county register of deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporter attendance fees, and costs of the collection of the charges authorized under this article. The cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. 
(f)  The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the cost within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, 1893 PA 206, as amended. 
(g)  In addition to the other remedies provided under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of a dangerous building or structure for the full cost of demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior or grounds adjoining a dangerous building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained under this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-166. - Enforcement of judgment against other assets. 
(a)  A judgment in an action brought pursuant to section 18-165(g) may be enforced against assets of the owner other than the building or structure. 
(b)  The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to section 18-165(g) against the owner's interest in all real property located in this state that is owned in whole or in part by the owner of the building or structure against whom the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this section does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens or encumbrances. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-167. - Penalties. 
(a)  A person who violates any provision of this dangerous building ordinance shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  A person who fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the construction board of appeals under section 18-165 within the time prescribed by that section is guilty of misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 120 days or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Sec. 18-168. - Appeal of circuit court. 
    An owner or party in interest aggrieved by any final decision of the construction board of appeals may appeal the decision or order to the Washtenaw County Circuit Court by filing an appeal within 20 days from the date of such decision. 
( Ord. No. 803 , § 1, 4-5-18) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic liquors, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; community antenna television system, ch. 30; fair housing, § 46-26 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 735, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 22-26-22-42, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to peddlers, solicitors and transient traders and derived from Ord. No. 107, §§ 1-7, adopted Sept. 20, 1939; Ord. No. 160, §§ 1-12, adopted Apr. 16, 1962; Res. of 160, adopted May 24, 1962; Code 1968, §§ 13-1-13-33. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms shall be defined for the purposes of this article. 
    Person means an individual, organization, group, club, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity, or any combination of the above. 
    Solicit means the act of offering or attempting to offer wares, merchandise, services, items of personal property, or real property, either for immediate or future delivery; or the act of seeking or attempting to seek contributions of money or services, for charitable or commercial purposes. 
    Solicitor means a person, including but is not limited to canvasser, peddler, or hawker, who solicits when traveling either by foot, motorized vehicle or other means of conveyance, from place to place, house to house, or street to street. "Solicitor" does not include those who deliver or pick up goods on an established route at the request of the homeowners/resident. 
    Transient merchant as used in this section shall be construed to mean a person who occupies any space within the city for a period of 30 days or less for the purpose of conducting business or soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 739, § 1, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 22-27. - Exempt persons. 
    The following persons shall be exempt from the provisions of this article: 
(1)  Persons engaged in the distribution of newspapers. 
(2)  Any person associated with a public or private school, or youth activity such as, but not limited to, scouts, church groups, or athletic leagues located in the Saline Area School District. 
(3)  Persons engaged in noncommercial or religious canvassing. 
(4)  Persons who are attempting to speak with resident(s) and who are engaged in the distribution of signed or unsigned hand-bills, political or otherwise. 
(5)  Children conducting a neighborhood lemonade stand or similar type with parent's approval on their own property. 
(6)  Farmers or others selling homegrown produce, crafts, or other merchandise under special permission within a city event/market specially designated and located for that general purpose. 
(7)  The downtown merchants association, chamber of commerce, Saline Historic Downtown Alliance, Saline Historical Society, local service organizations or vendors who have been invited to participate in community events which have been approved by city council. 
(8)  Persons with a seasonal sale permit issued under [Appendix A] section 5.12 of the city Code. 
(9)  A person or organization exempted by state or federal law. 
(10)  Person validly operating a mobile food vending unit in accordance with article IV, chapter 22, of the city Code. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 798 , § 1, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-28. - License required; transfers. 
    No person other than those exempted in section 22-27, shall be a solicitor or transient merchant in the City of Saline without first obtaining a license from the city clerk. Licenses shall expire on the date specified on the license issued by the city clerk, but in no event shall a license be issued for a period exceeding one year. No license shall be transferred. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-29. - Fees. 
    The fees which shall be charged by the city clerk for a license under this article shall be established by resolution of the city council and published in the current copy of the City of Saline's Fee Book. The application fee shall be paid upon submittal of the application and the license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license. All fees once submitted are non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-30. - Application requirements. 
    Application for a license shall be made at the office of the city clerk on forms provided. In the event the application is made by an organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity, or any combination of the above, each individual soliciting/conducting business under the license applied for shall submit their individual information on the application forms provided. The following items must be attached, if applicable. The application process typically requires one week for review and approval. 
(1)  Copy of the Michigan Sales Tax License, or exemption certificate. 
(2)  Copy of government issued identification with photograph. 
(3)  Written consent of the legal owner of the property showing approval for this use of the property. 
(4)  Site plan/sketch indicating the layout of proposed activity that will take place on the property if at a fixed location. A zoning review will be conducted by the building/zoning department for compliance with local zoning requirements. 
(5)  Approval from Washtenaw County Health Department. 
(6)  A current copy of the non-profit 501(c) 3 status. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-31. - License refusal; appeal. 
    Upon review and investigation of the application and the information contained therein, the city clerk may refuse to issue the license for any one or more of the following reasons; 
(1)  The applicant has failed to previously comply with the provisions and requirements of the article. 
(2)  The applicant falsified information on the application or has not fully completed the application or it is illegible. 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of a crime or a municipal civil infraction related to the activities covered by this article. 
(4)  The location, time, or method of solicitation will block or congest streets or sidewalks, or will impede the free flow of pedestrian or automobile traffic, or will otherwise endanger the health, safety, and/or welfare of the public. 
(5)  Or for any of the following reasons: 
a.  Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license or in the operation of a business; 
b.  Any violation amounting to a felony, or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; 
c.  Conducting a business in an unlawful manner or in such manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, morals, safety, or welfare of the public; 
d.  The failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this article. 
    Any business or individual whose license has been refused or denied shall have the right to petition the city council, in writing, for an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-32. - License revocation; appeal. 
    Any license issued by the city clerk may be suspended or revoked by the city clerk upon the clerk's findings based upon competent, material and substantial evidence of any of the following causes; 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application for license or in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise. 
(2)  Any violation of a Saline ordinance, state, or federal law. 
(3)  Conviction by the licensee of any felony. 
(4)  Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute breach of the peace. 
    Notice of the revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds for the revocation. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at the address provided in the application. Any licensee whose license has been revoked as herein provided shall have the right to appeal the revocation to the city council as provided in section 22-32. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-33. - Prohibited activities. 
    The following acts or activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Fixed stands: No solicitor shall remain in one place upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place unless the solicitor has obtained approval from the city council for use of public way. 
(2)  Prohibited areas: No solicitor shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk, or driveway. 
(3)  Entry upon property expressly requesting no solicitation: No solicitor shall enter a place within the city after having been expressly notified by an occupant or by a posted sign that no solicitation is desired and/or other language specifically conveying that message. 
(4)  Harassment or creation of nuisance: No solicitor shall threaten or harass any person in the city in the course of a solicitation or in any way engage in any conduct, which creates or would tend to create a nuisance. 
(5)  Loud sound or noise: No shouting, calling wares, using a public address system, horn, bells or other noisemaking device to call attention to the licensee's business. Exception: Neighborhood ice cream truck playing tunes at a reasonable sound level. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-34. - Hours of operation. 
    Door-to-door residential soliciting is only allowed within the city between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. No door-to-door soliciting on Sunday or nationally recognized holidays. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11; Ord. No. 739, § 2, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 22-35. - Duty to exhibit license. 
    All licensed solicitors and/or transient merchants are required to exhibit their city issued solicitor or transient merchant identification while soliciting. No person shall permit another person to use or employ a license issued to him/her by the city. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-36. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of any police or code enforcement officer of the city to enforce the provisions of this article. All complaints received or citations issued for violation of this article shall be reported to the city clerks office and the clerk shall maintain a record thereof. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-37. - Signs. 
    Any signs used by solicitors or transient merchants shall comply with the city's sign ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 735, § 1, 12-5-11) 
Secs. 22-38-22-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 22-50. - Massage establishments. 
(a)  License required. No person, firm, partnership, corporation or entity shall operate a massage establishment without first obtaining a license to do so from the city. 
(b)  Massage establishment defined. For purposes of this section, the term "massage establishment" shall mean a business establishment in which practice of massage therapy, as defined in the Michigan Public Health Code, 368 PA 1978, as amended, is one of the primary services provided. The following establishments shall not be considered massage establishments: 
(1)  Hospitals, doctors' offices, nursing homes, and other facilities in which massages are performed incidental to the provision of healthcare services. 
(2)  Establishments in which barbers or beauticians perform massages incidental to the provision of hairstyling or other similar services. 
(c)  Licensing of massage establishments. 
(1)  An application to operate a massage establishment shall be made to the city clerk. The application shall be made on a form provided by the city clerk and signed under oath stating that the information contained in the application is true and accurate. Any false statement set forth in an application shall be a violation of this article. The license fee (set by the city council) must be paid at the time of application and the license shall not be processed until the following information has been supplied to the city clerk: 
a.  The full name, residential address, business address and telephone numbers of each applicant, owner and each manager. If the applicant or owner is a corporation, the names and residential addresses of each of the officers and directors of the corporation and each shareholder owning ten percent interest or more in the corporation, either directly or beneficially, shall also be given. If the applicant or owner is a partnership, the names and residential addresses of each general partner and each limited partner owning ten percent interest or more in the partnership either directly or beneficially shall also be given. 
b.  A description of the services to be provided. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the building where the business will be conducted; also the name, address and telephone number of the building manager if different from the owner. 
d.  The location, mailing address and the telephone numbers where the business is to be conducted. 
e.  Written proof that the applicant (if individual or partnership) and all managers are at least 18 years of age. 
f.  A copy of identification from each manager, owner and from each applicant such as driver's license (if an individual), partnership agreement and certificate (if a partnership) or certificate of good standing from the state (if a corporation). 
g.  Business history: 
1.  Brief history of past massage establishment experience; 
2.  Whether any previous massage establishment associated with the applicant had its license suspended, revoked, denied and the reasons for such action. 
h.  The name and address of any other massage business or establishment owned (partially or wholly) or operated by any person or entity controlled by the applicant, owner or manager. 
i.  The names and addresses of each person (if then known) who will be employed at the massage establishments and copies of a state-issued massage therapist license for each employee who will be engaged in the practice of massage therapy. 
j.  A description of any other businesses to be operated on the same premises as the massage establishment or on any adjoining or nearby premises owned or controlled by the applicant, owner and manager. 
k.  Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to seek information and conduct a background investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and the qualifications for the applicant for the license. 
l.  Such identification and information necessary to verify the truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application. 
m.  The annual license fee for each massage establishment which shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
n.  List all criminal convictions (both in-state and out-of-state) other than traffic violations including the date of the conviction, the court the conviction was in, what the conviction was for and the case number of the conviction, and the reasons therefore. 
o.  Provide a printout from I.C.H.A.T. of Michigan Criminal History (Internet Criminal History Tool). Go to www.michigan.org and run your criminal history by following the ICHAT link. 
(2)  The applicant shall notify the city clerk in writing of each change in any of the data required to be furnished by this license within ten days of such change. 
(3)  The license granted hereunder shall be for one year beginning January 1 of each year, except the initial license granted hereunder shall be valid from the date of issuance until the following December 31. A license granted hereunder is nontransferable. 
(4)  Upon sale or transfer of any interest (in excess of ten percent) in a massage establishment, the license shall be void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate a massage establishment. 
(5)  The applicant, owner or manager of the massage establishment shall display the license in a conspicuous place at all times so that it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. 
(6)  No massage establishment licensed under this article shall operate under any name or conduct its business under any designation not specified in the license. 
(d)  Responsibilities of massage establishment. It shall be the responsibility of an owner, manager, operator or licensee hereunder in charge or in control of a massage establishment to comply with the following: 
(1)  In the event that the licensee wishes to obtain a license for an ensuing year, such licensee shall file its application in accordance with this article as the case may be, at least 14 days before the expiration of the current license. If the applicant fails to comply with this requirement, the city clerk shall not be required to grant or deny the license before the expiration of the current license. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use of, to his/her own or other's benefit, a license issued to him/her or another in accordance with this article. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge, or to deface or otherwise alter a license issued under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  A license issued under this article is not transferable, separable, or divisible, and the authority conferred only upon the individuals required to submit personal information pursuant to subsection (3). 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating an establishment to permit or allow an employee to violate any of the terms of this article while on the premises of the establishment. 
(6)  No persons shall sell, permit, consume, give or provide or cause to be sold, given or provided, any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any massage establishment. 
(7)  No medical treatment outside normal massage therapy duties shall be given or dispensed at a massage establishment. 
(8)  No massage establishment shall massage or service any person under the age of 17 except when such a person is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or under written order by a licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, psychiatrist or registered physical therapist, such order being dated and in possession of the massage therapist giving the massage. 
(9)  It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to offer any of the following acts or conducts: adamitism, anilingus, cunniilingus, coprophilia, fellation, flagellation, masturbation, sadism, sexual intercourse, sodomy, urolagnia, or any intentional stimulation or manipulation of sexual or genital parts of the human body for purposes of sexual arousal or stimulation or any other activity of a sexual nature prohibited by state law. 
(10)  No massage establishments shall be kept open between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(e)  Physical establishment standards. Each massage establishment shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All tables, tubs, shower stalls and floors (except reception and administrative areas) shall be made of nonporous materials which may be readily disinfected. 
(2)  Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean linen, towels and other materials used in connection with administering massages. 
(3)  Closed containers shall be provided for all soiled linen, towels and waste materials. 
(4)  At least one plumbed sink within the massage establishment. Additionally, each individual area in which massage is practiced shall be equipped with a hand-sanitizing facility equipped with: 
a.  Running water and soap; 
b.  Antibacterial hand wipes; 
c.  Waterless hand sanitizers; or 
d.  Other commercially acceptable means of hand-washing. 
(5)  Lavatories and shower stalls (if provided) shall be located as to ensure privacy between the massage establishment and any other business or use. 
(6)  All the general special use criteria in section 9.05 of the Zoning Ordinance are satisfied. 
(7)  All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories and any other such accouterments shall be regularly treated with disinfectants and shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(8)  No part of the licensed premises shall be used for or connected with any bedroom or sleeping quarters; nor shall any person sleep in a massage establishment except for a limited period incidental to and directly related to massage or bath. No beds, water mattresses, cots, or other such equipment designated for sleeping shall be permitted on the premises. 
(9)  All massage establishments are public places and during business hours shall not lock or obstruct the exits and entrances to the establishment or otherwise prevent free ingress and egress of persons. 
(10)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city building and county electrical codes. 
(11)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city building code. 
(12)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(f)  Sanitary standards. Each massage establishment shall comply with the following standards: 
(1)  All personnel shall wash his or her hands in hot water with soap before giving any service or treatment to each separate patron. 
(2)  All towels, tissues, sheets or other coverings shall be used singularly for each patron and discarded for laundry or disposal immediately after use. Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towel or linens shall be permitted. 
(3)  Non-disposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected after each use upon a patron. 
(4)  All massage therapists shall, at all times, wear clean outer garments whose use is restricted to the massage establishment. The garments shall be opaque and shall cover the torso, legs and the sexual and genital parts of the employee's body. 
(5)  The sexual and genital areas of patrons, customers or invitees must be covered by towels, cloths, or opaque garments at all times when in the presence of any massage therapist or employee of the massage establishment. 
(g)  Denial, revocation, or suspension of license. 
(1)  Any applicant for a license hereunder may be denied by the city clerk if there are any false statements set forth in the application and any license granted herein may be revoked by the city council for violation of any other provision of this article or any other city ordinance or state statute, or upon a determination that the continued operation under an existing license shall be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare. Appeal of the denial or revocation of a license by the city clerk shall be made to the city council. 
(2)  Before the city council revokes a license issued herein or upon appeal from denial of a license by the city clerk, the city council shall cause written notice to be sent by certified mail to the licensee or applicant affected, at the address stated in the license or application informing such person of the right to a hearing upon the request. If the licensee does not request a hearing within 14 days of the date said notice was sent, the license may be forthwith revoked or the denial of the application affirmed. If the licensee requests a hearing before the city council in regard to said proposed revocation or denial, said hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the written request. If the licensee or applicant is a massage establishment, the owner of the premises according to the latest tax assessment roll where such establishment is or plans to locate shall also be sent by certified mail a notice of the hearing. 
(3)  Any license issued by the city may be immediately suspended by the city manager or duly appointed city official, if it is determined that the licensee has violated or someone at or upon the licensed location has violated the city ordinance or state law and that continued operation under the license is contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. A licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any license suspension by the city manager. The city manager shall cause a written notice to be personally delivered or sent by certified mail to the licensee, at the address stated in the license or application informing the licensee of the suspension and the licensee's right to a hearing upon request. If the licensee does not file a written request within 14 days after receipt of the notice, the city council may forthwith confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate the license. If the licensee requests a hearing before the city council, the hearing shall be held within 21 days after the date of the written request. Notice of the hearing shall be sent to the licensee by certified mail at the address stated in the license. If the licensee is a massage establishment, the owner of the license premises according to the latest tax assessment roll shall also be sent by certified mail a notice of the hearing. 
(4)  Both the city and the licensee shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to present evidence on the issue at the hearing. In the event a license is revoked herein the licensee or a substantially similar or related licensee shall not be granted a new license nor shall a license be granted for the same premises, for a period of three years from the date of the revocation. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefore shall not be refunded. The action taken by the city council shall be final. 
(h)  Inspection. Every establishment operated as a licensed massage establishment shall be open for inspection by duly authorized representatives of any city department including but not limited to the department of public safety as well as any other department concerned with the licensing and supervision of such establishments during operating hours for the purpose of enforcing any provision of this article or any other ordinances or regulations of the city relating to public health, safety and welfare. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry by city representatives to the premises in which a massage establishment is being operated for the purpose of making lawful inspections. 
(i)  Renewal. The license to operate a massage establishment shall be renewed at least 14 days prior to the date of expiration. The license shall be renewed if the applicant submits a sworn affidavit that the matters contained in the original application are correct and indicates any changes necessary to otherwise comply with the requirements of this article. 
(j)  Penalty. Violations of this section shall be considered municipal civil infractions. 
(Ord. No. 797 , § 1, 2-5-18) 
Secs. 22-51-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MOBILE FOOD VENDING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 798 , § 2, adopted May 7, 2018 set out provisions intended for use as Art. III, §§ 22-38-22-46. Inasmuch as said sections already exist, said provisions have been redesignated as Art. IV, §§ 22-61-22-69, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 22-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words and terms shall be defined for the purposes of this chapter. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Mobile food vending means vending, serving, or offering for sale food or beverages from a mobile food vending unit, along with ancillary sales of branded items consistent with the food or mobile food vendor, such as a tee shirt that bears the name of the company, restaurant, or organization engaged in mobile food vending. 
    Mobile food vending unit means a vehicle with a self-contained kitchen, equipped to create, prepare, or package food for the purpose of vending, service, or offering for sale. 
    Mobile food vendor means any individual, company, restaurant, or organization operating a mobile food vending unit. 
    Operates means engaging in activities associated with the conduct of business, including setup and takedown and/or hours of operation and locations where the mobile food vending units are allowed to be open for business. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-62. - Permit required. 
(a)  No mobile food vendor shall operate a mobile food vending unit without a permit issued by the city authorizing such operation. The city clerk shall prescribe the form of available permits and the application for such permits. The city council shall, by resolution, establish appropriate fees for the available permits. 
(b)  All permits shall be prominently displayed on the mobile food vending unit. No vending through a mobile food vending unit of food or other human consumables shall be permitted unless it meets the definition of mobile food vending as defined by this chapter. 
(c)  No permit shall be required for a mobile food vending unit which is operated in conjunction with a community event approved by the city council. The regulations in sections 22-66 and 22-67 shall still apply. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-63. - Duration of permit; nontransferability. 
    Permits issued by the city clerk shall be valid only for the calendar year in which they are issued and for the mobile food vending unit identified on the permit. Any permit issued under this article is nontransferable. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-64. - Application for permit. 
    Any mobile food vendor desiring to engage in mobile food vending in the city shall submit a completed application to the city clerk for a permit under this chapter. The application must include all required information and all required documentation, such as insurance, as required by the city. There shall be at least two categories of permits: permits valid for a period of one calendar year and permits limited to a single event. 
    The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, all information requested on the application for a permit issued by the city clerk's office. Additionally, the applicant shall provide all documentation, such as proof of insurance, as required by this chapter or by resolution of the city council. The application for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee as defined in this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-65. - Fees. 
    The application fee, in an amount established by resolution of the city council, shall be required upon submission of the application. Regardless of when the application is submitted during the calendar year, the fee shall be required in full, and the fee shall not be prorated. Once the permit has been issued, the application fee shall be nonrefundable. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-66. - Requirements. 
    Any mobile food vendor engaging in mobile food vending shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Mobile food vending units may operate on private property on parcels zoned I-1, I-2, I-4, PB, OS, C-1, C-2, C-3, D-1, and D-2 if in compliance with the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Mobile food vendors shall not operate on city-owned property or on public streets except at such times and in such locations permitted by resolution of the city council. When mobile food vendors are permitted to operate on public streets, no food service shall be allowed on the driving lane side of the mobile food vending unit. To the extent it becomes necessary to designate specific mobile food vendors who may occupy a public location at any given time, city staff shall develop policies or practices for making such determinations. 
(3)  No food shall be sold, prepared, or displayed outside of the mobile food vending unit while on the location noted on the permit. 
(4)  Mobile food vendors shall provide appropriate waste and recycling receptacles at the site of the unit and remove all litter, debris and other wastes attributable to the mobile food vendor or customers on a daily basis. 
(5)  Mobile food vendors shall not use any flashing, blinking or strobe lights, or similar effects to draw attention to the mobile food vending unit; all exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque hood shields to direct the illumination downward. 
(6)  Mobile food vendors shall not use loud music, amplification devices, or any other audible methods to gain attention which causes a disruption or safety hazard as determined by the city. 
(7)  There shall be no signage used by mobile food vendors except for what is allowed on the mobile food vending unit itself in accordance with the city Code. 
(8)  When operating on city property or public streets, mobile food vendors are prohibited from locating, placing, or putting personal property outside of the mobile food vending unit, including but not limited to dining furniture, fixtures, and equipment. 
(9)  No mobile food vendor shall utilize any electricity or power without the prior written authorization of the power customer; no power cable or similar device shall be extended at or across any street or sidewalk except in a safe manner. 
(10)  Mobile food vendors shall comply with all applicable city laws, regulations, and ordinances, including those regulating noise, signage, and loitering. 
(11)  Mobile food vendors shall not represent the granting of a permit under this chapter as an endorsement of the city. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-67. - Other permits. 
    A permit obtained under this chapter shall not relieve any mobile food vendor of the responsibility for obtaining any other permit or authorization required by any other resolution, ordinance, statute, or administrative rule. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-68. - Complaints; appeals; revocation of permit. 
(a)  If a written complaint is filed with the city clerk alleging a mobile food vendor has violated the provisions of this chapter, the city clerk shall promptly send a copy of the written complaint to the mobile food vendor together with a notice that an investigation will be made by the city clerk, with the assistance of other city departments, as required, as to the truth of the complaint. The mobile food vendor shall be invited to respond to the complaint and present evidence and respond to evidence produced by the investigation. If the city clerk, after reviewing all relevant material, finds the complaint to be supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the complaint shall be certified. 
(b)  The city clerk shall revoke the permit of any mobile food vendor engaged in mobile food vending who ceases to meet any requirement of this chapter or violates any other federal, state, or local law, ordinance, or regulation; makes a false statement on the permit application; or conducts activity in a manner that is adverse to the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. Any revocation shall have immediate effect or remain in effect unless and until reversed on an appeal. 
(c)  If a permit is denied or revoked by the city clerk or if a written complaint is certified pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or holder of the permit may appeal to the city council in writing. The city council shall make a written determination, after reviewing evidence related to the appeal, as to whether the denial, revocation, or complaint is valid. If the city council determines that the denial, revocation, or complaint is valid as supported by a preponderance of the evidence, the action of the city clerk shall be sustained. The applicant may appeal the decision of the city council to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Immediately upon such revocation, the city clerk shall provide written notice to the permit holder by certified mail to the address indicated on the application. The permit to operate shall become immediately null and void upon revocation. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Sec. 22-69. - Civil infraction. 
    Any person who violates this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation. 
( Ord. No. 798 , § 2, 5-7-18) 
Chapter 26 - CEMETERIES 
  

Sec. 26-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Burial space means a lot or portion of a lot in any cemetery designated and maintained for the interment of a human body or bodies, and for no other purpose. 
    Cemetery means Oakwood Cemetery as heretofore established, and any other public cemetery owned, managed or controlled by the city. 
    Owner means any person owning or possessing the privilege, license or right of interment in any burial space. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 1, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 26-2. - Authority to acquire, manage. 
    The city may acquire, hold and own such cemetery or public burial place or places either within or without the limits of the city, as in the opinion of the council shall be necessary for the public welfare, and suitable for the convenience of the inhabitants, and shall limit such interment therein to such cemetery as the council may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 1, 1942; Code 1968, § 7-2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Authority to raise, appropriate money. 
    The council may, within the limits of law, raise and appropriate such sums as may be necessary for the purchase of cemetery grounds and for the improvement, adornment, protection and care thereof. 
(Ord. No. 111, § 2, 1942; Code 1968, § 7-3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Supervision by council. 
    The cemeteries which have been or may hereafter be established by the city and maintained either within or without its limits shall be under the management, supervision and care of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 2, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Preparation, filing of plats. 
    The council shall, if necessary, cause plats of such cemeteries, showing and designating lots, drives, walks and landscaping, to be prepared and kept on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 2, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Adoption of rules and regulations. 
    The city council shall, from time to time, make and adopt by resolution such rules and regulations for the burial of the dead, the care, improvement and protection of the grounds, mausoleums, monuments and appurtenances and the orderly conduct of persons visiting, as may be deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 3, 1-6-64; Ord. No. 194, § 1, 12-19-66; Code 1968, § 7-6) 
Sec. 26-7. - Appeals from rules and regulations. 
    Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the cemetery rules and regulations, or where a unique problem not covered by the cemetery rules and regulations arises, the parties affected thereby may appeal to the cemetery board of appeals, which is hereby established for such purposes and empowered to render a final decision in all such appeals. The cemetery board of appeals shall consist of four qualified persons to be appointed annually by the city council and one voting member of the city council to be appointed annually by the mayor, with approval of the council, and shall establish its own rules of procedure providing a fair and impartial hearing to all interested parties before rendering its decision. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 3, 1-6-64; Ord. No. 194, § 1, 12-19-66; Code 1968, § 7-7; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 7-21-86; Ord. No. 472, § 1, 2-4-91) 
Sec. 26-8. - Sale, transfer of lots. 
    The city clerk shall attend to the sale and transfer of all cemetery lots, and all certificates of right of burial therefor shall be executed on behalf of the city by the city clerk. Such certificates shall be delivered by the city clerk to each owner upon payment to the city clerk of the required amount, or upon receipt of proper proof of transfer, and shall convey only the right of interment subject to such rules and regulations as may have been or shall hereafter be adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 4, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-8) 
Sec. 26-9. - Prices of lots, services. 
    The city council shall fix by resolution the price of lots and other services incidental to cemetery operation. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 2, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-9) 
Sec. 26-10. - Register of interments. 
    The city clerk shall cause to be kept a register of all interments in which shall appear the name of the deceased, the date and place of interment and such other information as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 3, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-10) 
Sec. 26-11. - Lot records required. 
    The city clerk shall keep proper records in which the certificates of right of burial and transfer instruments to all burial spaces shall be recorded at length. In connection with all such records, the city clerk shall also keep a general index in which shall be noted, alphabetically, the name of the owner of each burial space in city cemeteries, and a cross reference index by burial space number. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 5, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-11) 
Sec. 26-12. - Labor charges for work in cemeteries. 
    The city clerk shall charge and collect on behalf of the city such fees for work performed in city cemeteries as may be from time to time fixed by resolution of the city council. All such fees shall be paid directly to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 6, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-12) 
Sec. 26-13. - Persons authorized to work in cemeteries. 
    No person other than an authorized employee of the city shall perform any work in city cemeteries, unless such work is done under the supervision of authorized city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 6, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-13) 
Sec. 26-14. - Perpetual care fund continued; assets; administration. 
(a)  The cemetery perpetual care fund, heretofore established, is hereby continued. There shall be added to such fund all sums paid to the city in accordance with the specified terms and conditions of perpetual care contracts, amounts realized from the sale of lots, parts of lots, and single graves in city cemeteries, and amounts realized from the interment charges (burial fees) in accordance with the following chart: 
(1) Lot sales ..... 100 percent to perpetual care fund. (2) Burial Fees ..... 40 percent to perpetual care fund; 
60 percent to cemetery operations. (3) Foundation Fees ..... 40 percent to perpetual care fund; 
60 percent to cemetery operations.  
(b)  The cemetery perpetual care fund shall be administered by the city council, and the city treasurer shall have custody of all money, credits and securities constituting such fund. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 7, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-14; Ord. No. 355, § 1, 10-20-80; Ord. No. 455, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 552, § 1, 7-24-95) 
Sec. 26-15. - Investment of perpetual care fund. 
    Any part of the principal of the perpetual care fund may be invested in bonds of the city, or any obligation of the government of the United States, or in insured savings accounts maintained in any financial institution in the city. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 8, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-15) 
Sec. 26-16. - Transferring, encumbering perpetual care fund. 
    No part of the cemetery perpetual care fund shall be transferred to any other fund, nor encumbered or used except as authorized in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 9, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-16) 
Sec. 26-17. - Use of perpetual care fund. 
    The income from the perpetual care fund shall be expended only for the following purposes: 
(1)  To perpetually maintain and care for lots located in city cemeteries which are covered by perpetual care contracts with the city. 
(2)  The remainder of the income, if any, may be used for general maintenance, repair and upkeep of city cemeteries. 
(3)  The principal of the perpetual care fund may be used for reasonable capital improvements in city cemeteries which will provide additional burial spaces to the extent that the use of such principal shall not substantially impair the earning capacity of the balance of the fund and after approval by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 171, § 9, 1-6-64; Code 1968, § 7-17; Ord. No. 371, § 1, 9-20-82) 
Chapter 30 - COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22. 

ARTICLE I. - VIDEO PROVIDERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 705, adopted May 7, 2007, amended the Code by repealing former art. I, §§ 30-1-30-29, and adding a new art. I. Former art. I pertained to franchise regulations, and derived from Ord. No. 547, adopted June 19, 1995; and Ord. No. 685, adopted March 21, 2005. 

Sec. 30-1. - Title and purpose. 
(a)  Short title. This article shall be known as the "City of Saline Video Providers Ordinance." 
(b)  Declaration of findings and purpose. 
(1)  The city council finds that cable systems permanently occupy and extensively make use of scarce and valuable city public rights-of-way in a manner different from the way in which the general public uses them. Video service providers also travel city streets and rights-of-way in order to transact local business. The city council finds that public convenience, safety, and general welfare can best be served by exercising the police powers vested in the city to protect the public and to ensure that any video franchise which issues is operated in the public interest. 
(2)  Further, the city finds that the average American home has a television on for nearly eight (8) hours per day. This average is much higher than the average time listening to the radio or surfing the Internet. Consequently, video emergency alerts should be included in any effort made by the city to distribute emergency messages affecting city residents. 
(3)  Further, it is determined that wireline competition in the delivery of video and other services delivered by cable systems is desired by the city, as such competition will lower prices for city residents, improve customer service, and increase innovation. 
(4)  Further, while competition in the delivery of cable services is desired and encouraged, no wireline cable competition currently exists within the city. As a consequence, cable prices in the city continue to increase at a pace greater than inflation, the regulation of customer service in the city is still deemed necessary due to a significant number of complaints, and a low level of relative customer satisfaction prevails. 
(5)  Further, attacks on the public while congregated within public spaces and attacks on children while at school have recently occurred at a disturbing rate, and it is imperative that the city require the development of cable systems that are reasonably capable of delivering emergency information to these public spaces. 
(6)  Further, the frequency of in-person interactions between a video service provider's employees and its subscribers will increase, as video service providers continue to offer a greater number of services to subscribers. 
(7)  Given the lack of wireline cable competition in the city, the city finds that it can improve and protect the general welfare and public interest of city residents by adopting policies and regulations pursuant to the city's police powers which regulate the manner in which cable operators transact local business within the city. 
(8)  In light of the foregoing, the following goals, among others, underlie the provisions set forth in this chapter: 
a.  Cable should be available to as many city residents as possible. 
b.  Wireline cable competition should be encouraged and should be made available to as many city residents as possible. 
c.  Cable systems within the city should be constructed in a manner that permits the city to interrupt video programming in the event that an emergency message needs to be transmitted to city residents. 
d.  Cable systems within the city should be constructed in a manner that permits emergency messages and other information related to public safety to be exchanged privately between public buildings, including police and fire stations. 
e.  Cable systems within the city should be constructed in a manner that permits the delivery of emergency messages to public classrooms and other public spaces where the public congregates and televisions may regularly be in use. 
f.  Video service providers should not utilize the public rights-of-way to transact local business in the city in a manner which may deprive city subscribers of rights and interests that they may otherwise enjoy under the law. 
g.  A cable operator should pay fair compensation to the city for the occupation and use of the local public rights-of-way. 
(c)  The city council intends that all provisions set forth in this chapter be construed broadly to serve the public interest and the foregoing public purposes, and that any franchise which may issue be construed to include the foregoing findings and public purposes as integral parts thereof. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended. The word shall is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
    Additional insureds shall have the meaning defined in section 30-14(a)(4). 
    Affiliate shall mean any entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with the entity in question. 
    Basic cable service means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and the PEG channels. 
    Cable Act means Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 as amended, 47 USC § 521 et seq. 
    Cable channel or channel means a portion of the capacity on a cable system which is capable of delivering a television channel while using the same transmission technology as is applied to the other channels appearing on the same service tier. 
    Cable operator means any person or group of persons who provides cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable systems, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system. 
    Cable service means the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming, or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video programming or other programming service. 
    Cable communications system, cable system, or system means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that provides video services which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include: 
(1)  A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; 
(2)  A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way; 
(3)  A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, 47 U.S.C. § 201 et seq., except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent that such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; 
(4)  An open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. §573; or 
(5)  Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility system. 
    City means the City of Saline, and all the territory within its territorial corporate limits. 
    City manager means the manager of the city or his/her designee. 
    Commercially impracticable means, with respect to any requirement applicable to the grantee, that it is commercially impracticable for the grantee to comply with such requirement as a result of a change in conditions which is beyond the control of the grantee and the nonoccurrence of which was a basic assumption on which the requirement was based. 
    Council means the city council of the City of Saline. 
    Educational or governmental access facilities means channel capacity designated for educational or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of such capacity. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission, Washington, D.C. 
    Franchising entity means the council. 
    Grantee means a video service provider which has sought and received a video service local franchise agreement and which operates in accordance with this chapter. 
    Gross revenues shall mean all consideration of any kind or nature, including, without limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the provider from the operation of the cable system to provide video services within the jurisdiction of the franchising entity. 
(1)  Gross revenues shall include all of the following: 
a.  All charges and fees paid by subscribers for the provision of video service, including equipment rental, late fees, insufficient funds fees, fees attributable to video service when sold individually or as part of a package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with services other than video service. 
b.  Any franchise fee imposed on the provider that is passed on to subscribers. 
c.  Compensation received by the provider for promotion or exhibition of any products or services over the video service. 
d.  Revenue received by the provider as compensation for carriage of video programming on that provider's video service. 
e.  All revenue derived from compensation arrangements for advertising shown within the local franchise area. 
f.  Any advertising commissions paid to an affiliated third party for video service advertising. 
(2)  Gross revenues do not include any of the following: 
a.  Any revenue not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt net of any recoveries of bad debt. 
b.  Refunds, rebates, credits, or discounts to subscribers or a city to the extent not already offset by subdivision (a) and to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is attributable to the video service. 
c.  Any revenues received by the provider or its affiliates from the provision of services or capabilities other than video service, including telecommunications services, information services, and services, capabilities, and applications that may be sold as part of a package or bundle, or functionally integrated, with video service. 
d.  Any revenues received by the provider or its affiliates for the provision of directory or internet advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and electronic publishing. 
e.  Any amounts attributable to the provision of video service to customers at no charge, including the provision of such service to public institutions without charge. 
f.  Any tax, fee, or assessment of general applicability imposed on the customer or the transaction by a federal, state, or local government or any other governmental entity, collected by the provider, and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes. 
g.  Any forgone revenue from the provision of video service at no charge to any person, except that any forgone revenue exchanged for trades, barters, services, or other items of value shall be included in gross revenue. 
h.  Sales of capital assets or surplus equipment. 
i.  Reimbursement by programmers of marketing costs actually incurred by the provider for the introduction of new programming. 
j.  The sale of video service for resale to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will resell the service and pay a franchise fee with respect to the service. 
(3)  In the case of a video service that is bundled or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the portion of the video provider's revenue attributable to the other services, capabilities, or applications shall be included in gross revenue unless the provider can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business. 
(4)  In the event that grantee provides services bundled in a package and offers said bundle(s) at a price discounted from the price that would otherwise apply if the services were purchased individually, then grantee shall not exclude from its gross revenues any amount greater than that amount calculated by applying that percentage which is equivalent to the overall discount of the entire bundled package against the full retail value of that service in the sold bundle which generates gross revenue (for purposes of clarification and without altering the aforesaid obligation, if a package price reflects an overall discount of 15 percent, then for the purpose of calculating gross revenues, no more than a 15 percent discount may be taken against the full retail value of the services in the sold bundle which generate gross revenue). 
(5)  Revenue of an affiliate shall be included in the calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as revenue of the affiliate has the effect of evading the payment of franchise fees which would otherwise be paid for video service. 
    IPTV means Internet protocol television. 
    Incumbent video provider means a cable operator serving cable subscribers or a telecommunications provider providing video services through the provider's existing telephone exchange boundaries in a particular franchise area within the city on the effective date of this chapter. 
    Normal operating conditions means those service conditions which are within the control of grantee. Those conditions which are normally not within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions. Those conditions which normally are within the control of grantee include, but are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular or seasonal demand periods, changes in the billing cycle, and repairs, rebuilds, maintenance or upgrade of the cable system. 
    PEG channels shall have the meaning set forth in section 30-9. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, limited partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation, or governmental entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easements dedicated for compatible purposes. "Public rights-of-way" shall not include property of the city which is not a dedicated public right-of-way, street, highway, or alley necessary and pertinent to a cable system. 
    Service tier means a category of cable service or other services provided by the grantee and for which a separate rate is charged by the grantee. 
    Service interruption means the loss of picture or sound on one or more cable channels by one or more subscribers. 
    State means the State of Michigan or political subdivision or agency thereof. 
    Subscriber means a person or organization located within the city whose premises are physically wired to receive any transmission from the system. 
    Video programming means programming provided by, or generally considered comparable to programming provided by, a television broadcast station. 
    Video service means video programming, cable services, IPTV, or OVS provided through facilities located at least in part in the public rights-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol technology. "Video service" does not mean any video programming provided by a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC § 332(d) or provided solely as part of, and via, a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered solely over the public internet. 
    Video service local franchise agreement, franchise, or franchise agreement means the separate agreement by which a franchise is granted to the grantee by the city or by operation of governing law. 
    Video service provider or provider means a person who provides video services pursuant to a franchise and in compliance with this article. 
    Video service provider fee means the amount paid by a video service provider under section 30-7, and shall be the total of the right-of-way access fee and the PEG fee, as those terms are defined in that section 30-7. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-3. - Franchise procedure. 
(a)  Franchise required. 
(1)  No person shall offer video service in the city without such person having first obtained a local video service franchise agreement. 
(2)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets, alleys, lanes, avenues, boulevards, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, rights-of-way or any other public place or public rights-of-way in the city or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purpose of offering video services without first obtaining a local video service franchise agreement. 
(b)  Franchise application. Subject to applicable law: 
(1)  A person wishing to provide video service within the city shall file a written application with the city clerk's office via regular first class mail return receipt requested or via a nationally recognized overnight delivery service. Copies of the application shall be provided concurrently and via the same delivery method to the city administrator, the city attorney, and such additional persons as the city may designate from time-to-time. Minimally, said application shall include the following information: 
a.  The name of the applicant; 
b.  The address and telephone number of the provider's principal place of business; 
c.  The name of the applicant's executive officers and any specific persons authorized to represent the provider before the city; 
d.  If the provider is not an incumbent video provider, the specific date on which the provider expects to provide video services in the area identified under subdivision e.; 
e.  An exact description of the video service area to be served in the city, as identified by a geographic information system digital boundary meeting or exceeding national map accuracy standards. For applicants with 1,000,000 or more access lines in this state using telecommunications facilities to provide video services, the footprint shall be identified in terms of entire wire centers or exchanges. An incumbent video provider shall provide right-of-way related information comparable to that required by a permit under the metropolitan extension telecommunications rights-of-way oversight act, 2002 PA 48, MCL 484.3101 to 484.3120; 
f.  A certification that the applicant will pay the video service provider fees required by section 30-7 herein; 
g.  A certification that the applicant will file in a timely manner with the FCC all forms required by that agency in advance of offering video service; 
h.  A certification that the applicant agrees to comply with all valid and enforceable federal, state and local statutes and regulations, which shall be deemed to include those contained in this article; 
i.  A certification that the applicant agrees to comply with all valid and enforceable local regulations regarding the use and occupation of public rights-of-way, including those promulgated pursuant to the police power of the city; 
j.  A requirement that the applicant comply with all FCC requirements involving the distribution and notification of federal, state and local emergency messages over the applicant's proposed cable system; 
k.  A certification that the provider will comply with the public, education, and government access programming requirements of section 30-9; 
l.  A certification that the applicant will comply with all customer service rules of the FCC under 47 CFR 76.309(c); said certification shall be deemed as the applicant's acknowledgment of the city's right to enforce and later amend said customer service standards, as set forth in the FCC order which promulgated the aforesaid regulation (Report & Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Section 8 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 , FCC 93-145 (Released April 7, 1993). 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by such nonrefundable fee as may set by the city council which shall be used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in processing said application. 
(d)  Applications shall be in such form and contain such information and supportive documentation as the city may require, and said applications may be obtained by an applicant from the city clerk. 
(e)  If any of the information contained in a franchise application or in a subsequently-issued franchise changes, the provider shall promptly notify the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-4. - Application process; city administrator's action. 
    Subject to applicable law: 
(1)  Upon receiving the application and any applicable fee, the city manager or his or her designee shall promptly investigate and review the application and determine whether the application is complete; 
(2)  The city manager shall inform the applicant as to whether its application is complete or incomplete not later than fifteen (15) business days following receipt of the application by the city clerk's office. At the same time, the city manager shall inform the applicant of the number of PEG channels required by the city as set forth in section 30-9 herein. 
(3)  In the event that the application is complete, the city manager may execute the application or take such other action with respect to the application as permitted under governing law. If further action is taken by the city manager, said action shall be taken not more than thirty (30) days following receipt of the complete application by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-5. - Permission, franchise. 
(a)  Nonexclusive. All franchises which issue subsequent to the effective date of this article shall be nonexclusive and subject to all the terms and conditions contained herein, and to all generally applicable provisions in the City Charter, the City Code and to city ordinances as from time to time in effect. 
(b)  Consents deemed given. Any franchise issued subsequent to the effective date of this article shall, subject to the provisions of this chapter, be deemed to provide: 
(1)  The city's consent for grantee to access, and for its cable system to occupy, the public rights-of-way for the delivery of video service, as required by article VII, section 29 of the Michigan Constitution; and 
(2)  The city's consent for a grantee to travel the public rights-of-way in order to transact local business, as required by article VII, section 29 of the Michigan Constitution. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-6. - Term of franchise. 
    Length. Any franchise which issues after the effective date of this article shall be in effect for a period of ten years after its effective date. A franchise may be renewed in the manner provided by governing law. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-7. - Video service provider fee. 
(a)  Video service provider fee. Each grantee shall pay to city throughout the term of its franchise a video service provider fee. The video service provider fee shall be defined as the total of: 
(1)  An amount equal to five percent of grantee's gross revenues (the "right-of-way fee"); and 
(2)  A public, educational and government access fee ("PEG fee") which shall be comprised of: 
a.  Two percent of grantee's gross revenues; and 
b.  Such additional PEG fees as may be required of a particular grantee by the city pursuant to section 30-7(b) (the "pro-rata fee"). 
All PEG fees paid by grantee are received by city pursuant to § 622(g)(2)(C) of the Cable Act, and will not qualify as a setoff to any franchise fee or right-of-way fee paid to the city. 
(1)  Due date. The video service provider fee shall be paid within 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter, and shall be based upon gross revenues received during such calendar quarter and upon the number of basic service tier subscribers held by the grantee as of the last day of such calendar quarter (the latter in the case of the pro-rata PEG fee); 
(2)  Report. Each payment shall be accompanied by a written report to city verified by an officer of grantee, containing an accurate statement of grantee's gross revenues, the number of basic service tier subscribers held by the grantee as of the last day of the particular calendar quarter, and the computation of the payment amount. Such report shall be submitted in the form attached as exhibit 1, following this article. 
(3)  Audit rights. City may audit grantee (or any entity affiliated with grantee) to verify the accuracy of franchise fees paid city. All records reasonably necessary for such audit will be made available by grantee at a location in or near city or at the city's option at such other locations as is convenient to city or agents acting on its behalf. Any additional amount due city shall be paid within 30 days of city's submitting an invoice for such sum, and if such sum shall exceeds five percent of the total franchise fee which the audit determines should have been paid for any calendar year, grantee shall pay city's cost of auditing that calendar year as well. 
(b)  In addition to the five percent ROW access fee and the two percent gross revenue component of the PEG fee identified in section 30-7(a), the city may require a grantee to pay a pro-rata share of such additional grants as the incumbent video provider(s) may have paid or may be paying. In determining whether such additional fee shall be charged, city shall: 
(1)  Consider whether the incumbent video provider(s) currently pay or have paid consideration (in addition to the ROW access fee and the two percent PEG fee) for its franchise in the form of any of the following: 
a.  The network component of the local emergency alert system, as contemplated in section 30-10(a)(2)a. herein; 
b.  Upstream signal input points required as a component of the local emergency alert system, and contemplated by section 30-10(a)(2)b. herein; 
c.  Video distribution facilities reaching into city classrooms and other publicly-owned facilities where the public congregates, required as a component of the local emergency alert system, and contemplated by section 30-10(a)(2)c. herein; 
d.  Any other grant. 
(2)  In the event that any of the items contemplated in section 30-7(b)(1)a., b., c. or d. are paid or have been paid to the city by an incumbent video services provider(s), the city may calculate a quarterly per-subscriber fee as follows: 
a.  The city shall first determine the direct, actual costs to the incumbent video provider(s) which have been or are associated with the provision of those items identified in section 30-7(b)(1)a., b., c., and d. The city shall next 
b.  Deduct from the those costs determined pursuant to section 30-7(b)(2)a. such recoupment as the particular incumbent video provider(s) may have achieved from building such costs into its basic service rate as permitted by governing FCC rate regulation guidelines in effect from time-to-time. The city shall next 
c.  Add all values resulting from the calculation made in section 30-7(b)(2)(B) together. The city shall next 
d.  Divide the value resulting from the calculation made in section 30-7(b)(2)c. by the total number of wireline video subscribers then exiting in the city. The city shall next 
e.  Divide the value resulting from the calculation made in subsection 30-7(b)(2)d. by four. The result of any total calculation conducted pursuant to this subsection 30-7(b)(2) shall be defined as the "Quarterly Per Subscriber PEG Fee." 
(3)  All grantees other than the incumbent video service provider(s) identified by the city shall multiply the quarterly per subscriber PEG fee by the number of basic tier subscribers that grantee held as of the last day of the previous calendar quarter; the product shall be defined as the "pro-rata PEG fee." 
(4)  Each grantee which holds a uniform video services local franchise agreement shall provide such financial and other information as the city may reasonably request in order for the city to calculate the quarterly pro-rata PEG fee. Any confidential or proprietary information submitted by a grantee may be marked as such, and the city shall protect such marked information from public disclosure as may be permitted by governing law. 
(5)  Receipt of a video services local franchise agreement shall be deemed to constitute a grantee's acceptance of the city's exclusive jurisdiction to calculate any required quarterly per subscriber PEG fee. Any person accepting a video services local franchise agreement shall also be deemed to have provided a covenant that it shall not directly or indirectly challenge the quarterly per subscriber PEG fee as said fee may be calculated from time to time and charged by city. 
(6)  Any pro-rata fee charged by the city shall be paid at the same time as the other components of the video service provider fee are due, i.e., within 45 days of the end of each calendar quarter. 
(7)  After receipt of each pro-rata fee, the city shall determine whether some or all of the pro-rata fee shall be paid over to the incumbent video service provider(s) in order to reduce that provider's(') relative expense related to those items considered in section 30-7(b)(1)a.-d. In rendering such determinations, the city shall pay over to the incumbent video service provider(s) pro-rata fees collected unless the city, in its sole discretion, believes that upgrades or improvements to the local emergency alert system are desirable; in such case(s), the city may retain one or more pro-rata fee payment and utilize that payment(s) for such purposes. 
(8)  This section 30-7(b) shall be construed and implemented by the city in a manner which promotes competitive neutrality between the providers. A provider's acceptance of a franchise shall be deemed as the provider's covenant to the city that it shall not challenge the city's determinations with respect to the collection, use, or payments over to an incumbent video service provider(s) of the pro-rata fee. 
(c)  Recovery permitted. Each grantee shall be permitted to recover in the manner permitted by governing FCC rate regulations all video service provider fees which are paid to the city. 
(d)  Financial verification. Each grantee shall provide an annual, itemized statement of all revenues derived by the company and attributable to its operation of a cable system in the city, together with an itemized statement of expenses attributable to the grantee's operation in the city. Said revenue and expense statements shall be itemized in the manner in which grantee ordinarily keeps its ledger of accounts and each statement shall be audited and certified by a nationally-recognized independent accounting firm. The aforesaid financial verification shall be due by May 1 of each year for the prior year. 
(e)  Permit fees. Each grantee shall pay the following permit and inspection fees in a manner consistent with Municipal Code: 
(1)  Permit fees shall be paid in accordance with the city's Code for any construction by grantee. 
(2)  Grantee shall pay the reasonable cost of municipal inspections for permitted construction and any reasonable "out of pocket" expenses of the city which result from inspections or street openings by grantee. 
(3)  Fees customarily charged or reasonably incurred by the city for reviews of preliminary or final engineering plans and specifications of the cable system; provided however, to the extent the city finds it necessary to hire a specialized independent engineering firm for the resolution of non-routing, highly technical, and unforeseen problems particular to the video industry, it shall so advise grantee, and grantee agrees to reimburse city for reasonable expenses incurred by such firm. 
(f)  Interest if late. All sums not paid when due shall bear interest at a rate which is one percent over the prime rate then being charged by Comerica Bank, and computed monthly. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-8. - Modification of franchise. 
(a)  Modification of franchise requirements. Subject to governing law, a grantee may obtain from the city modifications of its franchise as follows: 
(1)  Facilities, equipment. In the case of any requirement for facilities or equipment, including public, educational, or governmental access facilities or equipment, if grantee demonstrates that it is commercially impracticable for grantee to comply with such requirement, and the proposal by grantee for modification of such requirement is appropriate because of commercial impracticability. 
(2)  Service. In the case of any requirement for customer service, if grantee demonstrates that it is commercially impracticable for grantee to comply with such requirement, and the proposal by grantee for modification of such requirement is appropriate because of commercial impracticability. 
(b)  Public proceeding. Any final decision by the city under this section shall be made in a public proceeding. Such decision shall be made within 120 days after receipt of such request by the city, unless such 120-day period is extended by mutual agreement of grantee and the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-9. - Cable channels for educational or governmental use. 
(a)  Exclusive educational and governmental access channels. Each grantee shall make available two channels for use of the city or its designee. The required channels shall not be used for a commercial purpose, or in a manner that competes directly or indirectly with any service or offering of a grantee. 
(b)  Editorial control. A grantee shall not exercise any editorial control over any educational or governmental use of channel capacity provided pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-10. - System design and public safety. 
(a)  With respect to emergency alert systems, each grantee shall: 
(1)  Install as a part of its cable system, and shall operate throughout the term hereof, an emergency alert system (EAS) or successor to that system in accordance with all requirements imposed from time to time by the FCC. In establishing its EAS system, grantee shall, in accordance with FCC or other applicable regulations, cooperate with city on the use and operation by city of the emergency alert system. 
(2)  Install as part of their cable systems, and shall operate throughout the term of its particular franchise a local emergency alert system which shall permit the city manager, city police chief or city fire chief and his or her designates to override the audio feed to all video programming with an emergency message generated by an authorized city official and/or to distribute an emergency video message over a government access channel. The local emergency alert system shall be designed such that said local emergency messages are distributed to subscribers within the city's limits only, and shall be comprised of the following components: 
a.  A private, secure network constructed by grantee which connects each public facility within the city identified on exhibit 2, following this article (including, without limitation, all administrative buildings, police and fire stations) and which provides the capability of delivering confidential data, video and voice communications between city facilities in the event of an emergency. Such network shall incorporate the following features: 
i.  System topology that is transparent (i.e., usable) to any future electronics system; 
ii.  A backbone system that is capable of carrying traffic from the main hub to intermediate hubs in a physical ring topology; 
iii.  A cabling network that will provide service in the 20-year range, utilizing single-mode fiber; and 
iv.  All cable when entering a building will terminate within 50 feet, or transfer to metallic conduit or rated duct in order to meet fire codes, as designated by city. All fiber shall terminate with SC optical connectors. 
b.  An upstream path from the Saline municipal building, 100 North Harris Street, and further provide necessary electronic equipment such that the city has the capability of delivering emergency video messages produced by the city to the headend of a grantee. 
c.  A distribution network and necessary electronic components capable of delivering the city produced emergency audio and/or video message into the home of each of grantee's subscribers and into each public classroom within the public school district and such other buildings which are publicly-owned and designated by the city. 
d.  If a location contemplated by section 30-10(a)(2)a., b., or c. is relocated, then grantee shall relocate the contemplated local emergency alert system capabilities to that new location if: 
1.  The new location is within 300 feet; and 
2.  If grantee has an opportunity to "pre-wire" the new location during the new location's construction. 
If the new location does not meet with the two requirements listed in the immediately preceding sentence, then grantee shall relocate the service drop to the new location upon city's request and upon payment to the grantee of the grantee's direct, actual cost of relocating the facility. 
(b)  The city shall have an indefeasible right to use those portions of the system identified in subsections 30-10(a)(2)a., b. and c. in any manner determined by the city in its sole discretion. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the requirement contained in section 10-30(a)(2)a., b., and c., the city shall not require that a pre-existing local emergency alert system be duplicated by a second and subsequent grantees. Instead, city shall require a second and subsequent grantees to contribute to such facilities on a pro-rata basis through a "pro-rata fee," as contemplated by section 30-7(b) herein. 
(d)  All construction related to the local emergency alert system shall be completed not later than 18 months after grantee accepts a uniform video services local franchise agreement. The local emergency alert system shall be maintained by grantees and subject to testing by city at monthly intervals. 
(e)  Standby power supplies. Grantee shall provide backup or standby electric power (such as from batteries or from electric generators) at all locations on its cable system where the loss of electric power might disrupt the delivery of emergency messages within the city such that the system will operate for at least two hours even if electric service from conventional utility lines is interrupted. Notwithstanding the above, a grantee shall not be required to install standby power in locations where the electrical supply to the cable power supply location is the same as that which provides electrical power to the majority of homes served by the cable power supply. 
(f)  Each grantee may recoup its proportionate actual and direct cost associated with the construction and maintenance of the local emergency alert system in the manner permitted under governing law. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-11. - Signal quality requirements and public safety. 
(a)  FCC requirements. Grantee shall comply with all valid rules and regulations of the FCC with respect to the reception, carriage, and distribution of signals. 
(b)  Testing by grantee. Each grantee shall provide the city upon request with a report of testing for compliance with such rules and regulations, which shall be done in full compliance with the FCC rules and regulations. Such report shall state, in pertinent part, that the person doing the testing has been provided a copy of and reviewed the applicable regulations of the FCC. Such report shall set forth with specificity and in detail all areas of non-compliance, their actual or likely scope and causes, and grantee's recommendation of the best corrective measures to immediately and permanently correct the non-compliance. 
(c)  Testing by the city. The city at its expense may test grantee's cable system for compliance with the FCC technical standards once per year upon 15-day prior notice to grantee. 
(d)  Subscriber complaints. Unless a different process was established and noticed to subscribers prior to January 1, 2007, each grantee shall establish the following procedure for resolving complaints from subscribers about the quality of the video services delivered to them: All complaints shall go initially to grantee's office. All matters not resolved by grantee shall at grantee's or the subscriber's option be referred to the city for it to resolve. All matters not resolved by the city shall be referred to the Michigan Public Service Commission for it to resolve. Each grantee shall annually notify its subscribers of the preceding. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-12. - Construction and rights-of-way and public safety. 
(a)  Erection, removal, and common use of poles. No poles or other wire holding structures shall be erected by a grantee without prior approval of the city with regard to location, height, type, and other pertinent aspect. The city shall not unreasonably deny approval. However, no location of any pole or wire holding structure of grantee shall be a vested interest and such pole and structure shall be removed or modified by grantee at its expense whenever the city determines that the public convenience would be enhanced thereby. Where the city or a public utility serving the city desires to make use of the poles or other wire holding structures of grantee, but agreement therefor with the grantee cannot be reached, the city may require grantee to permit such use for such consideration and upon such terms as the council shall determine to be just and reasonable, if the council determines that the use would enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with grantee's operation. 
(b)  Underground locations. In those areas of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of both the current public utility providing telephone service and the utility providing electric service are underground or hereafter may be placed underground, then each grantee shall likewise construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground to the maximum extent that then existing technology permits, and in conformance with the then existing National Electrical Safety Code as well as in conformance with all applicable state and local ordinances and codes. In the event of a grantee having to reconstruct its facilities underground, grantee will be afforded compensation if the other utilities are afforded compensation for reconstructing their facilities underground. If and when necessary, amplifiers and/or transformers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be located in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground. 
(c)  Rights-of-way. In using public rights-of-ways, each grantee shall ensure the following: 
(1)  Safety, appearance. The safety, functioning and appearance of the property and the convenience and safety of other persons shall not be adversely affected by the installation, maintenance, or construction of facilities necessary for the cable system. 
(2)  Distribution of expense. The cost of the installation, construction, operation, maintenance, or removal of such facilities shall be borne by grantee or its subscribers, or a combination of both. 
(3)  Just compensation. The owner of the property shall be justly compensated by grantee for actual damages caused by the installation, construction, operation, maintenance, or removal of such by the grantee. 
(4)  Minimum interference. All transmission and distribution structures, lines, and equipment erected by grantee, within the city, shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and public places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys, or public ways and public places. 
(5)  Damage to public property. In case of disturbances of any street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area, grantee shall, at its own cost and in a manner approved by the council or its representative(s), replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved area in as reasonably a good a condition as existed prior to such disturbance. 
(6)  Relocation of equipment and materials. If at any time during the period of this franchise, the city shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley, or other public way, grantee, upon reasonable notice by the city, shall remove or relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(7)  Interference with travel. Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by grantee shall be placed in such a manner so as not to endanger persons or property and so as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way. 
(8)  Engineering standards, FCC specifications. All of grantee's plant and equipment, including but not limited to the antenna site, head-ends and distribution system, towers, house connections, structures, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, fixtures, and appurtenances shall be installed, located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained, and operated in accordance with good engineering practices and meet all relevant specifications of the FCC and federal law, or, where not regulated by federal law, state and local law. 
(9)  Rights of permit holders. Each grantee shall, at the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of such shall be paid by the party so requesting. Grantee may require that such expense be paid prior to its raising or lowering its lines. 
(d)  Construction-City permits. For purposes of this subsection, "construction" shall not include any standard "new-customer hook-up" by grantee, provided that extraordinary installations requiring structural modifications to the customer's premises shall constitute "construction." 
(1)  Prior to the commencement of construction, grantee shall apply for and obtain all city permits required of grantee by the City Code, including but not limited to building permits, street-cut permits, etc., and shall comply with all terms of such permits. Grantee where practicable shall utilize existing poles in the city. It is the stated intention of the city that all holders of franchises and rights within the corporate limits of the city will cooperate with the video provider's usage of their poles and pole line facilities whenever possible so that the number of new or additional pole line facilities installed within the city may be minimized. 
(2)  Supervision of construction; inspection. Without, in any way, limiting the provisions of subsection 30-12(d) the city, through its appropriately designated officials and representatives, shall have the right to inspect all construction or installation work performed within the public rights-of-way, streets and other easements dedicated for compatible uses as it shall find necessary to insure compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the City Code, applicable permits, and other pertinent provisions of law. Such inspections shall be performed in a timely and expeditious manner. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-13. - Customer service and the transaction of local business. 
(a)  Effective, prompt service. Grantee shall render effective service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as is possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(b)  No discrimination. No grantee shall deny service, deny access, or otherwise discriminate on the availability or rates, terms or conditions of cable services provided to actual or potential subscribers on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, ancestry, national origin, sex, disability, age, marital status, location within city, status with regard to public assistance, income level, or other demographics. All grantees shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination. 
(c)  All grantees shall comply with 47 C.F.R. §76.309(c) and the associated FCC Order which implemented said section (Report & Order, In the Matter of Implementation of Section 8 of the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 , FCC 93-145 (Released April 7, 1993) as each currently exist and may from time-to-time be amended. The city reserves the right by ordinance and subject to applicable law to alter or amend the customer service and consumer protection matters set forth in this part. 
(1)  All grantees shall have a local or toll-free telephone number available for use by subscribers toll-free 24 hours per day, seven days per week. 
(2)  A grantee's numbers shall be listed, with appropriate explanations, in the directory published by the local telephone company or companies and shall be printed on each grantee's bills to customers. 
(3)  Trained company representatives will be available to respond to subscriber telephone inquiries during normal business hours. Any calls answered after normal business hours shall be responded to by a trained company representative on the next business day. 
(4)  Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds from when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90 percent of the time under normal operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis. 
(5)  Under normal operating conditions, the subscriber will not receive a busy signal more than three percent of the time. 
(d)  Subject to applicable law, each grantee shall provide reports to City quarterly upon request as follows. 
(1)  The reports shall be in a form acceptable to the city, showing on a consistent basis, fairly applied the matters set forth below so as to measure grantee's compliance with the standards of the referenced sections. Such reports shall show grantee's performance excluding periods of abnormal operating conditions, and if grantee contends any such conditions occurred during the period in questions, it shall also describe the nature and extent of conditions and show grantee's performance both including and excluding the time periods grantee contends such conditions were in effect. 
(2)  The reports shall show the number of phone calls originating from within the city (or other appropriate area) and measure grantee's compliance with the standards of subsections 30-13(c)(4) and (5). They shall also measure and report on grantee's compliance with subsections 30-13(f)(2) and (3). 
(e)  A customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at least during normal business hours and will be conveniently located within the county. 
(f)  With respect to service interruptions: 
(1)  Under normal operating conditions, each grantee will meet the standards of subsections 30-13(f)(2) and (3) no less than 95 percent of the time measured on a quarterly basis. 
(2)  Excluding conditions beyond a grantee's control, grantee will begin working on a service interruption promptly and in no event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known to grantee. 
(3)  Excluding conditions beyond a grantee's control, grantee will begin working on subscriber complaints involving impairment or degradation of signal quality (other than a service interruption) on the next business day after notification of the service problem. 
(g)  The "appointment window" alternatives for installations, service calls, and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at maximum, a four-hour time block during normal business hours. The operator may schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal business hours for the express convenience of the customer. 
(1)  An operator may not cancel an appointment with a customer after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment. 
(2)  If a provider's representative is running late for an appointment with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the customer. 
(h)  Under normal operating conditions, installations located up to 125 aerial feet from the existing distribution cable system will be performed within seven business days after an order has been placed no less than 95 percent of the time, measured on a quarterly basis. Unless otherwise expressly permitted by governing law, no line extension charge or comparable charge shall be imposed on any current or potential subscriber for "standard drops" of 125 feet or less from the distribution portion or tap on the cable system to the subscriber's premises. 
(i)  A video service provider shall not do in connection with the providing of video service to its subscribers any of the following: 
(1)  Make a statement or representation, including the omission of material information, regarding the rates, terms, or conditions of providing video service that is false, misleading, or deceptive. As used in this subdivision, "material information" includes, but is not limited to, all applicable fees, taxes, and charges that will be billed to the subscriber, regardless of whether the fees, taxes, or charges are authorized by state or federal law. 
(2)  Charge a customer for a subscribed service for which the customer did not make an initial affirmative order. Failure to refuse an offered or proposed subscribed service is not an affirmative order for the service. 
(3)  If a customer has terminated a service, charge the customer for service provided after the effective date the service was canceled. 
(4)  Cause a probability of confusion or a misunderstanding as to the legal rights, obligations, or remedies of a party to a transaction by making a false, deceptive or misleading statement or by failing to inform the customer of a material fact, the omission of which is deceptive or misleading. 
(5)  Represent or imply that the subject of a transaction will be provided promptly, or at a specified time, or within a reasonable time, if the provider knows or has reason to know that it will not be so provided. 
(6)  Enter into a transaction in which the subscriber waives or purports to waive a right, benefit, or immunity provided by law, unless the waiver is clearly stated and the consumer has specifically consented to it. 
(7)  To the extent not already contemplated in the immediately-preceding subsections 30-13(i)(1)-(6), provider shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Michigan Consumers Protection Act, 1976 PA 331. 
(j)  All service personnel of each grantee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear clothing with grantee's name and logo clearly visible on the front and back of their clothing and shall have an identification card bearing their name and photograph. Grantee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of a grantee, its contractors and subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public: grantee's vehicles shall have grantee's logo and phone number plainly visible; those of contractors and subcontractors working for grantee shall have the contractor's/subcontractor's name and phone number plus markings (such as magnetic door sign) indicating they are under contract to grantee and grantee's telephone number. 
(k)  Late payment. Late payment charges shall be assessed only in accordance with this subsection and shall be not more than $5.00; provided however, that grantee may increase such limit for inflation if the new amount bears a reasonable resemblance to the cost of maintaining and collecting the delinquent accout. No late charge shall be assessed before the thirty-fifth day subsequent to the day on which the bill was mailed to the subscriber. 
(l)  Disconnection. 
(1)  Grantee may only disconnect a subscriber for failure to pay if at least 45 days have elapsed after the due date for payment of the subscriber's bill and grantee has provided at least 10 days written notice to the subscriber prior to disconnection, and a follow-up written notice or telephone call specifying the effective date after which cable services are subject to disconnection. 
(2)  At any time grantee in good faith believes that the subscriber has tampered with or abused grantee's equipment, that there is a signal leakage problem (or other non-compliance with FCC rules or other standards which poses a risk to lives or property) on subscriber's premises, or that subscriber is or may be engaged in the theft of cable services, grantees' remedies shall include disconnecting the subscriber. 
(3)  Notice. Each grantee shall promptly disconnect any subscriber who so requests disconnection. Unless otherwise stated by the subscriber, the disconnection date shall be considered that date when grantee receives the disconnect request. No charge may be imposed upon the subscriber for any cable service delivered after the disconnection date. 
(m)  Privacy and monitoring. Grantee shall not use its cable system to collect personally identifiable information concerning any subscriber without the prior written or electronic consent of the subscriber concerned; provided, however, that a grantee may use the cable system to collect such information in order to obtain information necessary to render a cable service or other service provided by grantee to the subscriber or to detect unauthorized reception of cable communications. 
(n)  Minimized disruption. Grantee shall avoid planned and intentional service outages to the greatest possible extent and, when such outages must occur, shall schedule them to the extent possible during periods of minimum use of the system. Where service outages extend for more than 24 hours, grantee shall credit subscribers on a pro rata basis for services not received during the period of service outage which occurs after grantee is notified by the subscriber of such outage, provided however, that no credit shall be provided for outages caused by the subscriber. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-14. - Financial safeguards and the protection of public assets. 
(a)  Insurance. 
(1)  During the term of its franchise, grantee shall maintain, or cause to be maintained, in full force and effect and at its sole cost and expense, the following types and limits of insurance: 
a.  Workers compensation insurance meeting state statutory requirements and employer's liability insurance with minimum limits of $100,000.00 for each accident. 
b.  Comprehensive commercial general liability insurance with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 as the combined single limit for each occurrence of bodily injury, personal injury and property damage. The policy shall provide blanket contractual liability insurance for all written contracts, and shall include coverage for products and completed operations liability, independent contractor's liability; coverage for property damage from perils of explosion, collapse or damage to underground utilities, commonly known as XCU coverage. 
c.  Automobile liability insurance covering all owned, hired, and non-owned vehicles in use by grantee, its employees and agents, with personal protection insurance and property protection insurance to comply with the provisions of the state no-fault insurance law, including residual liability insurance with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 as the combined single limit for each occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. 
d.  At the start of and during the period of any construction, builders all-risk insurance providing coverage on all building and structures which will be installed or constructed as part of the cable system together with an installation floater or equivalent property coverage covering cables, materials, machinery and supplies of any nature whatsoever which are to be used in or incidental to the construction of the cable system. Upon completion of the construction of the cable system, grantee shall substitute for the foregoing insurance policies of fire, extended coverage and vandalism and malicious mischief insurance on the entire cable system. The amount of insurance at all times shall be representative of the insurable values installed or constructed. 
(2)  All policies other than those for worker's compensation shall be written on an occurrence and not on a claims made basis. 
(3)  The coverage amounts set forth above may be met by a combination of underlying and umbrella policies so long as in combination the limits equal or exceed those stated. 
(4)  All policies, except for business interruption and worker's compensation policies, shall name the city, a municipal corporation of the state, all associated, affiliated, allied and subsidiary entities of the municipality now existing or hereafter created, and its respective officers, boards, commission, employees, agents and contractors, as their respective interests may appear as additional insureds (herein referred to as the "additional insureds"). Each policy is to be endorsed to add the additional insureds and shall contain cross-liability wording, as follows: 
"To any claim made or 'suit' brought against any one insured by another insured the coverage shall apply in the same manner and to the same extent as though a separate policy had been issued to each insured. Any breach of a condition of this policy by any insured shall not affect the protection provided by this policy to another insured." 
(5)  Evidence of insurance. Certificates of insurance for each insurance policy required to be obtained by grantee in compliance with this section, along with written evidence of payment of required premiums shall be filed and maintained with the city prior to the start of any franchise and annual during the term of the franchise. 
(6)  Cancellation of policies of insurance. All insurance policies maintained pursuant to this franchise shall contain the following endorsement: 
"At least sixty (60) days prior written notice shall be given to the city by the insurer of any intention not to renew such policy or to cancel, replace or materially alter same, such notice to be given by registered mail to City." 
(7)  Insurance companies. All insurance shall be affected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers licensed to do business by the state or surplus line carriers on the state insurance commissioner's approved list of companies qualified to do business in the state. All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated A+ or better by A.M. Best Company. 
(8)  Deductibles. All insurance policies may be written with deductibles, not to exceed $50,000.00 unless approved in advance by the city. Grantee agrees to indemnify and save harmless the city, the indemnities and additional insureds from and against the payment of any deductible and from the payment of any premium on any insurance policy required to be furnished by this franchise. 
(b)  Indemnification. Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless from any and all liability arising out of its franchise resulting from the acts or omissions of grantee, its assigns, employees, agents, invitees, or other persons for whom grantee is legally responsible, including, but not limited to, damages to persons or property arising out of the construction, maintenance or operation of the cable system, infringement of civil rights, patents, trademarks, trade names, or copy rights, libel, or slander. Grantee shall reimburse the city for its reasonable actual expenses incurred to defend against any such action to include, but not be limited to, attorney fees, expert witness fees, discovery expenses, court fees, damages and penalties and interest thereon, and expense incurred on appeal. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-15. - Maps, plats, and reports. 
(a)  Records retained. Grantee shall maintain copies of the following records and reports for at least a three-year period: Signal leakage tests, insurance policies, periodic gross revenue statements, revenue information necessary to document grantee's gross receipt statements for franchise fee purposes, customer service log reports, preventative maintenance reports, and any other applicable records and information that may be required by any other federal or state agency having jurisdiction over the grantee. 
(b)  Inspection of records. The city shall have the right to review at a mutually agreeable location all records and reports identified in this section and any other record or report related to grantee's transaction of business within the city on ten days' written notice. Such review, unless mutually agreed upon or judicially ordered, should occur within grantee's normal business hours. Moreover, the city will only request financial records on an as needed basis and will treat such information as confidential and proprietary to the fullest extent allowed by the state and federal law. 
(c)  Location of facilities/miss dig. Grantee shall provide the city upon request copies of any new "as-built" or comparable drawings as they are generated for portions of grantee's facilities and cable system located within the city. Upon request by the city, grantee shall mark up maps provided by the city so as to show the location of grantee's facilities and cable system. Each grantee shall participate in and be a member of the "Miss Dig" utility notification program provided for by MCL § 460.701ff or subsequent statute. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-16. - Rights reserved to the city. 
(a)  Generally-Applicable and cable service regulations. Each grantee shall, at all times during the period of a franchise granted hereunder, be subject to such reasonable regulations, generally-applicable to all commercial businesses operating in the city, as the city shall hereinafter provide. Grantee shall further be subject to and comply with all federal law and regulations related to its business, including, without limitation, those contained in the cable act and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(b)  Supervision, inspection. The city shall have the right to supervise all construction or installation work performed in the public rights-of-way and make such inspections, audits, or reviews of grantee's business records as city shall find necessary to insure compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent provisions of law. At the expiration, termination or cancellation of a franchise, the city shall have the right to require the grantee to remove at its own expense all portions of the cable communications system from all public streets, alleys, ways, and areas within the city. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-17. - Suspension of requirements. 
    The city may suspend any provision of this chapter which imposes an obligation on grantees, in whole or in part, for any length of time; provided, however, that any such waiver must: 
(1)  First be approved by resolution of the city council; and 
(2)  Be in writing and indicate with specificity the provision waived and the duration of such suspension; and 
(3)  Be applied on a competitively-neutral basis to all grantees. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-18. - Remedies. 
    For any violation of this chapter, the city shall be entitled to any and all of the following cumulative remedies: 
(1)  The commencement of an action at law for monetary damages. 
(2)  The commencement of an action of equity seeking injunctive or declaratory relief or the specific performance of any of the provisions which, as a matter of equity, are specifically enforceable. 
(3)  Revocation of: 
a.  Any consent previously given by the city to utilize the city's streets and rights-of-way to provide utility service, as provided pursuant to section 30-5(b)(1); and/or 
b.  The right to utilize city rights-of-way to transact business within the city, as otherwise provided pursuant to section 30-5(b)(2). 
(4)  Issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation, with civil fines and penalties not to exceed $500.00, 90 days in jail, or both. Continuing violations shall be deemed to create a separate civil infraction for each day on which the violation continues to exist. 
(5)  Grantee shall reimburse reasonable attorney fees and other costs incurred by city which arise as a result of city's efforts to enforce grantee's compliance with this chapter. Such fees and costs shall be included as a component of any judgment, order or other relief granted to the city pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
Sec. 30-19. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Access. Subject to the provisions of this chapter, city shall allow all grantees to install, construct, and maintain a video service network within the public rights-of-way and shall provide each grantee with open, comparable, non-discriminatory and competitively neutral access to the public rights-of-way. The city shall not discriminate against a grantee to provide video service for any of the following: 
(1)  The authorization or placement of a video service network in the public rights-of-way; 
(2)  Access to a building owned by a governmental entity; 
(3)  A municipal utility pole. 
(b)  No relationship. To the extent that ay relationship is deemed to exist between the city and a grantee other than that of franchisor and franchisee, such relationship shall be considered an independent contractual relationship, and no liability or benefits, such as worker's compensation, pension rights or liabilities, insurance rights or liabilities or other provisions or liabilities, arising out of or related to a contract for hire or employer/employee relationship, shall arise or accrue to either party or to either party's agents or employees as a result of grantee holding a franchise. 
(c)  Captions. Captions or headings to sections or subsections thereof are intended to provide ready access to this chapter and shall not be construed in any manner to interpret the content of any section or subsection thereof. 
(d)  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. If such disclosure is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been declared invalid is no longer so, said section, clause or paragraph shall thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be enforceable, provided that the city shall give the grantees 30 days written notice of such change before requiring compliance with this article. 
(e)  Conflict. In the event of a conflict between this article and the provisions of any franchise issued to a video service provider, the terms most benefiting the health, safety, and general public welfare of the residents of the city shall control, as determined by the city. 
(f)  Federal law. Any and all provisions of this chapter shall be interpreted in accordance with and subject to governing and enforceable federal and state law. 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
EXHIBIT 1 - Franchise Fee Report 
Year: ____________  Quarter: ____________ 
Subscriber Numbers as of the End of the Quarter: 
Basic Subscribers: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Expanded Basic Number: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Digital Subscribers Number: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
HD Subscribers Number: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Number of Premium Units: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Revenue for Quarter: 
Programming 
Basic service: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Expanded basic: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Digital: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
HD: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Premiums: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
PPV: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Bulk service: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Leased access: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Other (describe): 
1. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [ ] 
2. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [ ] 
Installation and equipment 
Install/service call revenue: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Converters: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Remotes: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
DVR: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
A/O: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Change of service charges: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Advertising 
National: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Regional and local: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Agency fees deducted: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Local ad production: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Home shopping commissions: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Other fees for exhibition or promotion of products: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Other 
Franchise fees: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
NSF charge fees: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Forfeited deposits: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Launch fees: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Studio/personnel fees: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Bill stuffers: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Late fees: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Services functionally integrated with video: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Guides: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Tower Rental: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Other: 
1. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [ ] 
2. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [ ] 
3. ____________ / ____________ / ____________ [ ] 
Additional 2% PEG fee: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ 
Additional pro-rata fee: ____________ / ____________ / ____________ = 
Additional Clarifications: 
_____
_____
_____
I certify that this report is true to the best of my knowledge, information and belief: 
____________ 
Name: 
Title: 
Date: 
Note: All franchisees are required by law to pay franchise fees based on their total gross revenue, which is defined by the federal Cable Act as all revenue derived from the operation of the cable system to provide cable services. See Cable Act Section 622(b). 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 
EXHIBIT 2 - Local Emergency Alert System Locations 
Saline Municipal Building, 100 N. Harris Street 
Water Treatment Plant, 401 Breconshire 
Public Works Facility, 1234 Tefft Court 
Saline Pollution Control Plant, 247 Monroe 
Saline Rec Center, 1866 Woodland Dr. 
City water towers 
City sewage pump stations 
(Ord. No. 705, 5-7-07) 

Secs. 30-20-30-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES FOR BASIC CABLE RATE REGULATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 517, adopted Sept. 13, 1993, has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. II, §§ 30-51-30-69. 

Sec. 30-51. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article: 
    Act shall mean the Communications Act of 1934, as amended (and specifically as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L 102-385), and as may be amended from time to time. 
    Associated equipment shall mean all equipment and services subject to regulation pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.923. 
    Basic cable service shall mean "basic service" as defined in the FCC Rules, and any other cable television service which is subject to rate regulation by the city pursuant to the Act and FCC Rules. 
    FCC shall mean the Federal Communications Commission. 
    FCC Rules shall mean all rules of the FCC promulgated from time to time pursuant to the Act. 
    Increase in rates shall mean an increase in rates or a decrease in programming or customer services. 
    All other words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-52. - Purpose; interpretation. 
    The purpose of this article is to: (1) adopt regulations consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules with respect to basic cable service rate regulations, and (2) prescribe procedures to provide a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties in connection with basic cable service rate regulation by the city. This article shall be implemented and interpreted consistent with the Act and FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-53. - Rate regulations promulgated by FCC. 
    In connection with the regulation of rates for basic cable service and associated equipment, the City of Saline shall follow all FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 3, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-54. - Filing; additional information; burden of proof. 
(a)  A cable operator shall submit its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates in accordance with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall include as part of its submission such information as is necessary to show that its schedule of rates or its proposed increase in rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules. The cable operator shall file ten copies of the schedule or proposed increase with the city clerk. For purposes of this article, the filing of the cable operator shall be deemed to have been made when at least ten copies have been received by the city clerk. The city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations consistent with the Act or FCC Rules prescribing the information, data and calculations which must be included as part of the cable operator's filing of the schedule of rates or a proposed increase. 
(b)  In addition to information and data required by rules and regulations of the city pursuant to section 30-54(a) above, the city administrator may request and the cable operator shall then provide additional information that is related to and helpful for the city's review and regulation of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates. The city administrator may establish reasonable deadlines for submission of the requested information and the cable operator shall comply with such deadlines. 
(c)  A cable operator has the burden of proving that its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates complies with the Act and the FCC Rules including, without limitation, 47 USC § 543 and 47 CFR § 76.922 and 76.923. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-55. - Proprietary information. 
(a)  If this article, any rules or regulations adopted by the city pursuant to section 30-54(a), or any request for information pursuant to section 30-54(b) requires the production of proprietary information, the cable operator shall produce the information unless permitted by applicable law (which includes the FCC Rules) to withhold it. However, at the time the allegedly proprietary information is submitted, a cable operator may request that specific, identified portions of its response be treated as confidential and withheld from public disclosure. The request must state the reason why the information should be treated as proprietary and the facts that support those reasons. The request for confidentiality will be granted if the city determines that the preponderance of the evidence shows that non-disclosure is consistent with the provisions of the Freedom of Information Act, 5 USC § 552. The city shall place in a public file for inspection any decision that results in information being withheld. If the cable operator requests confidentiality and the request is denied, (1) where the cable operator is proposing a rate increase, it may withdraw the proposal, in which case the allegedly proprietary information will be returned to it; or (2) the cable operator may seek review within five working days of the denial in any appropriate forum. Release of the information will be stayed pending review. 
(b)  Any interested party may file a request to inspect material withheld as proprietary with the city. The city shall weigh the policy considerations favoring nondisclosure against the reasons cited for permitting inspection in light of the facts of the particular case. It will then promptly notify the requesting entity and the cable operator that submitted the information as to the disposition of the request. It may grant, deny or condition a request. The requesting party or the cable operator may seek review of the decision by filing an appeal with any appropriate forum. Disclosure will be stayed pending resolution of any appeal. 
(c)  The procedures set forth in this section shall be construed to make them analogous to and consistent with the rules of the FCC regarding requests for confidentiality including, without limitation, 47 CFR § 0.459. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 5, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-56. - Public notice; initial review of rates. 
    Upon the filing of ten copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates pursuant to section 30-54(a) above, the city clerk shall publish a public notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city which shall state that: (1) the filing has been received by the city clerk and (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) is available for public inspection and copying, and (2) interested parties are encouraged to submit written comments on the filing to the city clerk not later than seven days after the public notice is published. The city clerk shall give notice to the cable operator of the date, time, and place of the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. This notice shall be mailed by first-class mail at least five days before the meeting. In addition, if a written staff or consultant's report on the schedule of rates or the proposed increase is prepared for consideration of the city council, then the city clerk shall mail a copy of the report by first-class mail to the cable operator at least five days before the meeting at which the city council shall first consider the schedule of rates or the proposed increase. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 1, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-57. - Tolling order. 
    After a cable operator has filed its existing schedule of rates or proposed increase in these rates, the existing schedule of rates will remain in effect or the proposed increase in rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of filing under section 30-54(a) above unless the city council (or other properly authorized body or official) tolls the 30-day deadline pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933 by issuing a brief written order, by resolution or otherwise, within 30 days of the date of filing. The city council may toll the 30-day deadline for an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings and for an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 7, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-58. - Public notice; hearing on basic cable service rates following tolling of 30-day deadline. 
    If a written order has been issued pursuant to section 30-57 and 47 CFR § 76.933 to toll the effective date of existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment or a proposed increase in these rates, the cable operator shall submit to the city any additional information required or requested pursuant to section 30-54. In addition, the city council shall hold a public hearing to consider the comments of interested parties within the additional 90-day or 150-day period, as the case may be. The city clerk shall publish a public notice of the public hearing in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall state: (1) the date, time, and place at which the hearing shall be held, (2) interested parties may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such hearing to submit comments on or objections to the existing rates or the proposed increase in rates, and (3) copies of the schedule of rates or the proposed increase in rates and related information (except those parts which may be withheld as proprietary) are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. The public notice shall be published not less than 15 days before the hearing. In addition, the city clerk shall mail by first-class mail a copy of the public notice to the cable operator not less than 15 days before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 8, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-59. - Staff or consultant report; written response. 
    Following the public hearing, the city administrator shall cause a report to be prepared for the city council which shall (based on the filing of the cable operator, the comments or objections of interested parties, information requested from the cable operator and its response, staff or consultant's review, and other appropriate information) include a recommendation for the decision of the city council pursuant to section 30-60. The city clerk shall mail a copy of the report to the cable operator by first-class mail not less than 20 days before the city council acts under section 30-60. The cable operator may file a written response to the report with the city clerk. If at least ten copies of the response are filed by the cable operator with the city clerk within ten days after the report is mailed to the cable operator, the city clerk shall forward it to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 9, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-60. - Rate decisions and orders. 
    The city council shall issue a written order, by resolution or otherwise, which in whole or in part, approves the existing rates for basic cable service and associated equipment or a proposed increase in such rates, denies the existing rates or proposed increase, orders a rate reduction, prescribe a reasonable rate, allows the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, or orders other appropriate relief, in accordance with the FCC Rules. If the city council issues an order allowing the existing rates or proposed increase to become effective subject to refund, it shall also direct the cable operator to maintain an accounting pursuant to 47 CFR § 76.933. The order specified in this section shall be issued within 90 days of the tolling order under section 30-57 in all cases not involving a cost-of-service showing. The order shall be issued within 150 days after the tolling order under section 30-57 in all cases involving a cost-of-service showing. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 10, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-61. - Refunds; notice. 
    The city council may order a refund to subscribers as provided in 47 CFR § 76.942. Before the city council orders any refund to subscribers, the city clerk shall give at least seven days' written notice to the capable operator by first-class mail of the date, time, and place at which the city council shall consider issuing a refund order and shall provide an opportunity for the cable operator to comment. The cable operator may appear in person, by agent, or by letter at such time for the purpose of submitting comments to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 11, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-62. - Written decisions; public notice. 
    Any order of the city council pursuant to section 30-60 or section 30-61 shall be in writing, shall be effective upon adoption by the city council, and shall be deemed released to the public upon adoption. The clerk shall publish a public notice of any such written order in a newspaper of general circulation within the city which shall: (1) summarize the written decision, and (2) state that copies of the text of the written decision are available for inspection or copying from the office of the clerk. In addition, the city clerk shall mail a copy of the text of the written decision to the cable operator by first-class mail. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 12, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-63. - Rules and regulations. 
    In addition to rules promulgated pursuant to section 30-54, the city council may, by resolution or otherwise, adopt rules and regulations for basic cable service rate regulation proceedings (including, without limitation, the conduct of hearings), consistent with the Act and the FCC Rules. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 13, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-64. - Failure to give notice. 
    The failure of the city clerk to give the notices or to mail copies of reports as required by this article shall not invalidate the decisions or proceedings of the city council so long as there is substantial compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 14, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-65. - Additional hearings. 
    In addition to the requirements of this article, the city council may in its sole discretion hold additional public hearings upon such reasonable notice as the city council shall prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 15, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-66. - Additional powers. 
    The city shall possess all powers conferred by the Act, the FCC Rules, the cable operator's franchise, and all other applicable law. The powers exercised pursuant to the Act, the FCC Rules, and this article shall be in addition to powers conferred by law or otherwise. The city may take any action not prohibited by the Act and FCC Rules to protect the public interest in connection with basic cable service rate regulation. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 16, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-67. - Failure to comply; remedies. 
    Unless prohibited by applicable law the city may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies against the cable operator (including, without limitation, all remedies provided under a cable operator's franchise with the city) for failure to comply with the Act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder. Unless prohibited or limited by applicable law, failure to comply with the act, the FCC Rules, any orders or determinations of the city pursuant to this article, any requirements of this article, or any rules and regulations promulgated hereunder, shall also be sufficient grounds for revocation or denial of renewal of a cable operator's franchise. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 17, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-68. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 18, 9-13-93) 
Sec. 30-69. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between this article and the provisions of any prior ordinance, then subject to applicable law and to the extent necessary to reasonably comply with the Act and FCC Rules, the provisions of this article shall control. In the event of any conflict between this ordinance and the provisions of any franchise, permit or other agreements with a cable operator, then subject to applicable law and to the extent necessary to reasonably comply with the Act and FCC Rules the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 19, 9-13-93) 
Secs. 30-70-30-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TELECOMMUNICATION SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 660, §§ 1-21, adopted October 21, 2002, repealed and reenacted art. III to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. III, §§ 30-85-30-103, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 627, §§ 1-19, adopted April 3, 2000. 

Sec. 30-86. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 1, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-87. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 2, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-88. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. A copy of the Act can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
    City means the City of Saline. 
    City council means the City of Saline Council or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in section 332(d) of part I of title III of the communications act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 3, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-89. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make seven copies of the application and distribute a copy to each member of the city council. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. A copy of the application form as approved by the commission can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional Information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan telecommunications act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 4, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-90. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 4(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. Copies of the permit forms currently approved by the MPSC can be obtained on the internet at http://www.cis.state.mi.us/mpsc/comm/rightofway/rightofway.htm. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 5, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-91. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter 74 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 6, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-92. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 7, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-93. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in [paper or electronic] format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 8, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-94. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 9, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-95. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 10, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-96. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 11, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-97. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 30-96 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 660, §, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-98. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 13, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-99. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 14, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-100. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 15, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-101. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this ordinance shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 16, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-102. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The city shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 30-89(c) of this article; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with subsection 30-89(f) of this article; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with subsection 30-89(g) of this article; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with subsection 30-90(a) of this article; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with subsection 30-90(a) of this article; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with subsection 30-90(a) of this article; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in subsection 30-90(b) of this article; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 30-90(c) of this article; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with subsection 30-90(d) of this article; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 30-91 of this article; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 30-96 of this article; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 30-99 of this article; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 30-100 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 17, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-103. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 18, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-104. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 19, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-105. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 20, 10-21-02) 
Sec. 30-106. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to the civil penalties provided in Ordinance No. 651 of the city. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 660, § 21, 10-21-02) 
Chapter 34 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; law enforcement, ch. 50. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 

Sec. 34-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system means a detection device or an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention or to which police are expected to respond. A fire alarm system or an alarm system which monitors temperature, humidity or other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises is excluded from the provisions of this article, except a fire alarm system which connects directly to an alarm system franchised hereunder. 
    Alarm system contractor means a person, firm, company, partnership or corporation engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration or servicing of alarm systems or who responds to an alarm system. "Alarm system contractor" shall not include a business which only sells or manufactures alarm systems unless the business services alarm systems, installs alarm systems, or monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
    Alarm system user means a person, firm, company, partnership, or corporation using an alarm system as defined in this section, and shall include the use of automatic calling or dialing telephone systems. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-11; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 5-20-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 34-27. - Franchise. 
    The city may by resolution duly adopted by the city council award to one or more alarm system contractors a nonexclusive franchise for the installation, operation and maintenance of an alarm system at such location or locations as may be designated by such resolution and in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-12; Ord. No. 347, § 2, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-28. - License. 
    A franchise shall be awarded only to alarm system contractors who are duly licensed under the Security Guard Act of 1968, Act No. 330 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.), as amended. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-13; Ord. No. 347, § 3, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-29. - Fees. 
    All fees charged for connection to the alarm system shall be reasonable and subject to prior approval by the city council and no changes in fees charged shall be made without prior council approval. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-14; Ord. No. 347, § 4, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-30. - Equipment and maintenance. 
    The receiving equipment used shall be state of the art equipment capable of accepting full input from all alarm systems in use in the city at the time of the adoption of this article and such new systems as the council may from time to time deem necessary for the safety and welfare of the city. Such equipment shall be properly maintained and be kept in good working order at all times. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-15; Ord. No. 347, § 5, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-31. - Installation and removal. 
    Receiving equipment shall be installed and removed at no expense to the city, and the site of all installations shall, after removal of the equipment, be restored to as good a condition as it was prior to such installation at no expense to the city. A bond in an amount satisfactory to the council shall be posted to secure the removal of equipment and restoration of the installation site in the event of termination of the franchise by the council as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-16; Ord. No. 347, § 6, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-32. - Review and termination of franchise. 
    All franchises granted under this article shall be subject to review by the council at any time, and subject to termination by the council at any time for violation of the terms or intent of this article, after reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-17; Ord. No. 347, § 7, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-33. - Users permit. 
    All alarm system users shall obtain annually a permit from the police department to connect to the authorized alarm system. The fee for such permit shall be established by resolution of the council and shall reflect the administrative cost of granting such permit. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-18; Ord. No. 347, § 8, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-34. - False alarms. 
    Alarm system users shall be charged a fee to be established by council resolution for responding to false alarms resulting from the negligent or willful improper use or maintenance of an alarm system. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-19; Ord. No. 347, § 9, 5-20-80) 
Sec. 34-35. - Liability insurance and indemnification. 
(a)  The alarm system contractor shall maintain, throughout the term of its franchise, liability insurance insuring the city and the contractor with regard to all damages for which the city and/or the contractor may be liable, including, but not limited to, damages arising out of the installation, operation, maintenance or removal of the alarm system that is the subject of this franchise, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise. 
(b)  The liability insurance referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall be in the following minimum amounts: 
(1)  $200,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person within limits, however, of $400,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident. 
(2)  $100,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. 
(3)  $100,000.00 for all other types of liability. 
(c)  The contractor shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise, the contractor agrees that it will pay any liability incurred by the city as a result of granting this franchise, and the contractor shall save the city harmless from any and all liability arising out of this franchise, the granting of the same or the operation of the system hereunder. The contractor shall pay for expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties which the city may be required to pay as a result of granting this franchise, including, but not limited to, all reasonable investigation, witness and attorney fees. 
(Code 1968, § 21/2-20; Ord. No. 347, § 10, 5-20-80) 
Secs. 34-36-34-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 623, §§ 1-8, adopted Mar. 6, 2000, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion as a new art. III, §§ 34-51-34-58, was at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 34-51. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Saline Emergency Response Cost Recovery Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 623, § 1, 3-6-00) 
Sec. 34-52. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from incurring extraordinary expenses resulting from the utilization of Saline Area Fire Department resources to respond to an incident requiring a technical rescue or involving a release of hazardous materials, the city council authorizes the imposition of charges to recover the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the Saline Area Fire Department in responding to or cleaning up such incidents. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 2, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 753 , § 2, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 34-53. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions apply for purposes of this article: 
    Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, a chemical that is a combustible liquid, a flammable gas, explosive, flammable, an organic peroxide, an oxidizer, pyrophoric, unstable reactive or water reactive. 
    Person means an individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing into the environment, or the discarding of barrels, containers, and other closed receptacles containing a hazardous material. 
    Technical rescue means any aspect of saving life or property that employs the use of tools and skills that exceed those normally required by the Saline Area Fire Department for firefighting, public works, medical emergencies, or rescues in the city. These disciplines include, but are not limited, to high angle rope rescue, swift water rescue, confined space rescue, trench excavation rescue, and building collapse rescue. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 3, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 753 , § 2, 12-16-13) 
Sec. 34-54. - Responsible parties. 
    The following responsible parties shall be jointly and severally liable for all charges imposed under section 34-55: 
(a)  The owner of the property on which a technical rescue occurs; 
(b)  The owner, tenant, occupant, or party in control of property onto which or from which hazardous materials are released into the environment or ignited in an unauthorized burning; 
(c)  The owner of a vehicle at which a technical rescue occurs; 
(d)  Any person involved in an activity that causes or contributes to an incident requiring a technical rescue or involving a release of hazardous materials; 
(e)  Any individual who files a false report resulting in the dispatch of technical rescue or hazardous materials personnel; 
(g)  Any individual requiring a technical rescue; 
(h)  The employer of any individual requiring a technical rescue, if the individual is acting within the scope of employment at the time when the incident requiring technical rescue first occurs; and 
(i)  The owner of property that is the target of a technical rescue, or anyone who has custody or control over such property at the time when the incident requiring technical rescue of the property first occurs. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 2, 12-16-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 753 , § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2013, renumbered the former § 34-54 as § 34-55 and enacted a new § 34-54 as herein set out. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 34-55. - Charges imposed upon responsible parties. 
    When the Saline Area Fire Department responds to an incident requiring a technical rescue or involving the release of hazardous materials, actual costs incurred by the Saline Area Fire Department and the city shall be imposed upon any person determined to be a responsible party under section 34-54. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  $250.00 per hour, or fraction thereof, for each engine required, in the opinion of the officer in command. For each hour, or fraction thereof, that the pumps are activated, an additional sum of $50.00 per hour shall be charged. 
(b)  $300.00 per hour, or fraction thereof, for each water tanker required, in the opinion of the officer in command, to be utilized in responding to the hazardous materials incident. 
(c)  $100.00 per hour, or fraction thereof, for each additional Saline Area Fire Department vehicle required, in the opinion of the officer in command. 
(d)  All personnel related costs incurred in responding to an incident. Such costs may include, but are not limited to, wages, salaries and fringe benefits, and insurance for full-time and part-time firefighters; overtime pay and related fringe benefit costs for hourly employees; and fire run fees paid to on call firefighters. Such personnel related charges shall commence as soon as the fire department responds to an incident and shall continue until all Saline Area Fire Department personnel have completed all related responsibilities. 
(e)  Other expenses incurred by the Saline Area Fire Department and/or the city in responding to an incident, including, but not limited to, rental or purchase of machinery, equipment, labor, consultants, legal and engineering fees, medical and hospitalization costs, and the replacement costs related to disposable personal protective equipment, extinguishing agents, supplies, water purchased from municipal water systems and meals and refreshments for personnel while responding to the incident. 
(f)  Charges to the Saline Area Fire Department or the city related to an incident and imposed by any local, state, or federal government entities. 
(g)  Costs incurred in accounting for all incident-related expenditures, including billing and collection costs. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 4, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 753 , § 2, 12-16-13) 
Note- See the editor's note to § 34-54. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 753 , § 2, adopted Dec. 16, 2013, renumbered the former § 34-55 as § 34-56 and enacted a new § 34-55 as herein set out. The historical notation has been retained with the amended provisions for reference purposes. 
Sec. 34-56. - Billing procedures and other remedies. 
    Following the conclusion of a technical rescue or hazardous materials incident, the fire chief or his designee shall prepare and deliver an invoice to any responsible party under section 34-54 for payment of the charges imposed by this article. The invoice shall demand full payment within 30 days of receipt of the bill. Any additional expenses that become known to the fire chief following the transmittal of the bill to the responsible party shall be billed in the same manner on a subsequent bill to the responsible party. For any amounts due that remain unpaid after 30 days, the Saline Area Fire Department shall impose a late charge of one percent per month, or fraction thereof. Notwithstanding section 34-58, the Saline Area Fire Department shall only retain an amount covering the costs incurred, and shall reimburse any additional moneys received to the responsible parties in accordance with the amount that each respective party contributed. If the Saline Area Fire Department receives payment from other responsible parties, an individual deemed responsible pursuant to [section] 34-54(g) shall only be responsible for the remaining balance and shall be relieved of any additional responsibility and reimbursed accordingly, up to full reimbursement. The city shall not separately bill the responsible party for the above costs, but will rely on the Saline Area Fire Department to bill for the emergency response services. In accordance with established procedures, the Saline Area Fire Department shall bill the city only for personnel costs incurred and notify the city not to individually bill the responsible party for those services. The Saline Area Fire Department and/or the city may pursue any other remedy, or may institute any appropriate action or proceeding, in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect charges imposed under this article. The recovery of charges imposed under this article does not limit liability of responsible parties under other local ordinances or state or federal law, rule, or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 623, §§ 5, 6, 3-6-00; Ord. No. 753 , § 2, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note to § 34-55. 
Sec. 34-57. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 7, 3-6-00) 
Sec. 34-58. - Accounts receivable disbursement. 
    Upon receipt of payment of invoices by responsible party, the Saline Area Fire Department shall do the following: 
(a)  Issue a check to the city for the personnel costs for the emergency response run which had been billed to and paid for by the city. 
(b)  The remaining monies collected for the emergency response run (excluding those personnel costs referenced in subsection (a) above) shall be a receivable placed in a restricted receipts line item by the Saline Area Fire Department. The Saline Area Fire Department shall not use these monies to reduce its normal operating expenses collected from the respective townships and/or city for the fiscal year budget. The Saline Area Fire Department shall use this restricted receivable line item for nonbudgeted items as authorized by its executive board. 
(Ord. No. 623, § 8, 3-6-00) 
Secs. 34-59-34-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE, AMBULANCE AND INHALATOR FEES 

Sec. 34-71. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Saline Fire, Ambulance and Inhalator Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 662, § 1, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 34-72. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide financial assistance to the city to defray the expense the city incurs for providing fire, ambulance and inhalator services to persons, businesses and entities, within the city, which persons, businesses and entities are not directly or indirectly assessed, or are exempt from, ad valorem taxes in the fire district served by the Saline area fire department, as authorized by MCL 41.806a. For the purpose of this article, all persons, businesses, and entities which own real estate not exempt from ad valorem taxes and located in the fire district served by the Saline area fire department shall be deemed to be directly or indirectly assessed ad valorem taxes for the support of the Saline area fire department. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 2, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 34-73. - Charges. 
    Persons, businesses and entities which are not directly or indirectly assessed, or are exempt from, property taxes in the fire district served by the Saline area fire department shall pay the actual costs, to include cost of collection, incurred by the city to provide fire, ambulance or inhalator services within the city. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 3, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 34-74. - Collection of fees. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the costs incurred by the city for the services herein provided, the treasurer, or his or her designee, shall forthwith mail an invoice for such costs and collection expense to the persons, businesses or entities which benefited from such services. 
(b)  All fees due pursuant to this ordinance shall be due and payable within 30 days from the date of invoice for such service and in default of payment shall be delivered to the city collection agency for collection through proceedings in any court of competent jurisdiction as a matured debt. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 4, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 34-75. - Waiver of fee. 
    The city council may waive the payment of any fee incurred by this article where it is determined that the sum results in an undue hardship on the person, business or entity required to make payment, or, after a showing of due diligence by the clerk, the invoice is determined to be uncollectible. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 5, 12-16-02) 
Sec. 34-76. - Administrative remedy. 
    In the event an aggrieved person disputes the benefit derived or amount of the invoice, he or she may file a claim of appeal with the clerk of the city within 30 days of the date of invoice. The claim shall be in writing, signed by the aggrieved party and state the grounds for disputing the invoice. Upon receipt of the claim, the clerk shall place the matter on the agenda of the city council and mail notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the person requesting the appeal. After hearing and upon a showing of good cause, the city council may modify or discharge the invoice. A person aggrieved by a decision of the city council may file a complaint with a court of competent jurisdiction within 21 days after receipt of an approved copy of the minutes of the city council at which the decision on the appeal was made. 
(Ord. No. 662, § 6, 12-16-02) 
Secs. 34-77-34-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY FOR ALCOHOL RELATED TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS AND ARRESTS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 664, § 1, adopted February 24, 2003, enacted provisions intended for use as article IV, §§ 34-71-34-78. Inasmuch as there are already provisions so designated, and at the discretion of the editor, said provisions have been redesignated as article V, §§ 34-86-34-93. 

Sec. 34-86. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of Saline Emergency Response Cost Recovery Ordinance for Alcohol Related Traffic Accidents and Arrests." 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-87. - Purpose. 
    In order to protect the city from incurring extraordinary expenses from the utilization of city law enforcement, rescue and medical emergency resources in making an emergency response to alcohol related traffic accidents and arrests in the city, the city council authorizes the imposition of charges to recover the reasonable and actual costs incurred by the city in responding to such accidents and offenses. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-88. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services by the city to an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of the drivers were operating the motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or while their ability was visibly impaired due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance, or where they were operating a motor vehicle while under the age of 21 years with "any bodily alcohol content" as defined in MCL 257.625(6). 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating the motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance, or while the driver's ability to operate the vehicle was visibly impaired due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance, or when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while under the age of 21 years with "any bodily alcohol content" as defined in MCL 257.625(6). 
    Expense of emergency response means: 
(1)  The costs incurred by the city in making an emergency response including the costs of providing police, firefighting, rescue and emergency medical services at the scene of the emergency response, as well as the salaries or wages, including overtime, of the personnel responding to the and investigating the incident and the costs of medical and other supplies used. 
(2)  The costs of conducting and analyzing preliminary chemical breath analysis and chemical tests of blood, urine, or breath to determine the amount or presence of alcohol or controlled substances in the blood and costs of processing or analyzing other physical evidence. 
(3)  The costs of arresting and/or detaining such drivers, including police officers salaries or wages, including overtime, supervisory and administrative costs, vehicle and cell decontamination, meals, and repair or replacement of any city property damaged or broken by such drivers. 
(4)  The costs of prosecuting such drivers, including police officers overtime in court for testimony. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-89. - Liability for expenses. 
    Any person who, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor and/or a controlled substance, or while operating a vehicle while visibly impaired due to the consumption of an intoxicating liquor and/or controlled substance, or where they were operating a motor vehicle while under the age of 21 years with "any bodily alcohol content" as defined by MCL 257.625(6), causes an accident resulting in an emergency response, or is arrested, shall be liable for the expenses of the emergency response upon conviction for such offenses. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-90. - Presumption of liability. 
    For purposes of this article, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle under the influence of intoxicating liquor when their blood contains 0.10 percent or more by weight of alcohol; furthermore, it is presumed that a person's ability to operate a motor vehicle was visibly impaired by alcohol when their blood contains at least 0.07 percent but less than 0.10 percent by weight of alcohol. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-91. - Administration and payment of expenses. 
    The city treasurer shall promptly prepare and deliver to a person who is liable for the payment of expenses of an emergency response a detailed invoice by first class mail or personal service. The person who is liable for the payment of the expenses of an emergency response shall make payment in full to the city treasurer within ten days of the date of service of the invoice. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-92. - Failure to pay. 
    A person liable for the expenses of an emergency response who fails to make payment in full to the city treasurer within ten days of service of the invoice shall be responsible for a civil infraction. The city may also commence a civil action against a person who has failed to make payment in full to the city treasurer within ten days of service of the invoice to recover the expenses, statutory interest, court costs and reasonable attorney fees. The city may also employ the services of a collection agency to collect such invoices, plus the cost of collection billed by the collection agency to the city. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Sec. 34-93. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this article is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions. 
(Ord. No. 664, § 1, 2-24-03) 
Chapter 38 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL 

Sec. 38-26. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Saline Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Ordinance." 
(Code 1968, § 151/2-1(a); Ord. No. 260, art. I, 9-10-73; Ord. No. 310, § 1, 11-15-76) 
Sec. 38-27. - Election to rescind ordinance. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of MCL 324.9106(5), as amended by Act No. 504 of Public Acts of 2000, effective January 11, 2001, the city hereby elects to rescind the Saline Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Ordinance making the Washtenaw County soil erosion and sedimentation control program operative within the city. 
(Ord. No. 642, § 1, 3-19-01) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 642, § 1, adopted March 19, 2001, repealed §§ 38-27-38-34 and enacted new provisions as herein set out. Formerly, §§ 38-27-38-34 pertained to definitions, purpose, permit and application procedure, performance guarantees, principles and standards, exceptions and variances, inspection and enforcement, and penalty, respectively, and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 151/2-1(b), 151/2-2-151/2-8; Ord. No. 260, arts. I-VIII, adopted September 10, 1973; Ord. No. 300, § 1, adopted April 5, 1976; Ord. No. 310, §§ 1-3, adopted November 15, 1976. 
Sec. 38-28. - Enforcing agency. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of said Act No. 504 of Public Acts of 2000, the city hereby rescinds its authority as an enforcing agency to enforce the rules promulgated under said acts and hereby transfers responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said rules to the County of Washtenaw. 
(Ord. No. 642, § 1, 3-19-01) 
Note- See editor's note at § 38-27. 
Secs. 38-29-38-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CLEANUP OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 505, adopted Oct. 3, 1994, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. III, §§ 38-101-38-109. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 42. 

Sec. 38-101. - Purpose and preamble. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to ensure that those persons responsible for the leaking, spilling or otherwise allowing certain hazardous substances which may pollute or impair the environment or health to escape containment, are responsible for clean-up and restoration of the affected areas. In the event the responsible person(s) cannot complete such clean-up and restoration, thereby requiring clean-up and disposal by the city chief of police, the responsible parties shall be financially responsible for any and all costs of such clean-up, disposal, containment or abatement. 
(b)  Preamble. Recognizing that the sanitary and safe disposal of hazardous substances is fundamental to individual, public and community health, further recognizing that hazardous substances can pollute and impair the environment, further still recognizing that accidental releases of hazardous substances should be cleaned up by the party responsible for the release, and in so far as possible to prevent the creation of nuisances and conditions menacing the public health, this regulation for the clean-up of the release of hazardous substances is hereby established pursuant to the Michigan Public Health Code. (MCLA 333.1101 et seq), Sections 2433, 2435, 2442, 2444, 2446, 2451, 2455, 2461, 2462, and 2465. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 1, 10-3-94) 
Sec. 38-102. - Definitions. 
    [As used in this article the following words and terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed:] 
    Chief of police refers to City of Saline Chief of Police in charge of the public safety or his/her duly authorized agent in writing. 
    Emergency situation: refers to an incident of release of hazardous substances into the environment which is deemed, by the sole determination of the Saline Chief of Police to require an immediate response by city representatives. 
    Environment: Refers to any land, surface waters, found water, subsurface, strata, air, fish, wildlife, plant life or biota, within the City of Saline. 
    Hazardous substance: is defined as follows: 
(a)  A chemical or other material which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or the environment. 
(b)  "Hazardous substance" as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96510, Stat, 2767. 
(c)  "Hazardous waste" as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of 1979, being Sections 299.501-299.551 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(d)  "Petroleum" as defined in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Act, Act No. 478 of the Public Acts of 1988, being Sections 299.831-299.850 of the Michigan Compiled Law. 
    Person means an individual, sole proprietorship, association, corporation, or other legal entity. 
    Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing of any hazardous or polluting substances into the environment. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 2, 10-3-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 38-103. - Fixed facilities in city. 
    It shall be the responsibility of any person which causes or controls a release of hazardous substances in the City of Saline not resulting from transportation accidents to immediately notify the chief of police of such release and to immediately remove such hazardous substances and to clean up and restore the area of the spillage to its pre-accident condition. Upon learning of an incident, the chief of police shall have the right to immediately inspect the area to determine the extent of the damage, whether the responsible party or parties possess the necessary equipment and personnel to clean up the affected area and whether the incident poses threat of immediate harm to nearby residents, plant or animal life or the environment. If, in the sole discretion of the chief of police, the responsible party or parties are unable to safely and effectively clean up and/or abate the affected area, the chief of police may undertake the clean-up and/or abatement through a private company, and the actual cost of such action shall be the sole responsibility of such party or parties. Moreover, if the chief of police determines that the materials pose an emergency, appropriate local, state, county or federal emergency personnel may be called upon to assist in the removal of the hazardous substances to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. All costs, fees and expenses incurred by the city in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the responsible party or parties. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 3, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 551, § 1, 7-10-95) 
Sec. 38-104. - Transportation accidents. 
    Transporters of hazardous substances which may pollute or impair the environment or health through the City of Saline shall be liable for the full amount and cost of any harm or damages which may result from the release of such hazardous substances. The person(s) responsible for such release of hazardous substances shall be required to immediately notify the chief of police of such release and to remove the hazardous substance and return the affected area to its pre-accident condition. Upon learning of an accident involving the release of hazardous substances, the chief of police in his or her sole discretion may determine the owner(s) or operator(s) of the vehicle involved in the accident are unable to safely and effectively clean up and/or abate the affected area, or that the spill constitutes a health hazard to nearby residents, plant life or animal life. In that event, the chief of police or his or her agents, may undertake the clean-up and or abatement of such spill or contract such a clean-up and or abatement through a private company, and the actual cost of such action shall be the sole responsibility of the responsible party or parties. In the case of an emergency, appropriate local, state, county or federal emergency personnel may be called upon to assist in the removal of the hazardous materials to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public. All cost, fees and expenses incurred by the city in connection with such action shall be assessed as damages against the responsible party or parties. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 4, 10-3-94; Ord. No. 551, § 2, 7-10-95) 
Sec. 38-105. - Remedies and penalties. 
(a)  The chief of police shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation of this regulation. Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this regulation shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding the sum of $200.00 or by imprisonment in jail for not more than 90 days or both. 
(b)  In addition, any person who shall fail to comply with any provision of this regulation shall be liable for monetary civil penalties of not more than $1,000.00 for each violation or day that the violation continues. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy, the chief of police may maintain an action in the name of the City of Saline in a court of competent jurisdiction for any injunction or other appropriate process against any party to restrain or prevent violations of this regulation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the existence of any other remedy listed in this section, the party responsible for an incident requiring clean-up under this regulation shall remain fully liable for the actual costs undertaken by the chief of police in cleaning up the incident. Costs incurred by the chief of police shall include, but are not limited to, actual labor cost of personnel, including workers compensation benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, cost of equipment operation, cost of material obtained directly by the chief of police and cost of any contract labor and materials. If the responsible party or parties fails to reimburse the chief of police as above provided, the chief of police shall have the right to enforce the payment of such clean-up costs, as well as any other remedies listed in this regulation, in any court of competent jurisdiction. The chief of police shall also have the right and power to petition the local governmental units' assessors office to add any and all costs of clean up and restoration to the tax roll of such property, and to levy and collect such costs in the same manner as provided for the levy and collections of real property taxes against said property if it is determined by the chief of police that the property owner was responsible for the incident requiring cleanup on the property. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 5, 10-3-94) 
Sec. 38-106. - Severability. 
    Should any section or provision of this regulation be declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such declarations shall not affect the validity of the regulation as a whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 6, 10-3-94) 
Sec. 38-107. - State of Michigan Environmental Response Act and other applicable state and/or federal law. 
    Whenever possible, this regulation shall be read in harmony with the Michigan Environmental Response Act, MCLA 299.601 and any other state and/or federal law which may apply. If in the Environmental Response Act, or any other applicable state and/or federal law, the provisions of the applicable state and/or federal law shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 7, 10-3-94) 
Sec. 38-108. - Repeal of all previous city regulations or parts of regulations in conflict. 
    All previous city regulations or parts of regulations in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this regulation full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 8, 10-3-94) 
Sec. 38-109. - Approval of regulation and effective date. 
    This article [Ordinance No. 505] shall be published in the manner required by law and shall become effective ten (10) days after the date of publication. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 9, 10-3-94) 
Secs. 38-110-38-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - GROUNDWATER PROTECTION 

Sec. 38-200. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Saline Groundwater Protection Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-201. - Purpose. 
    The city has determined that: 
(1)  The groundwater underlying the city is the sole source of the city's drinking water. 
(2)  Groundwater aquifers are integrally connected with, and flow into, the surface water, lakes, and streams which constitute significant public health, recreational and economic resources of the city. 
(3)  Spills and discharges of petroleum products, sewage and other hazardous substances threaten the quality of the groundwater supplies and other water related resources, posing potential public health and safety hazards and threatening economic losses. 
    Therefore, the city has enacted an ordinance to: 
(4)  Preserve and maintain existing and potential groundwater supplies, aquifers, and groundwater recharge areas of the city, and protect them from adverse development or land use practices. 
(5)  Preserve and protect present and potential sources of drinking water supply for public health and safety. 
(6)  Conserve the natural resources of the city. 
(7)  Protect the financial investment of the city in its drinking water supply and to meet state requirements for wellhead protection. 
(8)  Assure that state regulations which help protect groundwater are implemented consistently when new or expanded development proposals are reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-202. - Definitions. 
    Aquifer: A geologic formation, group of formations or part of formation capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater to wells or springs. 
    Best management practices: Measures, either managerial or structural to prevent or reduce pollution inputs to soil, surface water or groundwater. 
    Development: The carrying out of any construction, reconstruction, alteration of surface of structure or change of land use or intensity of use. 
    Environmental contamination: The release of a hazardous substance, or the potential release of a discarded hazardous substance, in a quantity, which is or may become injurious to the environment, or to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
    Facility: Any building, structure, or installation from which there may be a discharge of pollutants. 
    Hazardous substance: A chemical or other material which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment. The term "hazardous substance" includes, but is not limited to, hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980, Public Law 96-510, 94 Stat. 2767; "hazardous waste" as defined in the Hazardous Waste Management Act, Act No. 64 of the Public Acts of 1979, being sections 299.501 to 299.551 of the Michigan Compiled Laws; "petroleum" as defined in the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Act, Act No. 478 of the Public Acts of 1988, being sections 299.831 to 299.850 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
    Primary containment facility: A tank, pit, container, pipe, or vessel of first containment of a hazardous substance. 
    Secondary containment facility: A second tank, catchment pit, pip, or vessel that limits and contains liquid or chemical leaking or leaching from a primary containment area. Containment systems shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition to prevent the discharge to land, ground waters, or surface waters, of any pollutant which may emanate from said storage container or containers. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-203. - Scope. 
    These provisions shall apply to all business and facilities, including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than 100 kilograms per month (equal to about 25 gallons or 220 pounds), and which require site plan review under the provisions of this article or section 4.42 of Appendix A of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-204. - General provisions. 
(1)  Groundwater protections standards. 
(a)  The project and related improvements shall be designed to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains and groundwater, and to ensure the absence of an impairment, pollution, and/or destruction of water, natural resources, and the public trust therein. 
(b)  Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding, or the potential for environmental contamination, on-site or off-site, and shall not result in loss of the use of property by any third party. 
(c)  General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer system, an on-site holding tank, or a system authorized through a state surface or groundwater discharge permit. If connected to the public sewer system then the volumes and concentrations of waste discharged to the floordrain may require compliance with the city's Industrial Pretreatment Ordinance. 
(d)  Sites at which hazardous substances are stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands. 
(e)  State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without applicable permits and approvals. 
(f)  In determining conformance with the standards of this article, the city shall take into consideration all publications of the River Raisin Watershed Council, and other applicable references. 
(g)  Bulk storage of pesticides shall be in accordance with Regulation No. 640, Commercial Pesticide Bulk Storage, of Act 171 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended, being section 286.569. 
(2)  Aboveground storage and use areas for hazardous substances and polluting material. 
(a)  Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product tight. 
(b)  Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. Products held in containers of ten gallons or less packaged for retail use shall be exempt from this item. 
(c)  Outdoor storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism, including an allowance of the expected accumulation of precipitation. 
(d)  Out buildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns which are utilized as secondary containment shall not have floor drains which outlet to soil, public sewer system, groundwater, or nearby drains or natural water bodies unless a surface or groundwater discharge permit has been obtained pursuant to applicable requirements of Act 245. 
(e)  Areas and facilities for loading and unloading of hazardous substances as well as areas where such materials are handled and stored, shall be designed and constructed to prevent unpermitted discharges to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetland, groundwater, or soils. 
(3)  Underground storage tanks. 
(a)  Existing and new underground storage tanks shall be registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with applicable requirements of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(b)  Installation, operation, maintenance, closure, and removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. Leak detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention and overfill protection requirements shall be met. Records of monthly monitoring or inventory control must be retained and available for review by city officials for five years. 
(4)  Well abandonment. Out of service water wells shall be sealed and abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements of the Well Construction Unit now under the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality; Drinking Water and Radiological Protection Division. 
(5)  Site with contaminated soils and/or groundwater. 
(a)  Site plans shall take into consideration the location and extent of any contaminated soils and/or groundwater on the site, and the need to protect public health and the environment. 
(b)  Development shall not be allowed on contaminated areas of a site unless information from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality is available indicating that cleanup will proceed in a timely fashion. 
(6)  Construction standards. 
(a)  The general contractor, or if none, the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for handling any hazardous substances. For instance, handling hazardous substances in proximity to water bodies or wetlands may be improper. 
(b)  Hazardous substances stored on the construction site during the construction process, shall be stored in a location and manner designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands. Any storage container of over 25 gallons, or 220 pounds containing hazardous substances shall have secondary containment. 
(c)  If the contractor will be storing or handling hazardous substances that require a manufacturer's material safety data sheet, the contractor shall familiarize him/herself with the sheet, and shall be familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any releases of the hazardous substance. 
(d)  Upon completion of construction, all hazardous substances and containment systems no longer used, or not needed in the operation of the facility shall be removed from the construction site by the responsible contractor, and shall be disposed of, recycled, or re-used in a proper manner as prescribed by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(7)  Maintenance. In areas where hazardous substances are handled, structural integrity of the building must be maintained to avoid inadvertent discharge of chemicals to soil and groundwater. Cracks and holes in floors, foundations and walls must be repaired in areas where chemicals are handled or stored. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-205. - Review requirements. 
(1)  Specify location and size of interior and exterior area(s) and structure(s) to be used for on-site storage, use, load/unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous materials. 
(2)  Specify location of all underground and above ground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, hazardous materials storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or wash water, and all similar uses. 
(3)  Specify location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps, and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan. 
(4)  Specify areas on the site that the applicant has reason to believe are contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup, if applicable. 
(5)  Submit "Hazardous Materials Reporting Form for Site Plan Review." 
(6)  Submit "Saline/County Environmental Permits Checklist." 
(7)  Refer to section 4.42 of appendix A of this Code for additional requirements. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-206. - Conditions for approval or denial. 
    The planning commission, upon reviewing a site plan, shall take one of the following actions: 
(1)  Approval. If the site plan meets all the zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record such approval and the chairman shall sign three copies of the site plan filing one in the official site plan file, forwarding one to the building inspector, and returning one to the applicant. 
(2)  Disapproval. If the site plan does not meet zoning ordinance and related development requirements and standards, the planning commission shall record the reasons for denial. The applicant may subsequently refile a corrected site plan under the same procedures followed for the initial submission. 
(3)  Conditional approval. Conditions on approval of the site plan may be imposed meeting the requirements specified in the city Zoning Enabling Act. Conditions must be: 
a.  Designed to protect natural resources, and the health, safety, and welfare and the social and economic well-being of residents, neighbors, and the community as a whole; 
b.  Related to the valid exercise of the police power; 
c.  Necessary to meet the purposes of the zoning ordinance and related to the standards established in the zoning ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration. 
(4)  Table. If the site plan is found to be in violation of requirements, incomplete with respect to necessary information or presenting a unique situation, the planning commission may table the site plan until a public hearing can be scheduled to determine specific improvement requirements the planning commission feels are necessary but the applicant is not in agreement with. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-207. - Exemptions and waivers. 
    The transportation of any hazardous substance shall be exempt from the provisions of this article provided the transporting motor vehicle or rail is in continuous transit, or that it is transporting substances to or from a state licensed hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-208. - Appeals. 
    The city council may grant a special permit if it finds by written decision that the proposed use: 
(1)  Meets the intent of this section as well as its specific criteria; 
(2)  Will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse impact on any aquifer or recharge area in the district; 
(3)  Will not adversely affect an existing or potential domestic or municipal water supply; and is consistent with existing and probable future development of surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-209. - Penalties and costs. 
(1)  Falsifying information. Any persons who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any method required under this ordinance, shall be fined upon conviction not more than $500.00. 
(2)  Violations. Any person or persons who is found to have violated an order of the city or who willfully or negligently fails to comply with any provision of this article and the orders, rules, and regulations and permits issued thereunder, shall be fined upon conviction not more than $500.00. 
    Each day on which a violation shall occur, or continue to occur, shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued thereunder. 
    Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article, shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss, or damage caused by such violation. The city shall bill the person or persons for the costs incurred by the city (caused by the violation). 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Sec. 38-210. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, work, section or article of the ordinance from which this article is derived is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, sections, and chapters shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 1, 1-11-99) 
Secs. 38-211-38-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - MERCURY THERMOMETERS 

Sec. 38-301. - Findings. 
(a)  Mercury is a persistent and toxic pollutant that bioaccumulates in the environment and in the food chain; 
(b)  Combustion of medical, municipal and other solid waste, which contains whole or broken mercury thermometers, is a major source of atmospheric deposition of mercury resulting in mercury contamination of air and water; 
(c)  Mercury from mercury thermometers can also enter the environment, including the watersheds, rivers and lakes in and around the city, directly through vaporization and/or spillage when a thermometer breaks during use, transportation or disposal; 
(d)  The effect of mercury on the central nervous system includes tremors, impaired vision and hearing, paralysis, insomnia, emotional instability, developmental deficits during fetal development, attention deficit, and developmental delays during childhood; 
(e)  Due to the bioaccumulation of mercury in fish, the state department of community health has issued fish consumption advisories for every inland lake in the state, including lakes in the county. The advisories recommend that the general population of adults should eat no more than one meal per week of many types of sport fish from these lakes and women of childbearing age and children under age 15 should not eat more than one meal per month of these fish; 
(f)  Several states and cities around the world have demonstrated that the removal of mercury-containing products, such as mercury thermometers, from the waste stream is an effective way to reduce mercury contamination. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the American Hospital Association and the American Public Health Association are currently implementing programs to eliminate mercury waste; 
(g)  Mercury thermometers are not currently used or dispensed at either the University of Michigan Health System or St. Joseph Mercy Hospital, and both institutions have pledged to eliminate mercury and mercury waste in their medical practices; and 
(h)  There are accurate and safe alternatives to mercury thermometers that are readily available and comparable in costs. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Sec. 38-302. - Definitions. 
    Mercury thermometer means a mercury-containing product that is used to measure human body temperature. 
    Mercury-containing product means a product, device, instrument or equipment into which elemental mercury or mercury compounds are intentionally added during its formulation or manufacture and in which the continued presence of mercury is desired to provide a specific characteristic or to permit a specific function. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Sec. 38-303. - Retail sale prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial establishment to sell or offer for retail sale any mercury thermometer in the city. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Sec. 38-304. - Manufacturing prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture a mercury thermometer in the city. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Sec. 38-305. - Importation or distribution by medical facility prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any medical facility, including a hospital, medical laboratory, or health care provider, to import, purchase, or distribute a mercury thermometer in the city. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Sec. 38-306. - Penalty. 
    A person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 647, § 1, 5-20-01) 
Chapter 42 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; emergency services, ch. 34; law enforcement, ch. 50; planning, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- State fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 42-1. - Fire department-Composition. 
    The fire department shall consist of a fire chief and such other officers and employees as he may determine, with the approval of the city council, and in any emergency the fire chief may secure, without the approval of the council, any additional assistance that may be necessary in the performance of the duties of the department. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 8-1) 
Charter reference- Appointment of fire chief required, § 4.4. 
Sec. 42-2. - Same-Duties. 
    The fire department is charged with guarding the city against the occurrence of fires, with combatting and subduing fires, and with protecting property and persons against damage and accident resulting from fire. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 8-2) 
Sec. 42-3. - Duties of chief. 
    The chief shall be responsible for the fire department, operation of the fire apparatus and for putting the equipment in readiness to answer other calls immediately after each fire. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 8-3) 
Sec. 42-4. - Reports of chief. 
    The fire chief shall submit to the clerk, to be transmitted to the city council at its regular meeting, a report of the activities of his department in the last preceding month, and at the end of the fiscal year shall prepare a report of the activities of his department for the year to be submitted to the council at its first meeting in the succeeding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 6, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 8-4) 
Secs. 42-5-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION 

Sec. 42-31. - Adoption by reference. 
    The International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, including Appendix Chapters A-J inclusive, as promulgated and published by the International Code Council, Inc., is adopted by reference as the Fire Code of the City of Saline, and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth in this article, subject to the modifications provided in this article and subject to such further modifications as the city shall adopt from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 753 , § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 2013, repealed former §§ 42-31-42-36, and enacted new §§ 42-31-42-31 as set out herein. The former sections pertained to code adopted, violations, penalties, fire detection systems required in leased dwelling units, and open burning prohibited, and derived from Code 1968, §§ 8-15-8-17; Ord. No. 335, § 4, adopted Nov. 20, 1978; Ord. No. 384, § 1-9, adopted Jan. 9, 1984; Ord. No. 411, § 4, adopted July 20, 1987; Ord. No. 599, § 1, adopted Aug. 10, 1998; Ord. No. 691, §§ 1-3, adopted April 17, 2006; and Ord. No. 722, § 1, adopted July 20, 2009. 
Sec. 42-32. - Enforcement. 
    The International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, shall be enforced by the fire chief or his or her designated representative. The term "fire code official," as used in the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, shall refer to the individual charged with enforcing the regulations being discussed. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note at § 42-31. 
Sec. 42-33. - Available for public inspection. 
    A complete copy of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, is available for public use, inspection, and purchase at the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note at § 42-31. 
Sec. 42-34. - Definitions. 
    Whenever the words "city," "jurisdiction," or "governmental unit" are used in the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, they shall mean the City of Saline. Whenever the word "state" is used in the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, it shall mean the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note at § 42-31. 
Sec. 42-35. - Amendment to fire code. 
(a)  Amended sections. 
The following sections of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, are revised as follows: 
(1)  Section 101.1 shall read: 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Saline, hereinafter referred to as "this Code." 
(2)  Section 105.6.30 shall be amended so as not to have any exceptions. 
(3)  Section 108.1 shall read: 108.1 Board of Appeals Established. Whenever the fire code official disapproves an application or refuses to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this Code do not apply or that the intent and/or meaning of this Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the fire code official to the fire board of appeals created in Section 108.2 of this Code within 30 days from the date of the decision. 
(4)  Section 108.2 shall read: 108.2 Composition. There shall from time to time be created a fire board of appeals consisting of six members who are qualified by experience and training to interpret this Code. The fire board of appeals shall be appointed by the city council and shall hold office at its pleasure. 
(5)  Section 108.3 shall read: 108.3 Authority. The fire board of appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting an investigation and shall render all decisions and findings in writing to the fire code official with a duplicate copy to the appellant. 
(6)  Section 109.3 shall read: 109.3 Violation Penalties. Persons who violate a provision of this Code or fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and assessed a civil fine in accordance with Section 58-407 of the city code. Notwithstanding any other provision of the city code, each act of violation, and every 10 days in which a prohibited condition continues, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(7)  Section 109.4 is added to read: 109.3.1 Costs of prosecution; equitable enforcement. In addition to a fine, a person determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor under this Code shall be assessed the cost of prosecution of not less than nine dollars ($9.00) but not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to the penalties provided by this section, the district court shall have equitable jurisdiction to enforce any judgment, writ, or order necessary to enforce any provision, the violation of which is a municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor, including, but not limited to, abatement of the violating condition or the granting of any injunctive relief. 
(8)  Section 111.4 shall read: 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall, upon conviction, be punishable in accordance with section 1-8 of the city code. 
(9)  Section 113.2 shall read: 113.2 Schedule of permit fees. A fee for each permit shall be paid if required by a schedule established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(10)  Section 307.1 shall read: 307.1 General. A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or maintained any open burning unless conducted and approved in writing and in accordance with this section. The term open burning shall not include fires of LP or natural gas, charcoal, or wood chips for the purpose of outdoor cooking, provided that such fires are contained in a metal, brick, or other fireproof container designated for cooking. 
(11)  Section 307.2 shall read: 307.2 Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the code official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire or recreational fire. The fire code official shall not issue a permit for the following activities without prior approval from the city council: the open burning of building demolition or excess construction materials, the open burning of refuse from a multiple dwelling, or the open burning of refuse at commercial, governmental or industrial sites. 
(b)  Geographic limits. 
The geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, are revised as follows: 
(1)  Section 3404.2.9.6.1 shall read: As also provided in section 3404.2.4.4 of this Code, there shall be no above-ground storage tanks outside of a building with more than 999 gallons of Class I and II liquids within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, unless such storage is approved by the fire code official in writing. 
(2)  Section 3404.2.4.4 shall read: As also provided in section 3404.2.9.6.1 of this Code, there shall be no above-ground storage tanks outside of a building with more than 999 gallons of Class I and II liquids within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, unless such storage is approved by the fire code official in writing. 
(3)  Section 3506.2 shall read: Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of a building is prohibited within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Section 3804.2 shall read: There shall be no above-ground storage tanks outside of a building with more than 2,000 gallons of liquefied petroleum gas within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, unless such storage is approved by the fire code official in writing. There shall also be no single installation containing two or more such tanks storing more than an aggregate amount of 2,000 gallons of liquefied petroleum gas with 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, unless such storage is approved by the fire code official in writing. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note at § 42-31. 
Sec. 42-36. - Fire protection systems. 
    Fire protection systems shall be installed as required by chapter 9 of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition. The owner of a building shall be responsible for annually replacing the batteries in any fire protection system that requires such batteries. The city clerk shall annually in the first week of September publish in The Saline Reporter, or other newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice setting forth the owner's responsibilities under this section. 
(Ord. No. 753 , § 1, 12-16-13) 
Note- See editor's note at § 42-31. 
Sec. 42-37. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 1, 8-10-98) 
Chapter 46 - HUMAN RELATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 793 , § 2, adopted March 5, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 46, §§ 46-26-46-30, 46-41-46-45, 46-56, 46-66-46-68, and enacted a new Ch. 46 as set out herein. The former Ch. 46 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1986, § 71/2-1-71/2-5, 71/2-11-71/2-15, 71/2-21, 71/2-28-71/2-30; Ord. No. 205, §§ 101-104, 201-205, 301, 401-402, 501-502, adopted Sept. 16, 1968. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

ARTICLE I. - NONDISCRIMINATION 

Sec. 46-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The city intends that no individual be denied the equal protection of the laws; nor shall any individual be denied the enjoyment of his or her civil rights or be discriminated against because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(b)  The prohibitions against discrimination in this article are intended to supplement federal and state civil rights law prohibiting discrimination in the areas of employment, housing accommodations, and public accommodations. 
(c)  Nothing in this article is intended to require or shall be construed to require preferential treatment of any individual or group identified in subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-2. - Definitions and interpretation. 
(a)  As used in this article: 
    Age means chronological age beginning at birth, except as otherwise provided by law. 
    Alcoholic liquor means that term as defined in section 105 of the Michigan liquor control code of 1998, 1998 PA 58, MCL 436.1105 or any statutory provision that replaces it. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer, code enforcement personnel or any other city personnel designated and authorized by the city manager, by any provision of the Saline City Code, or by state law to investigate or issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bona fide business necessity means a policy, practice, or requirement reasonably necessary to the normal operation of the person's business. A bona fide business necessity does not arise (i) due to a mere inconvenience (ii) because of cost of compliance unless compliance with this article would be financially unfeasible, or (iii) because of suspected or actual objection by neighbors, customers, or other persons. 
    Bona fide occupational qualification means an otherwise protected classification which is reasonably necessary to the normal performance of the particular position in a particular business or enterprise. 
    City manager means the individual appointed by the city council as the city manager, acting city manager or interim city manager and that individual's designee(s). 
    Complaint means a verified, written statement alleging a violation of this article that is in a form and contains the information required in this article. 
    Contractor means any person providing goods or services to the city, a city body, a city officer in that officer's official capacity, or a city employee in that employee's official capacity pursuant to a contract other than a contract of employment and includes all subcontractors. A person is not a contractor if the contract with the city (i) has as its principal purpose, making real property available for use by the city or general public or (ii) is an unwritten contract for the city's incidental purchase goods or services that was made without a request for proposals, request for qualifications, or invitation to bid. 
    Controlled substance means that term as defined in section 7104 of the Michigan public health code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7104 or any statutory provision that replaces it. 
    Disability means: 
(a)  One or more of the following: 
(1)  A determinable physical or mental characteristic of an individual, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition of birth, or functional disorder, if the characteristic: 
a.  For purposes of section 42-3, substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of that individual and is unrelated to the individual's ability to perform the duties of a particular job or position or substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of that individual and is unrelated to the individual's qualifications for employment or promotion. 
b.  For purposes of section 42-4, is unrelated to the individual's ability to utilize and benefit from a place of public accommodation or public service. 
c.  For purposes of section 42-4, is unrelated to the individual's ability to utilize and benefit from educational opportunities, programs, and facilities at an educational institution. 
d.  For purposes of section 42-5, substantially limits one or more of that individual's major life activities and is unrelated to the individual's ability to acquire, rent, or maintain property. 
(2)  A history of a determinable physical or mental characteristic described in subparagraph (1). 
(3)  Being regarded as having a determinable physical or mental characteristic described in subparagraph (1). 
(4)  Genetic information about an individual. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (a) of this definition, major life activities include, but are not limited to, caring for oneself, performing manual tasks, seeing, hearing, eating, sleeping, walking, standing, lifting, bending, speaking, breathing, reading, concentrating, thinking, communicating, and working. Major life activities also include the operation of a major bodily function, including, but not limited to, functions of the immune system, normal cell growth, digestive, bowel, bladder, neurological, brain, respiratory, circulatory, endocrine, and reproductive functions. 
(c)  Disability does not include a determinable physical or mental characteristic caused by the current illegal use of a controlled substance by that individual. It also does not include a determinable physical or mental characteristic caused by the current use of alcoholic liquor by that individual, if that physical or mental characteristic negatively impacts that individual's ability to perform the duties of that individual's job. 
    Discriminate (discrimination) means to make a decision, offer to make a decision or refrain from making a decision based in whole or in part on an individual's race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. Discrimination also includes harassment based upon any protected class, including but not limited to sexual harassment. 
    Gender identity/expression means gender-related identity and the appearance, mannerisms, behaviors, clothing, haircut or voice, and which may or may not conform to socially defined masculine or feminine behaviors and characteristics, regardless of sex assigned at birth. 
    Genetic information means information about a gene, gene product, or inherited characteristic of an individual derived from the individual's family history or a genetic test. 
    Genetic test means the analysis of human DNA, RNA, chromosomes, and those proteins and metabolites used to detect heritable or somatic disease-related genotypes or karyotypes for clinical purposes. A genetic test must be generally accepted in the scientific and medical communities as being specifically determinative for the presence, absence, or mutation of a gene or chromosome in order to qualify under this definition. Genetic test does not include a routine physical examination or a routine analysis including, but not limited to, a chemical analysis of body fluids unless conducted specifically to determine the presence, absence, or mutation of a gene or chromosome. 
    Harassment (harass) means unwelcome verbal or physical conduct or communication based on a the victim's race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression under any of the following conditions: 
(a)  Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations, or housing accommodations; 
(b)  Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual's employment, public accommodations or housing accommodations; or 
(c)  The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or housing accommodations, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, or housing accommodations environment. 
    Housing accommodation means any improved or unimproved real property or part thereof, dwelling unit or facility used or intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied as a home, domicile, or residence of one or more individuals. 
    Immediate family means a spouse, parent, child or sibling. 
    Individual means a human being. 
    Labor organization means an organization of any kind, an agency or employee representation committee, group, association, or plan in which employees participate in or are members of, which exists for the purpose, in whole or in part, of dealing with employers concerning collective bargaining, grievances, labor disputes, wages, rates of pay, hours, or other terms or conditions of employment. For purposes of this definition, a labor organization need not be subordinate to or affiliated with a national or international labor organization. 
    Marital status means the state of being married, unmarried, divorced or widowed. 
    National origin means the nation of origin of an individual or that individual's ancestor. 
    Person means any individual, agent, co-partnership, limited partnership, joint apprenticeship committee, labor organization, legal representative, mutual company, receiver, unincorporated organization, corporation, limited liability company, association, club, joint venture, joint stock company, estate, trust, trustee, government, government agency, any other legal entity, and any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
    Place of public accommodation or public accommodation means an educational, governmental, health, day care, entertainment, cultural, recreational, refreshment, transportation, financial institution, accommodation, business or other facility of any kind, whose goods, services, facilities, privileges, advantages or accommodations are extended, offered, sold or otherwise made available to the public. Place of public accommodation includes a private club that is a (i) golf or country club, (ii) boating or yacht club, sports or athletic club, or (iv) dining club except a dining club that is a religious organization. 
    Private club means an establishment that is not open to the public and is not a private club that is a place of public accommodation. A private club is one whose members' association with each other and the club is sufficiently intimate, small and exclusive that it is not open to the public. 
    Real estate broker means a person, whether licensed or not, who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases, exchanges, rents, or leases real property; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate any of those activities; who a person who represents that the person is as engaged in those activities; who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a loan secured or to be secured by a mortgage or other encumbrance upon real property; who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a publication; or a person employed by or acting on behalf of a real estate broker or salesperson. 
    Real estate transaction means the sale, exchange, rental, lease, mortgaging or financing of real property, or an interest therein. 
    Real property means a building, structure, mobile home, real estate, land, mobile home park, trailer park, tenement, leasehold, or an interest in a real estate cooperative or condominium and includes, without limitation any housing accommodation. 
    Religious organization means a religious corporation, association, educational institution or society owned, supported, controlled or managed by a particular religion a purpose of which is the propagation of that particular religion and the inculcation of religious values or the provision of charity; that primarily employs persons who share its religious tenets; and that primarily serves persons who share its religious tenets or, on a charitable basis, the broader community. Religious organization or institution includes, for illustration and not limitation: churches, mosques, synagogues and other houses of worship; and educational institutions affiliated with, controlled, or managed by those houses of worship or with articles of incorporation, bylaws and other documents stating an intention to inculcate its religious tenets in students. 
    Respondent means a person against whom a complaint is filed under this article. 
    Sex or gender includes, but is not limited to, marital status, pregnancy, childbirth, and medical conditions related to pregnancy or childbirth. 
    Sexual harassment means unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and other verbal or physical conduct or communication of a sexual nature under any of the following conditions: 
(a)  Submission to the conduct or communication is made a term or condition either explicitly or implicitly to obtain employment, public accommodations, or housing accommodations. 
(b)  Submission to or rejection of the conduct or communication by an individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting the individual's employment, public accommodations or housing accommodations. 
(c)  The conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of substantially interfering with an individual's employment, public accommodations or housing accommodations, or creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive employment, public accommodations, or housing accommodations environment. 
    Sexual orientation means bisexuality, heterosexuality, or homosexuality. 
    Unfair housing practice means: 
(a)  For an owner, a real estate broker, or any other person to: 
(1)  Refuse to negotiate for a real estate transaction with a person because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(2)  Refuse to engage in a real estate transaction with a person because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(3)  Discriminate against a person in the terms, conditions or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(4)  Refuse to receive from, or to fail to transmit to, a person, a bona fide offer to engage in a real estate transaction because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(5)  Represent to a person that real property is not available for inspection, sale, rental or lease when in fact it is so available, or to fail to bring a property listing to the person's attention, or to refuse to permit that person to inspect real property, under reasonable conditions, because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(6)  Publish or advertise, directly or indirectly, an intent to make a limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(7)  Use a form of application for a real estate transaction for the purpose of making a limitation, specification or discrimination based on race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(8)  Make a record or inquiry in connection with a prospective real estate transaction which indicates the race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression of a person. 
(9)  Offer, solicit, accept, use or retain a listing of real property with the understanding that a person may be discriminated against in a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection therewith with respect to race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(b)  A person to whom application is made for financial assistance in connection with a real estate transaction or for the construction, rehabilitation, repair, maintenance or improvement of real property, or a representative of such a person to: 
(1)  Discriminate against the applicant because of race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(2)  Use a form of application for financial assistance or to make or keep a record of inquiry in connection with applications for financial assistance which indicated, directly or indirectly, the applicant's race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression. 
(c)  A person, for the purpose of inducing a real estate transaction from which the person may benefit financially, to: 
(1)  Initiate, instigate or participate in a series of representations, advertisements or contacts within a block, neighborhood or area designed to promote real estate transactions in the block, neighborhood or area based on the implication, directly or indirectly, that changes have occurred or will or may occur in the composition with respect to race, religion, color, national origin, gender, sex, age, height, weight, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, or gender identity/expression of the owners or occupants in the block, neighborhood or area in which the real property is located. 
(2)  Solicit the sale or listing for sale of real property, by telephone, mail or personally, after the property owner has expressly requested the solicitor or the company the person represents to cease such solicitation. 
(d)  For a person to: 
(1)  Retaliate or discriminate against a person because that person has opposed an unfair housing practice, or because that person has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted or participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing under this article. 
(2)  Coerce a person to engage in an unfair housing practice. 
(3)  Interfere willfully with the performance of a duty or the exercise of a power by the any person investigating or taking action regarding an alleged violation of this article. 
(4)  Obstruct or prevent willfully a person from complying with the provisions of this article or an order issued hereunder. 
(b)  When construing this article, the following shall apply: 
(1)  Except when necessary due to supplementation of state and federal law to address discrimination involving additional classifications not currently addressed by state and federal law, issues this article shall be construed and interpreted consistently with state and federal jurisprudence applicable to state and federal civil rights laws. 
(2)  This article shall be construed and applied in a manner consistent with jurisprudence regarding freedom of speech, freedom of association, and free exercise of religion under the First Amendment to the United States Constitution. 
(3)  If any provision or a part of any provision in this article is subsequently preempted by changes in state or federal law, any provisions and parts of provisions of this article not so preempted shall remain in effect. 
(4)  If any provision or a part of any provision in this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, any provisions and parts of provisions of this article not held to be invalid or unconstitutional shall remain in effect. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-3. - Employment. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article or for a bona fide occupational qualification: 
(a)  An employer, including the city, shall not discriminate in the employment, compensation, work classifications, conditions or terms, promotion or demotion, or termination of employment of any person. 
(b)  A labor organization shall not discriminate in limiting membership, conditions of membership, or termination of membership of any person in any labor union or apprenticeship program. 
(c)  An employment agency shall not discriminate in the procurement or recruitment of any person for possible employment with any employer. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-4. - Public accommodations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article no person shall discriminate in making available full and equal access to all goods, services, activities, privileges, advantages, and accommodations of any place of public accommodation. 
(b)  No person shall prohibit a breast-feeding mother from or segregate a breast-feeding mother within any public accommodation where she and the child would otherwise be authorized to be. This provision shall not be construed to prevent a place of public accommodation from allowing a breast-feeding mother who desires to so do to segregate herself within the place of public accommodation or from providing segregated facilities for breast-feeding mothers who wish to use them. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-5. - Housing accommodations. 
(a)  A person shall not: 
(1)  Discriminate in leasing, selling, or otherwise making available any housing accommodation. 
(2)  Discriminate in the terms, conditions, or privileges of a real estate transaction or in the furnishing of facilities or services in connection with any housing accommodation. 
(3)  Discriminate in providing financing for the purchase, repair, or remodeling of any housing accommodations. 
(4)  Discriminate in making referrals, listings or otherwise providing information regarding housing accommodations. 
(5)  Engage in, participate in, or, with respect to any real property the person owns or has an interest in, allow others to engage in or participate in an unfair housing practice. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to: 
(1)  The rental of a housing accommodation in a building that contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living independently of each other if the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family resides in one of the housing accommodations, or to the rental of a room or rooms in a single family dwelling by a person if the lessor or a member of the lessor's immediate family resides in the dwelling. 
(2)  The rental of a housing accommodation for not more than 12 months by the owner or lessor if it was occupied by him or her and maintained as his or her home for at least three months immediately preceding occupancy by the tenant and is maintained as the owner's or lessor's legal residence. 
(3)  With respect to the age provision and the familial status provision only, the sale, rental, or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state, or local housing programs for senior citizens, or accommodations otherwise intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older. 
(4)  Arrangements for the shared ownership, lease or occupancy of a housing accommodation. 
(5)  The owner of a housing accommodation devoted entirely to the housing of individuals of one gender may restrict the occupancy of that housing accommodation on the basis of gender. 
(c)  Information relative to the marital status of an individual may be obtained when necessary for the preparation of a deed or other instrument of conveyance. 
(d)  This section does not preclude the use by a landlord of reasonable accommodations as required by section 102(2) of the Michigan Handicappers' Civil Rights Act, 1976 PA 220 MCL 37.1102. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-6. - City contracts. 
(a)  A person proposing to do contract with the city shall represent and covenant that the contractor does not discriminate against employees or applicants for employment with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, or a matter directly or indirectly related to employment. 
(b)  All city contracts with contractors shall include an agreement by the contractor that the contractor will not discriminate against employees or applicants for employment with respect to hire, tenure, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment, or a matter directly or indirectly related to employment. 
(c)  All city contracts shall include a provision that if there is a misrepresentation in the representation and covenant required by subsection (a) or a failure to comply with the provision required in subsection (b) the city may, at its option, to do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Terminate the contract in whole or part and/or refuse to make any required periodic payments under the contract. 
(2)  Declare the contractor ineligible for the award of any future city contracts for a specified length of time. 
(3)  Make the contractor liable for all expenses the city incurs to obtain from other sources the materials, goods and services that were to be provided by the contractor under the terminated contract. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-7. - Other practices. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article: 
(a)  A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy or requirement, publish, post, circulate or otherwise broadcast any advertisement, sign, solicitation or notice which discriminates or suggests discrimination in providing employment, housing accommodations, or public accommodations. 
(b)  A person shall not coerce, threaten or retaliate against another for making a complaint or assisting in any investigation regarding a violation or alleged violation of this article. A person shall not require, request, conspire with, coerce or otherwise assist a person to retaliate against a person for making a complaint or assisting in an investigation. 
(c)  A person shall not conspire with, assist, coerce, or request another to discriminate in any manner prohibited by this article. 
(d)  A person shall not adopt, enforce, or employ any policy, practice or requirement which, while facially neutral, has the effect of discriminating in a manner prohibited by this article, except when there is a bona fide business necessity for such a policy, practice or requirement. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-8. - Exceptions. 
    Regardless of any other provision of this article, the following shall not be a violation of this article: 
(a)  For a religious organization to limit its employment of individuals to those who share and practice its religious tenets and to engage in employment practices that are consistent with its religious tenets. 
(b)  A religious organization or institution may restrict the occupancy of any of its housing accommodations or place of public accommodations operated as a part of its religious activities to persons of its denomination or those who conform to the religious tenets of that religious organization or institution. 
(c)  To discriminate based on an individual's age when such discrimination is required by state, federal, or local law. 
(d)  To refuse to enter a contract with an un-emancipated minor. 
(e)  To refuse to admit to a place of public accommodation serving alcoholic beverages an individual under the legal age for purchasing alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  To refuse to admit individuals under 18 years of age to a business providing entertainment or selling literature which the operator of said business deems unsuitable for minors. 
(g)  For an educational institution to limit the use of its facilities to those affiliated with such institution. 
(h)  To provide discounts on products or service to students, minors, and senior citizens or others based on age. 
(i)  For a governmental institution to restrict any of its facilities or to restrict employment opportunities based on duly adopted institutional policies that conform to federal and state laws and regulations. 
(j)  To restrict participation in an instructional program, athletic event or on an athletic team on the basis of age, weight or sex. 
(k)  To restrict membership in a private club that is not a place of public accommodation. 
(l)  To restrict employment opportunities to members of one's family. 
(m)  To offer and limit participation in a health and retirement plan based on the requirements and provisions of the plan, provided the plan's requirements and provisions comply with all applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
(n)  For the city to allow use of its facilities or services by persons (i) who may be affiliated with or otherwise supported by a religious organization or institution which may espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this article or (ii) who are not generally affiliated with or supported by a particular religious organization or institution, but who may espouse policies or practices inconsistent with the general intent of this article. 
(o)  To comply with the terms and conditions of any state or federal grant or loan agreement. 
(p)  To comply with any affirmative action laws, rules or regulations of any level of government. 
(q)  To offer preferential treatment or benefits to any of the classes protected from discrimination under this article to the extent allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-9. - Complaints, investigation and enforcement. 
(a)  A person believing a violation of this article has occurred may file a complaint with the city manager within 180 days of the date the alleged violation occurred. A complaint shall include at least the following: 
(1)  The complainant's name, address, telephone (cell) number, e-mail address and any other contact information. 
(2)  If the complainant is not the victim of the alleged violation, the victim's name, address, telephone (cell) number, e-mail address and any other contact information. 
(3)  To the extent known, the name, address, telephone (cell) number, e-mail address and any other contact information about the person alleged to have committed or participated in the violation of this article. 
(4)  The place(s) at which the alleged violation of this article occurred. 
(5)  To the extent known, the name, address, telephone (cell) number, e-mail address and any other contact information about any persons believed to have witnessed or to have information about the violation of this article. 
(6)  What provisions of this article were violated. 
(7)  Details about the incident(s), violation(s), person involved, and other information that may be needed or helpful in investigating the complaint. 
(b)  If the complaint alleges violations of state or federal laws, rules or regulations that are within the purview of any state or federal agency, the city manager shall transmit and refer the complaint to that state or federal agency. 
(c)  If the complaint does not allege a violation of state or federal laws, rules or regulations or, in the city manager's opinion, referral to a state or federal agency is otherwise inappropriate, the city manager, in consultation with or direction of city personnel and the city attorney, shall: 
(1)  Investigate the complaint to determine whether or not a violation of this article occurred. Any investigation shall include communications with the respondent for an opportunity to provide any information the respondent deems appropriate and, if the respondent desires to do so, to file a written response to the complaint. A respondent shall have a right to a copy of the complaint before responding to the complaint. 
(2)  If the city manager determines a violation of this article did not occur or cannot be reasonably proved, the city manager shall notify the complainant in writing of that determination and that no action will be taken on the complaint. The complainant may pursue any other remedies for violation of this article. 
(3)  If the city manager determines that a violation of this article occurred, the city manager may do one or more of the following: 
a.  Refer the matter for dispute resolution with an organization for conciliation or facilitative mediation services. A complainant or respondent failing to appear for a scheduled conciliation or mediation shall pay any costs resulting from such failure to appear. If a conciliation or mediation agreement is entered into under this section, the parties shall be bound to its terms. A respondent's breach of such a conciliation or mediation agreement is a violation of this article. 
b.  Refer the matter to an authorized city official to issue one or more municipal civil infraction citations and prosecute the matter as municipal civil infraction(s). 
c.  If a violation of section 46-6, occurred: 
1.  Recommend to the city council termination of the contract and, if appropriate, payment of the city's expenses as provided in subsection 46-6(C). 
2.  Recommend to the city council that the contractor be ineligible for future city contracts for a period of time as provided in subsection 46-6(C)(2). 
d.  Implement another remedy provided by this article. 
(4)  The city manager shall at regular periods report to the city council about the numbers and resolutions of any complaints filed under this article. 
(5)  To the extent not prohibited by law, in circumstances not involving dispute resolution under subsection 46-9(C)(3)(a), complaints shall be treated with the same confidentiality as complaints alleging or investigations about violations of other laws and ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Sec. 46-10. - Violations as municipal civil infractions; other remedies. 
(a)  A violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction. Persons responsible for such violations shall pay the costs of investigation and prosecution of the violation plus fines in the following minimum amounts. 
(1)  For a first violation of this article, the minimum fine shall be $250.00. 
(2)  For a second violation of this article, the minimum fine shall be $1,000.00. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation of this article, the minimum fine shall be $2,500.00. 
(b)  A violation of this article shall be a nuisance per se. 
(c)  A plaintiff who successfully brings a civil action for a violation of this article may, in addition to any damages or other remedies resulting from such civil action, recover the plaintiff's costs to investigate, bring, and maintain that civil action through any appeals, including, without limitation, filing fees, discovery costs, fee paid to experts or investigators, and reasonable attorneys' fees. Such costs shall be determined and awarded in the same manner as for recoveries of such costs under 42 USC §1985. 
(d)  If a person violates this article, the city may bar that person from entering into license agreements and other contracts to use city parks and other city facilities for a period of time. This provision shall not preclude any individual from using city parks or facilities on a basis that does not require a license agreement or other contract with the city, from attending any city meetings generally open to the public, from seeking police or other emergency assistance from the city, or from entering city hall or other city facilities to may payments, seek permits or engage in other business with the city. 
(Ord. No. 793 , § 1, 3-5-18) 
Chapter 50 - LAW ENFORCEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; emergency services, ch. 34; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; offenses, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - General duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police is charged with the preservation of peace and order in the city, with the protection of the inhabitants from personal violence and with safeguarding private and public property by unlawful depredation or by fire, and with the care of all equipment belonging to the department. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 5, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 15-1) 
Charter reference- Appointment of chief of police required, § 4.4. 
Sec. 50-2. - Assistance for chief. 
    The chief of police shall secure such assistance as he may require in the performance of his duties with the approval of the council, except in case of emergency when approval by the council shall not be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 5, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 15-2) 
Sec. 50-3. - Reports of chief. 
    The chief of police shall submit to the clerk, to be transmitted to the city council at its regular meeting, a report of his activities in the last preceding month, and at the end of each fiscal year shall prepare a report of the activities of his department for the year to be submitted to the council at its first meeting in the succeeding fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 5, 7-6-31; Code 1968, § 15-3) 
Sec. 50-4. - Disposition of unclaimed personal property. 
    The police department shall be charged with the custody of such unclaimed personal property as may come into its possession, and shall dispose of such personal property, except impounded motor vehicles, as provided in this section: 
(1)  All personal property found by the police department and unclaimed by the owner for a period of 90 days or more may be sold at public sale upon five days' written notice of the time and place of sale, which shall have included therein a description of the property to be sold, which notice shall be published in a newspaper of local circulation, made available for broadcast over a local radio station, and posted in at least three public places, one of which shall be at the city hall; provided perishable produce may be sold within 12 hours if unclaimed; and animals after 48 hours, upon notice to the city clerk of the proposed sale and terms thereof. If the unclaimed property consists of currency which has been surrendered to the police department by the finder thereof, the currency shall be retained by the police department for a period of 90 days from and after the date such currency has been deposited with the police department by the finder thereof, and at the expiration of the 90-day period, if the currency has not been claimed by the rightful owner thereof, such currency shall be delivered and turned over to the finder by the police department. If provision is made by statute or ordinance for the registering or recording of the ownership of unclaimed property, such property shall be held by the police department for a period of six months during which time every reasonable effort shall be made by the department to locate the owner thereof. If the property is not claimed by the owner during the six-month period from and after the property has been deposited with the department, the property shall be sold as provided for in this subsection. If the unclaimed personal property shall not be currency, or of a nature that the same is required by law to be registered, and shall be delivered by the finder thereof to the police department, the property shall be held by the police department for a period of 90 days from and after the date when the same was deposited in the department, and if not claimed by the owner within the 90-day period, the property shall be surrendered and turned over by the police department to the finder thereof. 
(2)  The police department shall keep a written record which shall list all unclaimed personal property, the date taken into possession by the police department and the final disposition thereof, and, if sold, the amount received which shall be certified to by the city treasurer. 
(3)  Each sale shall be under the direction of the city treasurer, and the city clerk shall act as clerk at such sale. 
(4)  All monies derived from such sale, less the necessary expenses incidental thereto, shall be turned over to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund. 
(Code 1968, § 15-4; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 6-21-82) 
Secs. 50-5-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MINIMUM EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 50-31. - Standards for employment. 
    All Saline police officers shall satisfy the minimum standards for law enforcement officers promulgated under state law, in addition to any other standards or hiring criteria adopted by police department policy. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-14; Ord. No. 762 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 50-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 762 , § 2, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed § 50-32, which pertained to standards declared minimum and derived from Ord. No. 198, § 3, adopted June 5, 1967 and Code 1968, § 15-15. 
Sec. 50-33. - Compliance with statutes. 
    Law enforcement officer recruitment and employment practices and standards shall be in compliance with existing Michigan statutes governing this activity. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-16) 
Sec. 50-34. - Citizenship. 
    All law enforcement officers shall be citizens of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-17) 
Sec. 50-35. - Education. 
    All law enforcement officers shall have graduated from high school or equivalent. "Equivalent" is defined as having attained a passing score on the general education development test indicating high school graduation level. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-18) 
Sec. 50-36. - Fingerprinting. 
    All city employees shall be fingerprinted and a search of local, state and national fingerprint files made to disclose any criminal record. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-19) 
Sec. 50-37. - Felons disqualified. 
    The law enforcement officer shall not have been convicted of a felony offense. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-20) 
Sec. 50-38. - Character. 
    The law enforcement officers shall be of good moral character as determined by a favorable report following a comprehensive background investigation covering school and employment records, home environment, personal traits and integrity. Consideration will be given to any and all law violations, including traffic and conservation law convictions as indicating a lack of good character. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-21) 
Sec. 50-39. - Physical, emotional, mental fitness. 
(a)  The applicant for a position as a law enforcement officer shall be of acceptable physical, emotional and mental fitness as established by a licensed physician following an examination to determine if the applicant is free from any physical, emotional or mental condition which might adversely affect his performance of duty as a police officer. 
(b)  The trainee for a position as a law enforcement officer shall possess normal hearing and normal color vision. He shall be free from any impediment of the senses. He must possess normal visual functions and visual acuity in each eye correctable to 20/20. The trainee must be physically sound; well developed physically, with height and weight in relation to each other and to age as indicated by accepted medical standards, and in possession of his extremities. He shall be free from any physical defects, chronic diseases, organic diseases, organic or functional conditions, or mental instabilities which may tend to impair efficient performance of duty or which might endanger the lives of others or himself if he lacks these qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, §§ 15-22, 15-23) 
Sec. 50-40. - Medical history. 
    A declaration of the applicant's medical history shall become a part of the background investigation. The information shall be available to the examining physician. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-24) 
Sec. 50-41. - Interview required. 
    An oral interview shall be held by the hiring authority, or his representative, to determine the applicant's acceptability for a police officer position and to assess appearance, background and ability to communicate. 
(Ord. No. 198, § 1, 6-5-67; Code 1968, § 15-25) 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 50; parks and recreation, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Statutory definitions. 
    Whenever any words and phrases as used in this chapter are not defined, but are defined in the state penal code, any such definition therein shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases used in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-1), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-2. - Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code, whether such person directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission may hereafter be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if such person had directly committed such offense. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-2), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 58-3. - Dangerous, offensive, and misleading solicitation. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings provided in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Accosting means approaching or speaking to a person in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon his person, or upon property in his immediate possession. 
(2)  Solicit means and includes, without limitation, the spoken, written or printed word or such other acts as are conducted in furtherance of the purpose of obtaining donations. For purposes of this section, solicitation does not include the sale of goods or services. 
(3)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another means continuing to solicit from a person after that person has made a negative response, blocking the passage of the individual addressed, or otherwise engaging in conduct which could reasonably be construed as intended to compel or force a person to accede to demands. 
(4)  Misleading conduct means knowingly making a false statement or visual representation or intentionally omitting information from a statement in a way that causes the statement to be misleading. Misleading conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Stating that a donation is needed to meet a specific need, when the person already has sufficient funds to meet that need and does not disclose that fact; 
b.  Stating that a donation is needed to meet a need that does not exist; 
c.  Stating that the person is from out of town and stranded when that is not true; 
d.  Wearing a military uniform or other indication of military service, when the person is neither a present nor former member of the service indicated; 
e.  Wearing or displaying an indication of physical disability when the person does not suffer the disability indicated; 
f.  Use of any makeup or device to simulate any deformity; or 
g.  Stating that the solicitor is homeless, when he or she is not. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c), it shall be a violation of this section for any person to solicit money or other things of value: 
(1)  On private property if the owner, tenant or lawful occupant has asked the person not to solicit on the property or has posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome on the property; 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility; 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine, provided that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(5)  Within any public transportation vehicle, or within 15 feet of any bus stop, taxi stand or rapid transit stop; 
(6)  From any operator of a motor vehicle that is in traffic on a public street; 
(7)  From any person who is waiting in line for entry to any building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility; or 
(8)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit from a building, public or private, including, but not limited to, any residence, business or athletic facility. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (b), the following acts shall not be considered violations of this section: 
(1)  Soliciting assistance with a vehicular emergency from an operator of a motor vehicle in traffic on a public street; 
(2)  Soliciting money or other things of value on private property with the consent or invitation of the property owner; or 
(3)  Soliciting money or other things of value from the occupant of a residential unit, when such solicitation occurs at the front entrance of the residential unit and the occupant has not asked the person not to solicit on the property or posted a sign clearly indicating that solicitations are not welcome. 
(d)  In addition to the actions listed in subsection (b), it shall also be a violation of this section for any person to solicit money or other things of value by: 
(1)  Accosting another; 
(2)  Forcing oneself upon the company of another; or 
(3)  Engaging in misleading conduct. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-3), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
State Law reference- Persons found begging in a public place defined as disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Sec. 58-4. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to look, peer or peep into, or be found loitering around or within view of any window not on his own property, with the intent of looking through such window in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-4), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 58-5. - Occupying or being within a place of illegal occupation or business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant of any place where prostitution, illegal gambling, the illegal sale of use or alcoholic beverages, drugs, or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-5), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(j). 
Sec. 58-6. - Solicitation in public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to solicit employment of legal services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizance in or about any police station, police headquarters building, jail, hospital, court building, or other public building. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-6), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
State Law reference- Such persons deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(k). 
Sec. 58-7. - Roller skating, skateboarding. 
    The use of roller skates and skateboards or other similar devices in the central business district, as defined in this section, and on private commercial property open to the public, after written request from the owner and approval by the traffic engineer, is hereby prohibited, except as part of a scheduled event approved and regulated by the city council. For the purpose of this section, the central business district shall be described as that area which is bounded on the north by the north right-of-way line of McKay Street, on the south by the south right-of-way line of Henry Street, on the east by the east right-of-way line of Harris Street, and on the west by the west right-of-way line of Lewis Street, which area shall be appropriately signed by the traffic engineer to designate those areas in the central business district which the traffic engineer deems hazardous for such activity. The owner of private commercial property open to the public requesting such prohibition shall pay for the cost of appropriate signs which shall be installed under the direction of the traffic engineer. Any person found responsible for violating the provisions of this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction punishable by such fines as the council may by resolution adopt. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-7), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-8. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  The term "controlled substance" shall be defined as provided for in part 71 of the public health code, Act No. 368 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 333.7101 et seq.), as amended. 
(2)  The term "drug paraphernalia" means any equipment, products, and materials, or a combination of equipment, products or materials, which is specifically designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance, including, but not limited to, all of the following: 
a.  An isomerization device specifically designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled substance. 
b.  Testing equipment specifically designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of a controlled substance. 
c.  A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use in weighing or measuring a controlled substance. 
d.  A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, specifically designed for use with a controlled substance. 
e.  A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
f.  An object specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
2.  Water pipes; 
3.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
4.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning materials, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
5.  Miniature straws, cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
6.  Chamber pipes; 
7.  Carburetor pipes; 
8.  Miniature lockets, rings, or vials designed, marketed, or used for the storing of controlled substances. 
g.  A device commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing controlled substances in to the human body, and which consists of at least a razor blade and a mirror. 
h.  A device commonly known as a bullet, that is specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substance to the user. 
i.  A device commonly known as a snorter, that is specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the user's nose. 
j.  A device commonly known as an automotive safe, that is specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and concealing controlled substances. 
k.  A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body. 
l.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
m.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
n.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
o.  Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(3)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia a court or other authority should consider in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by the owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled substances; 
c.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the state law; 
d.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
e.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
f.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of state or local law or of this subdivision; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of state, local law or this division, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia; 
g.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
h.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
i.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
j.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
k.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products; 
l.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
m.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
n.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
(b)  Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(c)  Manufacture, delivery or sale. It is unlawful for any reason to deliver, sell, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with the intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia, knowing that it will be used to plant, convert, produce, process, prepare, test analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of state or local law. 
(d)  Advertising. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, sign, poster, or other publication, any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(e)  Exceptions. This subdivision shall not apply to manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists, and embalmers in the normal legal course of their respective business or profession, nor to persons suffering from diabetes, asthma, or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(f)  Civil forfeiture. Any controlled substance or drug paraphernalia uses, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this subdivision shall be seized and forfeited to the city. 
(Ord. No. 644, §§ 1-6, 10-15-01) 
Secs. 58-9-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 58-31. - Hindering officers and employees. 
    No person shall hinder, resist or oppose any city officer or employee, including police officers and firefighters, in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-31), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of police officer, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 58-32. - Resisting officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any police officer or other law enforcement agent while in the discharge or apparent discharge of their duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder them in the discharge of their duty, including, but not limited to, the commission of oral, or other nonphysical acts, such as lying or otherwise giving false information, that hinder, interrupt, or delay an officer's attempt to keep the peace. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-32), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 645, § 1, 11-5-01) 
State Law reference- Resisting officer in discharge of duty, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 58-33. - Impersonation of officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely assume or pretend to be an employee of the city, an employee of the county, an employee of the state, or an employee of any public utility for the purpose of gaining entry into any home or business located in the city. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-33), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- False personation of officers, MCL 750.215. 
Sec. 58-34. - Obstructing, disobeying firefighters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly and willfully hinder, obstruct or interfere with any firefighter in the performance of his duties, or who shall, while in the vicinity of any fire, willfully disobey and/or disregard any order, rule or regulation of the officer commanding any fire department at such fire. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-34), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-35. - False fire alarm. 
    Any person who shall knowingly and willfully commit any one or more of the following actions shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  Raise a false alarm of fire at any gathering or in any public place. 
(2)  Ring any bell or operate any mechanical apparatus, electrical apparatus or combination thereof, for the purpose of creating a false alarm of fire. 
(3)  Raise a false alarm of fire orally, by telephone or in person. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-35), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.240. 
Secs. 58-36-58-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 58-56. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to attempt or offer, with force and violence, to do a corporal harm to another, or assault and/or batter any other person or persons. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-51), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.81. 
Sec. 58-57. - Harassment. 
    A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he: 
(1)  Follows a person in or about a public place. 
(2)  Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-52), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-58. - Malicious annoyance by writing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly send or deliver, or to make, for the purpose of being delivered or sent; to part with the possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark or other designation with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any person within the city or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-53), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.390. 
Sec. 58-59. - Malicious acts. 
    Any person is guilty of a misdemeanor who maliciously uses any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime, or of an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service. 
(4)  Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-54), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Secs. 58-60-58-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-81-58-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LITTERING 

Sec. 58-91. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Litter includes, without limitation, wood, yard waste, brush, metal, sod, shavings, saw dust, refuse, rubbish, trash, liquids, chips, bricks, ice, dirt, manure, filth, parts of machinery or motor vehicles, furniture, appliances or any other loose or cast-off material or articles of any kind. 
    Person means all natural persons, firms, co-partnerships, corporation, and all associations of natural persons, incorporated or unincorporated, whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or employee. All persons who violate any provision of this division whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, servant, or employee shall be equally liable as principals. 
    Public or private property or water includes but is not limited to, the right-of-way of a street, road or highway, a body of water or watercourse, or the shore or beach thereof, including the ice above the water; a park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties or timberlands. 
    Vehicle means every motor vehicle required to be registered under the provisions of MCL 257.923, as amended, to operate on a public road. 
    Vessel means a vessel required to be registered under state law to operate. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 1, 9-23-91) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-92. - Littering penalty. 
    Littering or otherwise violating this division shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 in addition to the actual cost of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation. This division shall not prevent the city from using other methods or means available to it under state law pertaining to litter problems or violations. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 7, 9-23-91; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-93. - Prohibited generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly, without the consent of the city or the owner of private property in the city, to dump, deposit, place, throw or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter on public or private property or water within the city. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 2, 9-23-91) 
Sec. 58-94. - Leaving injurious substances on streets following removal of wrecked vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person who removes a vehicle, wrecked or damaged in an accident, on a highway, road or street, to fail to remove all glass and other injurious substances or litter dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of the accident. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 3, 9-23-91) 
Sec. 58-95. - Litter thrown from vehicle. 
    The owner and/or driver of a vehicle or vessel is presumed to be responsible for litter which is thrown, dropped, dumped, deposited, placed, or left from the vehicle or vessel on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 5, 9-23-91) 
Sec. 58-96. - Presumption concerning vehicles used in violation. 
    Except as provided for in section 58-97 involving litter from a leased vehicle or leased vessel, in a proceeding for a violation of this division involving litter from a motor vehicle or vessel, proof that the particular vehicle or vessel described in the citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 4, 9-23-91) 
Sec. 58-97. - Leased vehicles used in violation. 
    In a proceeding for a violation of this division involving litter from a leased motor vehicle or leased vessel, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation, complaint or warrant was used in the violation, together with proof that the defendant named in the citation, complaint or warrant was the lessee of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a presumption that the lessee of the vehicle or vessel was the driver of the vehicle or vessel at the time of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 484, § 6, 9-23-91) 
Secs. 58-98-58-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - THEFT 

Sec. 58-111. - Larceny of goods valued up to $100.00. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to steal, or unlawfully take any money, goods, chattels or property of any other person of the value of $100.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-86), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356. 
Sec. 58-112. - Larceny from vacant buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city to steal or unlawfully remove or in any manner damage any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to, connected with or used in the construction of any vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction, or to break into any vacant structure or building with the intention of unlawfully removing, taking therefrom, or in any manner damaging any fixture, attachment or other property belonging to, connected with, or used in the construction of such vacant structure or building, whether built or in the process of construction. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-87), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.359. 
Sec. 58-113. - Larceny from public libraries. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to procure, or take in any way from the public library in the city any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same to his own use. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-88), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.364. 
Sec. 58-114. - Breaking and entering coin box. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously and willfully, by and with the aid and use of any key, instrument, device or explosive, blow or attempt to blow, or force or attempt to force an entrance into any coin box, depository box, newspaper coin box, or other receptacle established and maintained for the convenience of the public, or of any person or persons not making payment for any articles of merchandise or service, or for any person to extract or obtain or attempt to extract or obtain therefrom any such money or thing of value so deposited or contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-89), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.356b. 
Sec. 58-115. - Breaking and entering outside showcases. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to break and enter, or to attempt to break and enter, or enter without breaking at any time any outside showcase or other outside enclosed counter used for the display of goods, wares or merchandise, with intent to steal, or to commit the crime of larceny therein. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-90), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-116. - False weights and measures. 
    Any person who shall offer or expose for sale, sell, or use or retain in his possession, a false weight or measure or weighing or measuring device in the buying or selling of any commodity or thing or for hire or reward; or who shall dispose of any condemned weight, measure or weighing or measuring device contrary to law or remove any tags placed thereon by the sealer of weights and measures; or any person who shall sell or offer or expose for sale less than the quantity he represents, or sell or offer or expose for sale any such commodity in any manner contrary to law, or any person who shall sell or offer for sale or have in his possession for the purpose of selling any device or instrument to be used to, or calculated to, falsify any weight or measure, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-91), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.561. 
Sec. 58-117. - Fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or other valuable thing, or to aid or abet, or in any manner to be concerned therein. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-92), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Frauds and cheats, MCL 750.271 et seq. 
Sec. 58-118. - False statements for welfare aid. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to obtain by means of a willfully false statement or representation or by impersonation, or other fraudulent device: 
(1)  Aid, relief or welfare assistance to which he is not entitled. 
(2)  Aid, relief or welfare assistance greater than that to which he is entitled; or knowingly aids or abets in buying or in any way disposing of the property of a recipient of aid, relief or welfare assistance. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-93), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- False statements to obtain public relief or assistance, MCL 400.60. 
Sec. 58-119. - Bad checks. 
    Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or deliver within the city any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker, or drawer, has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation, or any person who, with the intent to defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver within the city any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing, shall, if the amount payable in the check is $300.00 or less, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-94), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131. 
Sec. 58-120. - Use of stolen, revoked or cancelled credit card. 
    Any person who knowingly and with intent to defraud uses for the purpose of obtaining goods, property or services or anything of value, a credit card which has been stolen or which has been revoked or cancelled by the issuer thereof, as distinguished from expired, and notice of such revocation or cancellation has been received by such person through registered or certified mail or by personal service, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-95), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.1575. 
Sec. 58-121. - Receiving, concealing, stolen, etc., property. 
(a)  A person who buys, receives, possesses, conceals or aids in the concealment of stolen, embezzled, or converted money, goods or property knowing the money, goods or property to be stolen, embezzled or converted is guilty of a misdemeanor, if the value of the stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property is $100.00 or less. 
(b)  A person who is a dealer in or collector of merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer or collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal right to do so or who buys or received stolen, embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-96), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 58-122. - Retail fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain, or attempt to obtain, money or property of a value of $100.00 or less by doing any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-97), 9-28-92) 
Secs. 58-123-58-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 58-136. - Malicious destruction of property generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the real or personal property of another, or the appurtenances thereof, and where the damage done shall be $100.00 or less. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-116), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a. 
Sec. 58-137. - Malicious destruction of public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to maliciously destroy, damage, injure, mar or deface any building, monument, sign or structure or fence, tree, shrub, plant, park or public property of any kind which is owned, controlled or managed by the state, county, city, any school district within the city, or by any other unit or agency of government whose operating budget is raised in whole or in part by public taxation, or to commit any act of vandalism on or in any such property. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-117), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-138. - Tampering with utility appurtenances. 
    It shall be unlawful to tamper with, injure, deface, destroy, or remove any sign, notice, marker, fire alarm box, fire hydrant, topographical survey instrument, water meter, water stop box, or any other personal property erected or placed by the city; or to make unauthorized taps into the water lines or any unauthorized use of fire hydrants. 
    Any person who shall take water from a fire hydrant, or make any other unauthorized use of a fire hydrant, without the written permission of the public works director shall be liable for a civil penalty of $500.00 for each such occurrence in addition to the criminal penalty provided for the violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-118), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 618, § 1, 9-20-99) 
State Law reference- Tampering with property of utility, MCL 750.383a. 
Sec. 58-139. - Tampering with motor vehicle. 
    Any person shall be guilty of a violation of this Code who shall: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority from the owner, maliciously start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle. 
(2)  Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof. 
(3)  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure said machine and cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-119), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.416. 
Secs. 58-140-58-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - TRESPASS 

Sec. 58-151. - Upon lands or premises of another. 
    Any person who shall willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden so to do, or after such lands or premises have been previously posted with a conspicuous notice forbidding any trespass thereon by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant, or any person being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of either, who, without lawful authority neglects or refuses to depart therefrom, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-136), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 58-152. - Breaking and entering, entering without authority. 
(a)  Any person who shall break and enter, or shall enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto, or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  This section shall not apply: 
(1)  To entering without breaking of any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. 
(2)  Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was committed by a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and enter or otherwise enter without breaking provided the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was committed in the lawful performance of their duties as a peace officer or other person authorized by law to break and enter or otherwise enter without breaking. 
(3)  Where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking was committed by someone under the direction of a person exempted from the applicability of this section as noted in subsection (2) above. 
(c)  Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner, lessee or occupant of the structure, place, or area as set out in subsection (a) above, or the agent thereof, or the police department. The police department shall enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-137), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.115. 
Sec. 58-153. - Unauthorized entrance upon private parking area. 
(a)  Any person who enters upon or loiters upon any private parking area, either in a vehicle or on foot, without the express or implied permission of the owner, lessee, occupant or agent, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Before this section shall be effective in any parking area, suitable signs must be first posted which would apprise the ordinarily observant person of the restricted use of the parking area. For the purpose of this section, implied permission shall be deemed granted to any person for the use designated by such signs. Implied permission shall not be deemed granted to any person found upon any private parking area after business hours of the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the parking area. 
(c)  The posting of signs upon a parking area pursuant to this section shall constitute authority by the owner, lessee, occupant or agent of the property for the police department to enforce this section. 
(d)  Complaint for violation of this section may be made by the owner, lessee or occupant of the parking area, or the agent thereof, or the police department, and the police department shall enforce this section. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-138), 9-28-92) 
Secs. 58-154-58-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

Sec. 58-176. - Breach of peace. 
    Any person who shall make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion, or any rout or riot, by which the peace and good order of the city are disturbed, shall be guilty of a breach of the peace, and disorderly conduct. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-156), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 58-177. - Permitting gathering of disorderly persons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous, or disorderly persons in his presence after being ordered by a police officer to stop this behavior. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-157), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-178. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be found jostling or roughly crowding people unnecessarily in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-158), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 58-179. - Fighting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel by intentionally and physically touching another person in a public place. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-159), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-180. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be intoxicated in a public place and to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-160), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 58-181. - Gatherings and meetings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons within the city to willfully or knowingly interrupt or disturb on any day of the week any assembly of people meeting for worship, or to willfully or knowingly interrupt or disturb any other lawful and peaceable assembly by making noise intended to be heard and that is actually heard by those in assembly, during the course of the assembly. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-161), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
State Law reference- Disturbance of religious worship, MCL 750.169, 752.525; disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 58-182. - Remaining in public parks after posted hours. 
    It shall be unlawful to remain in any public park outside its posted operational hours. 
(Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 764 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed the former § 58-182 and enacted a new § 58-182 as set out herein. The former § 58-182 pertained to loitering and derived from Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-162), adopted Sept. 28, 1992. 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 58-183. - Committing riot. 
    It is unlawful and constitutes the crime of riot for five or more persons within the city acting in concert to wrongfully engage in violent conduct and thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious risk of causing public terror or alarm. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-163), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.541. 
Sec. 58-184. - Incitement to riot. 
    It is unlawful and constitutes incitement to riot for a person within the city intending to cause or to aid or abet the institution or maintenance of a riot to do an act or engage in conduct that urges other persons to commit acts of unlawful force or violence, the unlawful burning or destroying of property or the unlawful interference with a police officer, peace officer, firefighter or a member of the state national guard or any unit of the armed services officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-164), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.542. 
Sec. 58-185. - Public urination and defecation. 
    It shall be unlawful to urinate or defecate on or about any property, public or private, outside of an appropriate sanitary facility. This section shall apply to property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, parking lots and public buildings. 
(Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 764 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed the former § 58-185 and enacted a new § 58-185 as set out herein. The former § 58-185 pertained to unlawful assembly and derived from Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-165), adopted Sept. 28, 1992. 
Sec. 58-186. - Possession or concealment of weapons. 
(a)  Authorization. This section is enacted pursuant to the city's general police power, authority granted to cities by Article 7.22 of the Michigan Constitution; the Home Rule Cities Act, MCL 117.1 et. seq., as amended; and Sec. 2.1. General Powers, of the Saline City Charter to make and enforce ordinances and resolutions for the care protection, control and management of buildings owned by and/or controlled by the city located within the city corporate limits. 
(b)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city while at certain buildings belonging to the city. The issue of safety at city public buildings is important not only to the employees of the city but also to all those who have business or personal reasons to visit city buildings. 
(c)  Definitions. When used in this section, the following words, terms and phrases, and their derivations shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Concealment shall mean to intentionally hide, put out of sight, disguise, or do any other act to keep a weapon out of sight and to avoid its being discovered or observed. 
    Possession shall mean carrying or having control over a weapon with knowledge of its presence. 
    Weapon shall include a dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto or knife having a blade over three inches in length, but shall not include pistols or other firearms, ammunition for pistols or other firearms, or components of pistols or other firearms, except as otherwise provided by federal law or a law of this state, the regulation of which pistols or other firearms, ammunition for pistols or other firearms, or components of pistols or other firearms is preempted by state law (MCL § 123.1102) which state law specifically prohibits local government regulation of firearms and ammunition. 
(d)  Possession or concealment of weapon prohibited. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2), possession or concealment of a weapon shall be prohibited in all buildings owned and/or controlled by the city and located in the city including: city hall, police station, fire station, DPW administrative office, recreation center and wastewater treatment plant. 
(2)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any state, federal or local law enforcement officer, city auxiliary police officer and retired police officer may possess or conceal a weapon while at the public buildings owned and/or controlled by the city which are identified in section (d)(1). 
(e)  Signs. The city shall post and maintain signs at all public entrances to the public buildings owned and/or controlled by the City of Saline which are identified in subsection (d)(1) notifying the public that possession or concealment of weapons in those public places is prohibited. The sign shall have lettering that is distinct, contrasting to the background and easily read, letters shall have a minimum height of 3/4-inch and shall be posted in English and such other language(s) as the city clerk shall deem appropriate. 
(f)  Violations and penalties. Any person who possesses or conceals a weapon in public buildings owned and/or controlled by the city which is identified in subsection (d)(1) shall be responsible for a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 and/or 90 days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 663, § 1, 2-24-03; Ord. No. 677, §§ 1, 2, 2-2-04) 
Secs. 58-187-58-205. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-206. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful to expose one's genitals or female breasts in a public place or in an area visible from a public place. A mother's breastfeeding of her baby does not under any circumstances constitute nudity irrespective of whether or not the nipple is covered during or incidental to the feeding. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-181), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 58-207. - Public harassment. 
    It shall be unlawful to make threatening, abusive, insulting, or sex-related comments or gestures to a specific person or persons in a manner that intimidates, offends, or otherwise provokes a reaction of fear, anger, or apprehension in such person or persons, or is intended to cause such reactions. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-182), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 764 , § 1, 3-16-19) 
State Law reference- Such person deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 58-208. - Public nudity. 
(a)  "Public nudity" defined. "Public nudity" as used in this section means knowingly or intentionally displaying in a public place any individual's genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or any female individual's breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola, for payment or promise of payment. 
(b)  "Public place" defined. "Public place" as used in this article means any premises within the city used or controlled in whole or in part for the purpose of displaying an individual's genitals, anus, or female breast for payment or promise of payment, and which is open to the general public as a business, club, or association. 
(c)  Public nudity prohibited. 
(1)  No person, corporation, business, club, or association shall knowingly or intentionally cause, promote, invite, employ, or encourage any person to knowingly or intentionally display in a public place for payment or promise of payment his or her genitals or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or her female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. 
(2)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally display his or her genitals or anus in a public place for payment or promise of payment with less than a fully opaque covering. 
(3)  No female shall knowingly or intentionally display her breast in a public place for payment or promise of payment with less than a fully opaque covering of the nipple and areola. A woman's breast-feeding of a baby does not under any circumstances constitute public nudity within the purview of this article. 
(4)  Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided by this Code. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any premises, building, dwelling, or other structure in which public nudity as defined in this article is offered, promoted, allowed or encouraged shall constitute a public nuisance, and shall be subject to civil abatement proceedings initiated by the city before the circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 1, 9-14-98) 
Secs. 58-209-58-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PROSTITUTION 

Sec. 58-221. - Prostitution generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to commit or offer or agree to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to secure or offer another for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be in or near any place frequented by the public or any public place for the purpose of inducing, enticing or procuring another to commit a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly transport any person to any place for the purpose of committing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to knowingly receive or offer to or agree to receive any person into any place or building for the purpose of performing a lewd act or an act of prostitution or moral perversion or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any place of building for any such purpose. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to direct or offer to direct any person to any place or building for the purpose of committing any lewd act or act of prostitution or moral perversion. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-201), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 58-222. - House of ill fame-Keeping, maintaining. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-202), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.452. 
Sec. 58-223. - Same-Patronizing. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any house of ill fame or assignation or place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to accept the solicitation of or solicit a prostitute for the practice of fornication, prostitution or lewdness. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-203), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution, MCL 750.449; engaging or offering to engage services of female, MCL 750.449a. 
Sec. 58-224. - Same-Leasing premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to lease to another any house, room or other premises, in whole or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set forth in sections 58-222 and 58-223 or to knowingly permit a house, room or other premises to be used or occupied for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-204), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.454. 
Sec. 58-225. - Soliciting, accosting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city, male or female, to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place or in or from any building or vehicle by word, gesture or any other means to commit prostitution or to do any other lewd or immoral act. This section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer while in the performance of his duties as an enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-205), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.448. 
Secs. 58-226-58-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GAMBLING 

Sec. 58-236. - Keeping or occupying building for gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or his agent or employee, within the city, to directly or indirectly keep or occupy, or assist in keeping or occupying any common gambling house, or any building or room therein, or place within the city where gaming is permitted or suffered, or to suffer or permit on any premises owned, occupied or controlled by him, any apparatus used for gaming or gambling, or to use such apparatus for gaming or gambling in any place within the city. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-221), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.302. 
Sec. 58-237. - Gambling and frequenting prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to deal in, play or engage in gaming such as faro, roulette, dice, cards, or other device or game of chance, hazard or skill, either as bookmaker, dealer, keeper, player or otherwise for the purpose of gambling for money or other valuable thing or to knowingly attend or be found frequenting any place where gambling is permitted or allowed or is taking place. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-222), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-238. - Cappers, steerers, loiterers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the work or occupation of a roper, steerer, doorman, or capper so-called for any gambling room, gaming house, or place where gaming is carried on, or for any gambling, game of chance, trick or device, or for any place where gambling or games of chance may be permitted or allowed or are being carried on. It shall be unlawful for persons to knowingly frequent, attend, or be found present in any of such places. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-223), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-239. - Keeping gaming room for hire, gain or reward. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to keep or maintain for hire, gain or reward a gaming room or gambling table or any game of skill or chance, or partly of skill and partly of chance, used for gaming, or to knowingly suffer a gaming room or gaming table, or any such game to be kept, maintained or played on any premises within the city occupied or controlled by him, or for any person to aid, assist or abet in the keeping or maintaining of any such gaming room, gaming table or game within the city. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-224), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.303. 
Sec. 58-240. - Gambling place and equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, or his agent or employee within the city to directly or indirectly keep, maintain, operate or occupy any building or room, or any part thereof, or any place with apparatus, books, or any device for registering bets, or buying or selling pools upon the result of a game, competition, political competition, appointment or election, or any purported event of like character, or to register bets, or buy or sell pools, or to be concerned in buying or selling pools, or to knowingly permit any grounds or premises owned, occupied or controlled by him to be used for any of the purposes aforesaid. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-225), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.304. 
Sec. 58-241. - Policy or pool tickets, etc.; confiscation of articles of gaming. 
    It shall be unlawful, within the city, for any person or persons to be in possession of any policy or pool tickets, slips or checks, memoranda, or any combination thereof, bet slips, numbers slip or slips, or of any article associated and/or connected with commercial gambling. Any and all such articles may be confiscated and destroyed by the police department, or used in evidence in any prosecution for violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-226), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.306. 
Secs. 58-242-58-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MODEL GLUE 

Sec. 58-251. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the term "model glue" means any glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or other adhesive of the type commonly used in the construction of model airplanes, automobiles, boats and other unassembled model kits, containing toluene, acetone, xylene, butyl alcohol, hexane, tricresyl phosphate or other toxic ingredient. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-246), 9-28-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-252. - Minors; sale, possession by. 
    No person under the age of 18 shall possess or buy any model glue and no person shall sell or transfer possession of any model glue to another person under 18 years of age, except: 
(1)  A person may sell or transfer possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age for model building or other lawful use where such juvenile has in his possession and exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian. 
(2)  A person may sell or transfer possession to a person under the age of 18 years, not more than one assembly kit which contains not more than one container of model glue not to exceed one fluid ounce, as a necessary part of model assembly. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-247), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-253. - Parental consent. 
    A person making a sale or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian shall record the name, address, sex and age of the juvenile and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept in a permanent-type register available for inspection by the police department for a period of at least six months. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-248), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-254. - Inhalation of fumes. 
    No person shall inhale, drink, eat or otherwise introduce into his respiratory or circulatory system any compound, liquid, chemical, or any substance known as glue, adhesive cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner changing, distorting the eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance or coordination of such person. For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-249), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-255. - Medical use. 
    The provisions of this division shall not pertain to any person who inhales, drinks, eats or otherwise introduces into his circulatory or respiratory system such material or substance pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, dentist or other person authorized to so direct or prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-250), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-256. - Aiding or abetting violation. 
    No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this division, intentionally possess, buy, sell, transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue. It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate any provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-251), 9-28-92) 
Secs. 58-257-58-275. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-276. - Abandonment of refrigerators, etc., with airtight doors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling, or in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator, trunk or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or lock which may not be released for opening from the inside of the icebox, refrigerator, trunk or other container, without first removing the locks or doors therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-301), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Sec. 58-277. - Throwing stones or missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to throw any stone, brick or any other missile at any motorbus, automobile or other motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-302), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-278. - Fireworks. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    National holiday means the following legal public holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day, January 1. 
(2)  Birthday of Martin Luther King, Jr., the third Monday in January. 
(3)  Washington's birthday, the third Monday in February. 
(4)  Memorial Day, the last Monday in May. 
(5)  Independence Day, July 4. 
(6)  Labor Day, the first Monday in September. 
(7)  Columbus Day, the second Monday in October. 
(8)  Veteran's Day, November 11. 
(9)  Thanksgiving Day, the fourth Thursday in November. 
(10)  Christmas Day, December 25. 
(b)  Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks. Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks. A person may ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday except that a person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks from 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. on the day preceding, the day of, or the day after a national holiday. 
(c)  Possession of consumer fireworks by minor. A minor shall not possess consumer fireworks. 
(d)  Determination of violation; seizure. If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize the consumer fireworks as evidence of the violation. 
(e)  Penalty. 
(1)  A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(2)  Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this section, the city may dispose of or destroy any consumer fireworks retained as evidence in that prosecution. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible for a violation of this section shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying consumer fireworks that were confiscated for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-303), 9-28-92; Ord. No. 743, §§ 3-7, 6-4-12; Ord. No. 748 , § 1, 7-1-13) 
State Law reference- Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, MCL 28.451 et seq.; Fireworks, MCL 750.243a et seq.. 
Sec. 58-279. - Sky lanterns prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall sell, store, possess, ignite, discharge, or use sky lanterns within the city. For the purposes of this section, "sky lantern" means an unmanned, self-contained luminary device that uses a balloon to become airborne and that while airborne has an open flame or other heat source. 
(b)  A violation of this section is a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to $500.00, plus the costs of prosecution. 
(c)  If a police officer determines that a violation of this section has occurred, the officer may seize the sky lantern(s) as evidence of the violation. 
(d)  Following final disposition of a finding of responsibility for violating this section, the city may dispose of or destroy any sky lantern(s) retained as evidence in that prosecution. In addition to any other penalty, a person that is found responsible for a violation of this section shall be required to reimburse the city for the costs of storing, disposing of, or destroying sky lantern(s) that were confiscated for a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 772 , § 1, 8-10-15) 
Secs. 58-280-58-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS.[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 765 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed the former Div. 2., §§ 58-291-58-302, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-326-11-337), adopted Sept. 28, 1992. 

Sec. 58-291. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
    Approved range means a gun or archery range with all applicable licenses, permits, and approvals. 
    BB gun means a smooth bore rifle or handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling by a spring, or by gas or air, BBs not exceeding .177 caliber. 
    Bow means a device for propelling an arrow from a string drawn, held, and released by hand if the force used to hold the string in the drawn position is provided by the archer's muscles. 
    Conceal means to intentionally hide, put out of sight, disguise, or do any other act to keep an object out of sight and to avoid its being discovered or observed. 
    Crossbow means a weapon consisting of a bow, with a draw weight of 100 pounds or more, mounted transversely on a stock or frame and designed to fire an arrow, bolt, or quarrel by the release of a bow string controlled by a mechanical or electric trigger with a working safety. 
    Dangerous stabbing weapon means knife with a blade in excess of four inches, a knife having the appearance of a pocket knife with a blade that can be opened by the flick of a button, a dagger, dirk, stiletto, sword, or similar dangerous weapon used for cutting or piercing. 
    Firearm means a weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by an explosive, or by gas or air. The term "firearm" does not include BB guns. 
    Possess means carrying or having control over an object with knowledge of its presence. 
    Public building means a building owned and/or controlled by the city and located in the city, including, but not limited to, the police station, fire station, department of public works administrative office, recreation center, waste water treatment plant, and city hall. 
    Toy shooting apparatus means a BB gun, slingshot, catapult, or similar toy item designed to shoot projectiles. 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-292. - Discharge of dangerous weapons. 
    No person shall discharge any firearm, bow, or crossbow, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Authorized law enforcement officers are permitted to discharge firearms in the performance of their duties. 
(2)  A person may discharge a firearm, bow, or crossbow for the lawful protection of life or property. 
(3)  A person may discharge a firearm, bow, or crossbow for target practice purposes, in a safe manner upon an approved range. 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-293. - Possession of dangerous stabbing weapons by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under 18 years of age to possess or control, except within his or her own domicile, a dangerous stabbing weapon. However, such person shall not be in violation of this section if: 
(1)  The person is at or in route to or from a place of employment where use of such dangerous stabbing weapon is necessary; 
(2)  The person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult and is at or in route to or from a place of hunting, trapping or fishing and, whenever required, is carrying a valid license for such weapon; or 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-294. - Possession and concealment of knives and similar weapons in public buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful to possess or conceal any dangerous stabbing weapon in a public building. However, this subsection shall not apply to any law enforcement officer carrying a weapon issued or authorized for use on the job by the officer's employer. 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-295. - Toy shooting apparatuses. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge a toy shooting apparatus in a manner likely to result in the damage or destruction of life or property. 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-296. - Penalties, seizure of weapons. 
(a)  A violation of this division shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  City police officers are authorized to seize any weapon involved in a violation of this division. Once a weapon has been seized, the police department shall release the weapon to the violator (or legal guardian of a violator under 18 years of age) upon request, except when there is a pending prosecution for the violation. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as affecting the authority of city police officers with respect to weapons seized for violations of state law. 
(Ord. No. 765 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Secs. 58-297-58-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES ON SCHOOL GROUNDS 

Sec. 58-326. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article the term "school" means any pre-elementary, elementary (grades K-6), secondary (grades 7-12) school, any college or combination thereof; and the term "principal" means any principal of any elementary or secondary school or the chief administrative officer of any elementary or secondary school or college. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-356), 9-28-92) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 58-327. - Admission restricted. 
    No person who is not a regularly enrolled student or parent or guardian thereof or a school official, teacher, or other public or school employee shall enter or trespass upon or loiter in or upon any public, private, or parochial school building or school property in the city for any reason whatever unless such person has received written permission from the principal or other person designated by the principal to be in or upon or to remain in or upon such public, private or parochial school building or school property; provided, however, that such written permission need not be secured by persons engaging in or attending a school or recreation board authorized activity or by persons using school playground or playground equipment after school hours or when school is not in session unless such entry or use shall have been otherwise prohibited by a rule or regulation of the school board, school principal or other person, board or committee with the authority to prohibit such use or entry. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-357), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 58-328. - Disturbing schools. 
    No person shall willfully or maliciously make or assist in making any noise, disturbance or improper diversion by which the peace, quietude or good order of any public, private or parochial school is disturbed. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-358), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 58-329. - Duty of person creating disturbance to leave premises. 
    Any person, whether lawfully or unlawfully in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property who is found to be creating a disturbance in or upon any such school building or property shall leave immediately when so directed by the principal or by any other person designated by the principal. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-359), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 58-330. - Extortion. 
    No person shall by violence, threats of violence or other form of coercion force or attempt to force any public, private or parochial school student or other person to give or to lend any money or other thing of value to any person at any time. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-360), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Extortion, MCL 750.213 et seq. 
Sec. 58-331. - Unauthorized borrowing of money or things of value from students in school or traveling to or from school. 
    No person shall borrow or attempt to borrow any money or thing of value from any student in or upon any public, private or parochial school building or school property in the city or during any time when such student is engaging in, going to or returning from any regularly scheduled session or activity of any such school without first obtaining the written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated by the principal to issue such written approval; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to college students who borrow money or things of value from other college students or adults. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-361), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-332. - Destruction of school property. 
    No person shall damage, destroy or deface any public, private or parochial school building or the grounds, outbuildings, fences, trees or other appurtenances or fixtures belonging thereto. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-362), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 58-333. - Use of tobacco products on school property. 
(1)  Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (4), below, a person shall not use a tobacco product on school property. 
(2)  Violation. A person who violates subsection (1), above, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(3)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(a)  School district means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School Code of 1976, Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 380.1-380.1852; a joint high school district formed under part 3A of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 380.171-380.187; or a consortium or cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
(b)  School property means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
(c)  Tobacco product means a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled, chewed, or placed in a person's mouth. 
(d)  Use of a tobacco product means any of the following: 
1.  The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted smoking device. 
2.  The inhaling or chewing of a tobacco product. 
3.  The placing of a tobacco product within a person's mouth. 
(4)  Exceptions. Subsection (1) does not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air stadium, during either of the following time period: 
(a)  Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(b)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 2, 1-19-98) 
Secs. 58-334-58-355. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-356. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-386), 9-28-92) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 58-357. - Parental neglect. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section: 
    Criminal acts means those acts which violate the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city and shall include traffic violations. 
    Habitual offender means one who commits two or more criminal acts, or including four or more moving traffic violations, within a 12-month period. 
    Minor means any juvenile under the age of 17 residing with the parent as defined in this section. 
    Parent means the mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be found residing. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable parental control which results in the minor committing any criminal act or to allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act or become delinquent in accordance with the probate code as it pertains to juveniles. 
(c)  Notification. 
(1)  Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of any criminal act within the city, the parent of such minor shall be immediately notified by the police department advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor and their responsibility under this article. 
(2)  A record of such notifications shall be kept by the police department. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-387), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-358. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 794 , § 3, adopted Dec. 4, 2017, repealed § 58-358, which pertained to use of alcohol and drugs by minors and derived from Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-388), adopted Sept. 28, 1992. 
Sec. 58-359. - Cigarette and other tobacco products, cigarette vending machines. 
(a)  No person shall sell or deliver, or permit the sale or delivery of, cigarette or other tobacco products to a minor in the city. 
(b)  No person who has the ownership, possession, or control of a cigarette vending machine in the city shall place such vending machine in a location where it can be used by a minor to obtain cigarettes, or other tobacco products, without being at all times observed by the person owning, possessing, or controlling such machine, or the agent of such person. 
(c)  In an action for violation of this section, proof that the defendant demanded and was shown a motor vehicle operators license, or other bona fide documentary evidence that such person was not a minor, before selling or delivering, or permitting the sale and delivery of, cigarettes or other tobacco products to a minor, shall be a defense to an action under this section. 
(d)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-389), 9-28-92) 
Sec. 58-360. - Possession or use of tobacco products in public by minors. 
    A person under 18 years of age shall not possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form, on a public highway, street, alley, park, or other lands used for public purposes, or in a public place of business or amusement. A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each offense. Pursuant to a probation order, the court may require a person who violates this section to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program, if available. A probationer who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this section is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, a person who violates this section is subject to the following: 
(a)  For the first violation, the court may order the person to do one or more of the following: 
1.  Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
2.  Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection. 
(b)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(c)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the person to perform not more than 48 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home, or long-term care facility. 
(Ord. No. 585, § 1, 1-19-98) 
Secs. 58-361-58-370. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 763 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed the former Div. 2., §§ 58-371-58-373, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 500, § 1(11-401-11-403), adopted Sept. 28, 1992. 

Sec. 58-371. - Juvenile curfew. 
    Except as otherwise provided in section 58-372, it shall be unlawful for: 
(1)  A minor under 12 years of age to idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent or guardian as the caretaker for the minor. 
(2)  A minor under 16 years of age to idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent or guardian as the caretaker for the minor. 
(3)  A minor under 17 years of age to idle, congregate, traverse or remain in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or any other person 21 years of age or older who is authorized by a parent or guardian as the caretaker for the minor. 
(4)  A person who is 17 years of age or over to assist, aid, abet or encourage a minor under the age of 17 years to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  A parent, guardian or other person having the legal care or custody of a minor under 17 years of age to knowingly allow, permit or encourage that minor to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 763 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 58-372. - Curfew exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions in section 58-371, it shall not be a violation of this chapter for a minor to be in or upon any public street, highway, alley or other public place if the minor is: 
(1)  On an errand, without any detour or stop, at the direction of the minor's parent, guardian or caretaker. 
(2)  In a vehicle involved in interstate travel. 
(3)  Engaged in lawful employment activity, or going to or from employment, without any detour or stop. 
(4)  On the sidewalk in front of or alongside the minor's or the next door neighbor's residence, if the neighbor has not complained to the police. 
(5)  Engaging in or in route to the following authorized activities: 
a.  A school or a school-sanctioned event or activity. For purposes of this subsection, school means a public or private school, including a home school. 
b.  A sporting event or activity, or extracurricular event or activity, that is not school-sanctioned but that is part of an official sports league or association or an official extracurricular club, or that is paid for as a service offered by a business specializing in those events or activities or training for those events or activities. 
c.  A class or program of vocational instruction offered by a college, community college, nonprofit association, or unit of government or by a business specializing in vocational training. 
d.  An event or activity sponsored by a religious organization. 
e.  Transporting an individual in need of immediate emergency care or personal protection to a health care professional, hospital, police station, domestic violence shelter, or public safety location. 
(Ord. No. 763 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Secs. 58-373-58-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 651, §§ 1-9, adopted March 18, 2002, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence codification as Art. X, §§ 58-401-58-409 is at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 58-401. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
    Act means Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer, city superintendent, city building inspector, city code enforcement officer, or any other city personnel or person authorized by the city manager to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal ordinance violation notices, or perform other enforcement functions under the City of Saline Code of Ordinances. 
    Bureau means the city municipal ordinance violations bureau, as established by this chapter. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation or citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal ordinance violation notice or violation notice means a written notice, other than a citation, prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized under Section 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 1, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 783 , § 1, 5-2-16) 
Sec. 58-402. - Commencement of municipal civil infraction actions. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of: 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or 
(2)  A Municipal ordinance violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the city municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 2, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-403. - Issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court. 
(3)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section 8705 of the Act. 
(4)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as if it were made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I DECLARE UNDER THE PENALTIES OF PERJURY THAT THE STATEMENTS ABOVE ARE TRUE TO THE BEST OF MY INFORMATION, KNOWLEDGE AND BELIEF." 
(5)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(6)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon the investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for such an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(7)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
a.  Except as provided by subsection 58-403(7)b. hereof, an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
b.  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 3, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-404. - Contents of municipal civil infraction citations. 
(1)  A municipal civil infraction citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(2)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
a.  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
b.  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail, by the time specified for appearance, or in person or by representation. 
c.  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
1.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city. 
2.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(3)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
a.  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
b.  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
c.  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
d.  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
e.  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(4)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 4, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-405. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(1)  Establishment. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau, as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act, to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal ordinance violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by these codified ordinances or any ordinance. 
(2)  Location; supervision; rules and regulations; employees. The bureau shall be located at city hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(3)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal ordinance violation notice has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this section shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(4)  Scope of authority. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 5, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-406. - Issuance and service of municipal ordinance violation notices. 
(1)  Contents. Municipal ordinance violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as are provided for municipal civil infraction citations in subsection 58-403(7) hereof. In addition to any other information required by these codified ordinances or any other ordinance, the violation notice shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(2)  Appearances; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal ordinance violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal ordinance violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or by representation. 
(3)  Procedure where admission of responsibility is not made or fine is not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and cost, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the district court, and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 6, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-407. - Civil penalties. 
(1)  A schedule of civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established and shall be known as the city official municipal civil infraction fines and costs schedule. The fines for the violations listed in section 58-408 shall be those specified in "Appendix 1" to this section. Council may, by ordinance, modify or expand the official municipal civil infraction fines and costs schedule, and may cause to be included therein civil fines for municipal civil infractions hereafter created by the city council. Promptly after each such modification, a copy of the entire new official civil infraction fines and costs schedule, as changed by the adoption of the new civil fines and by the revisions to prior fines, shall be prominently posted at the Bureau and made available for public inspection. 
(2)  A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted at the municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(3)  A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided. 
OFFICIAL MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION 
FINES AND COSTS SCHEDULE 
    The civil fines and costs payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau for admissions of responsibility shall be as follows and governed by the following provisions: 
1.  For a first offense ..... $ 25.00 
2.  For a second repeat offense within one year ..... 50.00 
3.  For a third and each subsequent repeat offense within one year ..... 100.00 
4.  All fines shall be due and payable within 14 days after the date on which a municipal ordinance violation notice is served on a violator personally (or by posting and first class mail if land or building is involved). 
5.  After the date on which a municipal ordinance violation is served on a violator personally (or by posting and first class mail if land or building is involved), a separate offense shall be deemed committed each during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided. 
6.  If the fine and costs are not paid to the bureau as above provided within 14 days after a municipal ordinance violation notice is served as above provided, or if the violator denies responsibility for the municipal civil infraction, or if the violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation", a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court shall be issued forthwith. 
7.  Municipal ordinance violation notices and municipal civil infraction notices may be issued by police officers and/or city department heads and/or their designated deputies. 
8.  City personnel authorized to issue municipal ordinance violation notices and/or municipal civil infraction citations shall make reasonable efforts to warn violators and give them a reasonable time to correct their violations before issuing a municipal ordinance violation notice or a municipal civil infraction citation, but failure to give or receive such warning shall not be a defense to the violation. 
9.  A copy of this schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be posted prominently at the bureau and made available for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 7, 3-18-02) 
Sec. 58-408. - Initial ordinance provisions the violation of which shall be deemed to be municipal civil infractions. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by this Code, it is hereby determined that violation of any of the provisions of any of the following sections of this Code shall constitute a municipal civil infraction, and upon an admission of responsibility therefore at the bureau, there shall be imposed upon the responsible party a civil fine and costs in such amounts as may be established by the city council and specified in the official municipal civil infraction fines and costs schedule, and upon a determination of responsibility therefore following any informal or formal hearing as provided in this chapter, there shall be imposed upon the responsible party a civil fine and costs in such amounts as may be established by the district court: 
Chapter 14. Animals Secs. 14-1 thru 14-5 (In general) Sec. 14-31 thru 14-45 (Dogs) Chapter 18. Buildings and Building Regulations Sec. 18-1 thru 18-15 (In general) Sec. 18-36 (Property numbering system) Sec. 18-37 (MI building code) Sec. 18-40 (Security lighting) Sec. 18-41 (Security devices on exterior windows and doors) Sec. 18-71 (MI electrical code) Sec. 18-96 (MI plumbing code) Sec. 18-136 (MI mechanical code) Chapter 22. Businesses Sec. 22-61 thru 22-89 (Massage parlors) Chapter 42. Fire Prevention Sec. 42-31 thru 42-37 (Fire prevention) Chapter 58. Offenses Sec. 58-1 thru 58-7 (In general) Sec. 58-91 thru 58-97 (Littering) Sec. 58-297 (Hunting within city) Sec. 58-302 (Air rifles; pistols; slingshots) Sec. 58-333 (Tobacco on school property) Sec. 58-360 (Tobacco in public by minors) Chapter 70. Solid Waste Sec. 70-1 thru 70-9 Chapter 74. Streets, Sidewalks and Public Improvements Sec. 74-236 thru 74-241 (Snow and ice removal) Sec. 74-251 thru 74-265 (Newsracks) Chapter 86. Traffic and Vehicles Sec. 86-29 (8.25) (Parking on lawn extension) Chapter 90. Trees and Vegetation Sec. 90-1 thru 90-22 (In general) Sec. 90-71 thru 90-74 (Noxious weeds) Appendix A, Zoning Sec. 5.08 (Home occupation) Sec. 6.03(2) (Group day care home) Sec. 5.04(3) (Portable tent structures) Sec. 5.14 (Yard use) Sec. 7.04 (Clear vision requirements) Sec. 5.6 (Storage, dumping of waste) Sec. 13.02(7) (Motor vehicle storage) Sec. 13.02 thru 13.09 (Offstreet parking) Sec. 6.03(1) (Child care center) Sec. 12.01 thru 12.17 (Signs) Sec. 5.13 (Pet ownership) Sec. 4.04(14) (Outdoor storage)  
(2)  Nothing contained in this section shall in any way prohibit or restrict the city council from creating, by ordinance, new or additional municipal civil infractions, or from converting, by ordinance, existing misdemeanors to municipal civil infractions. This subsection is supplemented and hereby deemed to include by conversion from ordinance existing misdemeanors to new civil infractions for any provisions of the city zoning ordinance which has been decriminalized pursuant to any amendment to the zoning ordinance. All former misdemeanors as set forth under the zoning ordinance which have been decriminalized are now subject to the provisions of subsection (1) above. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 8, 3-18-02; Ord. No. 673, § 1, 11-17-03) 
Sec. 58-409. - General code penalty; complicity. 
(1)  Application of section. Unless a violation of these codified ordinances or any ordinance of the city is specifically designated in these codified ordinances or such ordinance as a municipal civil infraction, this section shall apply. 
(2)  General penalty. Whenever, in these codified ordinances, in any technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, any rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of any provision of these codified ordinances, or under the authority of any technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or under authority of state law, an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise provided, whosoever violates or fails to comply with any such provision shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided. 
(3)  Surcharges; equitable remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided for in this section shall be in addition to any surcharge levied for a violation of or noncompliance with a provision of these codified ordinances, a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either, or under authority of state law, and shall be in addition to any equitable remedy provided by a provision of these codified ordinances, a provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in these codified ordinances, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of either, or provided by state law, or a rule, regulation or order promulgated or made under authority of state law, including the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(4)  Complicity. Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under these codified ordinances, whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted and tried and, on conviction, shall be punished as if he or she had directly committed such offense. 
(Ord. No. 651, § 9, 3-18-02) 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; trees and vegetation, ch. 90; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 659, § 1, adopted July 1, 2002, amended art. II, §§ 62-26-62-37 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. II pertained to the parks and beautification commission and derived from the Code of 1968, §§ 12-1-12-12, and Ord. No. 318, § 2, adopted May 17, 1977. 

Sec. 62-26. - Created, jurisdiction; qualifications of members. 
(a)  Pursuant to the power and authority vested in it by the charter of the city and statutes of the state in such case made and provided, the city hereby creates a parks commission. The commission shall be composed of nine members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council and shall include one member of the city council to be appointed annually with full voting rights. 
(b)  The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall also appoint one member of the city staff and recording secretary to attend commission meetings as a liaison without voting rights, and shall appoint a recognized tree, shrub and plant expert as a non-paid, nonvoting advisor to the commission to be designated as city forester. 
(c)  Of the remaining members first appointed, four shall be appointed to serve a term of one year, and four for two years, and thereafter each member shall be appointed for a two-year term. Each member shall serve without pay and shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and qualified. The commission shall designate from its members a chairman and vice-chairman. The city council may remove from office any member for cause. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-27. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the parks commission shall be filled in like manner as original appointments. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-28. - Bylaws, rules. 
    The parks commission shall make and adopt such bylaws, rules and regulations for its own guidance as it may deem expedient and not inconsistent with this article and other laws made and provided. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-29. - General powers. 
    The parks commission shall have the authority and power to advise city staff regarding the operation of a system of public parks and playground in the city, including the planning, construction and maintenance of such public parks and playgrounds. The commission shall closely coordinate its activities with the community school program in order to ensure maximum benefits to the public. The commission shall have the power to conduct activities and incur the necessary expense for the supervision and caretaking incident thereto on grounds and properties owned, leased or controlled by the city or its departments, or owned, leased or controlled by school boards, or on other properties, with the consent of the owners or authorities who control the property. The parks commission shall also be charged with the following duties: 
(1)  It shall act as an advisory body to the city council and park staff with the duty to support, study, conceive, formulate, develop plans and research funding for the acquisition and development of parks, waterways, greenways, walkways, natural areas, playgrounds and other recreational areas; to promote, encourage and recommend the placing, planting, maintenance and preservation of trees, shrubs, woody and herbaceous plants in the city; to sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out activities within the city park system and to otherwise promote public interest in the general improvement of the city parks, greenways, waterways, walkways, playground, natural areas, and other outdoor recreational areas. 
(2)  It shall have the authority to request that the city manager direct the department of public works to perform such projects as do not exceed in cost the sums appropriated by the city council for such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-30. - Cooperation by other city departments. 
    The parks commission may have the power to call upon any service facilities of other departments of the city for the assistance in performing its duties and it shall be the duty of such other departments to comply with the proper requests of the commission. It shall be the duty of the department head to determine that such a request is proper or improper. Any question of what shall constitute a proper request for assistance shall be decided by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-31. - Reports; budgets and appropriations. 
    The parks commission shall render annually a full report to the mayor and council covering its operation for the year closing, together with a detailed account of its recommendations and estimated funds required for its work for the ensuing year. The city council shall thereupon consider each budget and shall approve, or disapprove and change, the budget in whatever manner the city council decides will best serve the needs of the city. The commission shall not spend any funds allocated to it pursuant to the council-approved budget for any purposes other than those set forth in the council-approved budget without first obtaining the prior approval of the city council by resolution duly adopted. The funds allocated to the commission pursuant to the council-approved budget shall be deposited in a parks commission account along with all other funds available to the commission in conducting its program. All fees and charges collected shall be deposited in this same account. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-32. - Acceptance of gifts, grants. 
    The parks commission is empowered and authorized to receive gifts, bequests or endowments of money or property as donations or grants from persons, firms or corporations including school districts, township, county, state or federal governmental agencies and to administer these funds for public recreation purposes for the benefit of the people of the city as contemplated by such donation or bequest, provided that any donation or grant, bequest, gift or endowment given for a specific purpose shall be used only for such specific purpose. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-33. - Liabilities in excess of available funds. 
    No debt or liability of any kind shall be created by the parks commission on its account in excess of the annual budget and money in the parks commission fund unless specially authorized by a majority of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-34. - Contracts authorized. 
    The parks commission is further empowered and authorized to enter into agreements with any other political subdivisions or groups for joint planning, exchanging use of facilities, services and other arrangements of mutual advantage in the conducting of a total recreation program for the Saline area. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-35. - Approval of contracts. 
    All contracts to carry out the objects and purposes of the parks commission as provided for in section 62-34 must be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-36. - Regulations governing facilities. 
    The parks commission may make all needful rules and regulations for the management, maintenance and care of its facilities, and regulate their use, subject to prior approval of the city council, by resolution duly adopted. The city council may provide ordinances for the observation of the same; and may also provide for the observation and enforcement of any other rules duly made by the commission, under any provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Sec. 62-37. - Assistance by engineer, superintendent, city clerk, city attorney. 
    The city engineer, superintendent and city clerk shall perform such services as may be required of them by the parks commission, subject to the approval and coordination by the city manager of the city. The city attorney shall be the legal adviser of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 659, § 1, 7-1-02) 
Secs. 62-38-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RECREATION DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 62-61. - Established; jurisdiction. 
    There is hereby established in and for the city a recreation department which shall have jurisdiction over all organized recreational activities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 1, 4-15-91) 
Sec. 62-62. - Director, staff and employees. 
    The recreation department shall be operated by a recreation director to be chosen by the city administrator, with the approval of the city council, and such staff and employees as the city administrator shall deem necessary and appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 2, 4-15-91) 
Sec. 62-63. - Duties, responsibilities of director. 
    The recreation director shall be responsible for all of the duties of a department head and shall report to and act under the supervision of the city administrator. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 3, 4-15-91) 
Sec. 62-64. - Establishment of rules, regulations. 
    The recreation department shall establish rules and regulations pertaining to the use of all real and personal property under its jurisdiction which rules and regulations, after approval by the city council, shall be enforced as provided for in section 2-176 of the city code. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 4, 4-15-91) 
Sec. 62-65. - Coordination of activities with schools, parks, etc. 
    The recreation department shall closely coordinate its activities with all Saline area schools recreation programs and with the parks and beautification commission in order to ensure maximum benefits to the public. 
(Ord. No. 478, § 5, 4-15-91) 
Chapter 66 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 734, adopted June 20, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 66, §§ 66-1-66-126, and enacted a new Ch. 66 as set out herein. The former Ch. 66 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 153, §§ 1-9, 11-13, adopted June 19, 1961; Code 1968, §§ 14-1-14-66; and Ord. No. 330, adopted June 6, 1978. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; fire prevention and protection, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 70; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq.; municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 66-26. - Scope, purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the city council under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101, et seq., to establish a planning commission with the powers, duties and limitations provided by those Acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this ordinance and any future amendments to this chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide that the Saline City Council shall hereby confirm the establishment under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., of the city commission formerly established under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31, et seq. to establish the appointments, terms, and membership of the planning commission; to identify the officers and the minimum number of meetings per year of the planning commission; and to prescribe the authority, powers and duties of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-27. - Created; composition. 
    There is hereby created a city planning commission consisting of the mayor, the chief administrative official or a person designated by the chief administrative official, one member of the council to be selected by its members ex officio and six persons who shall represent important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the local unit of government, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the local unit of government, such as agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the local unit of government to the extent practicable. 
    Members of a planning commission shall be qualified electors of the local unit of government, except that one planning commission member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the City of Saline, and who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval by a majority vote of the council. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-28. - Compensation of members. 
    All members of the planning commission shall serve as such without compensation. 
Sec. 66-29. - Members holding other city positions. 
    The appointed members of the planning commission shall hold no other municipal office, except that one of such appointive members may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-30. - Terms of members. 
    The terms of ex officio members of the planning commission shall correspond to their respective official tenures, except that the term of the administrative official shall terminate with the term of the mayor. The term of each appointed member, where six are appointed, shall be three years or until his successor takes office except that the respective terms of two of the members first appointed shall be for one year and two for two years. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-31. - Removal of members. 
    The city council may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. The member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws or by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-32. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the planning commission occurring other than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor in the case of members selected or appointed by the mayor, subject to approval by a majority vote of the council, and by the council in the case of the council's member. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-33. - Chairman, other officers. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chairman from amongst the appointed members and create and fill such other offices as it may determine. The term of the chairman shall be one year, with eligibility for reelection. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-34. - Meetings. 
    The planning commission shall hold not less than four regular meetings each year, and by resolution shall determine the time and place of the meetings. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Article VI of the planning commission bylaws. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-35. - Rules for transaction of business; records. 
    The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of business and shall keep a record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations, which record shall be a public record. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-36. - Appointment of employees. 
    The planning commission may appoint such employees as it may deem necessary for its work, whose appointment, promotion, demotion and removal shall be subject to the same provisions of law as govern other corresponding civil employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-37. - Contracts with consultants authorized. 
    The planning commission may contract with city planners, engineers, architects and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-38. - Expenditures. 
    The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the council, which shall provide the funds, equipment and accommodations necessary for the commission's work. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-39. - Educational activities. 
    The planning commission shall have the power to promote public interest in and understanding of the master plan and to that end may publish and distribute copies of the plan or of any report and may employ such other means of publicity and education as it may determine. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-40. - Authority to attend conferences, hearings, etc. 
    Members of the planning commission, when duly authorized by the commission, may attend city planning conferences or meetings of city planning institutes, or hearings upon pending city planning legislation, and the commission may, by resolution spread upon its minutes, pay the reasonable traveling expenses incident to such attendance. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-41. - Duty to consult with others. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning commission to consult and advise with public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional, and other organizations, and with citizens with relation to protecting or carrying out the plan. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-42. - Public officials to furnish requested information. 
    All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-43. - Right of entry. 
    The planning commission, its members, officers and employees, in the performance of their functions, may enter upon any land and make examinations and surveys and place and maintain the necessary monuments and markers thereon. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-44. - Conflict of interest. 
    Before casting a vote on a matter on which a planning commission member may reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall disclose the potential conflict of interest to the planning commission. Failure of a member to disclose a potential conflict of interest as required by this chapter constitutes malfeasance in office. 
    For the purposes of this section, conflict of interest is defined as, and a planning commission member shall declare a conflict of interest and abstain from participating in planning commission deliberations and voting on a request, when: 
(1)  An immediate family member is involved in any request for which the planning commission is asked to make a decision. "Immediate family member" is defined as an individual's father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, and spouse and a relative of any degree residing in the same household as that individual. 
(2)  The planning commission member has a business or financial interest in the property involved in the request or has a business or financial interest in the applicant's company, agency or association; 
(3)  The planning commission member owns or has a financial interest in neighboring property; 
(4)  There is a reasonable appearance of a conflict of interest, as determined by a majority vote of the remaining members of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-45. - General powers. 
    In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to fulfill its functions, promote municipal planning, or carry out the purposes of Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1931 (MCL 125.31 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-46. - Annual report. 
    The planning commission shall make an annual written report to the city council concerning its operations and the status of the planning activities, including recommendations regarding actions by the city council related to planning and development. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Secs. 66-47-66-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MASTER PLAN 

Sec. 66-66. - Required. 
    Under the authority of the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801, et seq., and other applicable planning statutes, the planning commission shall make a master plan as a guide for development within the city's planning jurisdiction. 
    It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make and adopt a master plan for the physical development of the city, including any areas outside of its boundaries which, in the commission's judgment, bear relation to the planning of the city. 
    Final authority to approve a master plan or any amendments thereto shall rest with the planning commission unless the city council passes a resolution asserting the right to approve or reject the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-67. - Purpose. 
    The master plan shall be made with the general purpose of guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted and harmonious development of the city and its environs which will, in accordance with present and future needs, best promote health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity and general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development; including, among other things, adequate provision for traffic, the promotion of safety from fire and other dangers, adequate provision for light and air, the promotion of the healthful and convenient distribution of population, the promotion of good civic design and arrangement, wise and efficient expenditure of public funds, and the adequate provision of public utilities and other public requirements. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-68. - Contents. 
    The master plan, with accompanying maps, plats, charts and descriptive matter shall show the planning commission's recommendations for the development of territory, including, among other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, viaducts, subways, bridges, waterways, waterfronts, boulevards, parkways, playgrounds and open spaces, the general location of public buildings and other public property, and the general location and extent of public utilities and terminals, whether publicly or privately owned or operated, for water, light, sanitation, transportation, communication, power, and other purposes; also the removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, vacating, abandonment, change of use or extension of any of the foregoing ways, grounds, open spaces, buildings, property, utilities or terminals; the general location, character, layout and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; and the general character, extent and layout of the replanning and redevelopment of blighted districts and slum areas; as well as a zoning plan for the control of the height, area, bulk, location and use of buildings and premises. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-69. - Studies prerequisite to preparation. 
    In the preparation of the master plan the planning commission shall make careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of present conditions and future growth of the city with due regard to its relation to the neighboring territory. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-70. - Procedure for adoption. 
    The city master plan shall be adopted pursuant to the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, PA 33 of 2008. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-71. - Adoption of parts of plan. 
    As the work of making the whole master plan progresses, the planning commission may from time to time adopt and publish a part or parts thereof, any such part to cover one or more major sections or divisions of the city or one or more of the aforesaid or other functional matters to be included in the plan. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-72. - Amendments. 
    The planning commission may from time to time amend, extend or add to the master plan. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Secs. 66-73-66-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS 

Sec. 66-96. - Submission, approval required. 
    Whenever the planning commission shall have adopted the master plan of the city or of one or more major sections or districts thereof no street, square, park or other public way, ground or open space, or public building or structure shall be constructed or authorized in the city or in such planned section and district until the location, character and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and approved by the commission; provided, that in case of disapproval the commission shall communicate its reasons to the council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. If the public way, ground, space, building, structure or utility is one the authorization or financing of which does not under the law or charter provisions governing same, fall within the province of the council, submission to the planning commission shall be by the board, commission or body having such jurisdiction, and the planning commission's disapproval may be overruled by the board, commission or body by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its membership. The failure of the commission to act within 60 days from and after the date of official submission to the commission shall be deemed approval. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-97. - Capital improvement program. 
    For the purpose of furthering the desirable future development of the city under the master plan, the city planning commission, after the commission has adopted a master plan, shall prepare coordinated and comprehensive programs of public structures and improvements. The commission shall annually prepare such a program for the ensuing six years, which program shall show those public structures and improvements, in the general order of their priority, which in the commission's judgment will be needed or desirable and can be undertaken within the six-year period. The above comprehensive coordinated programs shall be based upon the requirements of the community for all types of public improvements, and, to that end, each agency or department of the city concerned with such improvements shall upon request furnish the commission with lists, plans and estimates of time and cost of public structures and improvements within the purview of such department. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-98. - Commission to recommend programs. 
    The planning commission shall, from time to time, recommend to the appropriate public officials programs for public structures and improvements and for the financing thereof. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Sec. 66-99. - Referral, report prerequisite to changing or opening streets, acquiring open space. 
    Whenever the council shall have ordered the opening, widening or extension of any street, avenue or boulevard, or whenever the council shall have ordered that proceedings be instituted for the acquisition or enlargement of any park, playground, playfield or other public open space, such resolution shall not be rescinded until after the matter has been referred back to the planning commission for a report and until after a public hearing shall have been held. The council shall have power to overrule the recommendation of the planning commission by a vote of not less than two-thirds of its entire membership. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Secs. 66-100-66-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUBDIVISIONS 

Sec. 66-121. - Subdivision and land division recommendations. 
    The planning commission may recommend to the city council provisions of an ordinance or rules governing the subdivision of land. Before recommending such an ordinance or rule, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed ordinance or rule. The planning commission shall give notice of the time and place of the public hearing not less than 15 days before the hearing by publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the township. 
    The planning commission shall review and make recommendation on a proposed plat before action thereon by the city council under the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, MCL 560.101, et seq. Before making its recommendation, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed plat. A plat submitted to the planning commission shall contain the name and address of the proprietor or other person to whom notice of a hearing shall be sent. Not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing, notice of the date, time and place of the hearing shall be sent to that person at that address by mail and shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the township. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the proposed platted land. 
(Ord. No. 734, 6-20-11) 
Chapter 70 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 66; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate disposal, MCL 123.241, 123.361 et seq.; solid waste management act, MCL 299.401 et seq. 

Sec. 70-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial refuse means the miscellaneous waste material resulting from the operation of mercantile enterprises, and includes garbage and rubbish. 
    Construction materials means waste from building, street or other construction, alteration or repair, including dirt from excavation. 
    Contractor means the individual, partnership or corporation who or which agrees for a stipulated sum to perform the duties herein. 
    Department means the department of public works of the city. 
    Domestic refuse means the waste materials resulting from the usual routine of housekeeping, and includes garbage and rubbish. 
    Garbage means all waste animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter incident to the use, preparation and storage of food for human consumption. It includes spoiled food and dead animals. It does not include food-processing wastes from canneries, slaughterhouses, packing houses or similar industries, which shall be classified as industrial refuse. 
    Industrial refuse means all waste materials resulting from industrial or manufacturing operations or processes of every nature whatsoever, including organic wastes from canneries, slaughterhouses, packing houses and other industrial food processing operations. The term includes refuse material resulting from cleaning up in connection with such industrial or manufacturing operations, and refuse materials resulting from offices, stores, lunch rooms, warehouses or other operations established in conjunction with such industrial or manufacturing operations. 
    Municipal refuse means refuse or wastes consisting of certain discarded products incidental to housekeeping and mercantile enterprises. It shall be classified as either domestic refuse or commercial refuse, as further defined below. 
    Residential unit means a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy exclusively by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities and separate sanitary facilities. 
    Rubbish means the miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping and ordinary mercantile enterprises, and includes such material as packing boxes, cartons, excelsior, paper, ashes, cinders, tin cans, bottles, metal, rubber, tree limbs, brush and yard clippings. 
    Superintendent of public works means the superintendent of public works of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1968, § 9-14; Ord. No. 233, § 2.1, 1-17-72) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 70-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the intent of the city council that this chapter be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of preparation, collection and disposal of municipal refuse, and the maintenance of public and private property in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition, for the peace, health and safety of the community. The city administrator is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as from time to time appear to him to be necessary to carry out this intent, provided, however, that such rules are not in direct conflict with this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1968, § 9-13; Ord. No. 233, § 1.1, 1-17-72) 
Sec. 70-3. - Supervision and enforcement. 
(a)  The collection and removal of refuse shall be under the supervision of the superintendent of public works. 
(b)  The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be the duty of the city administrator or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1968, § 9-15; Ord. No. 233, §§ 3.1, 3.2, 1-17-72) 
Sec. 70-4. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and cost of prosecution, or by imprisonment not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Code 1968, § 9-21; Ord. No. 233, § 9.1, 1-17-72) 
Sec. 70-5. - Preparation and disposal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any municipal refuse, industrial refuse or construction materials by burning anywhere in the city, excepting in an incinerator or other disposal device approved under permit issued by the city administrator; provided, however, that the city council may designate by resolution a time and place for the emergency burning of trees destroyed by disease or storms. 
(b)  Municipal refuse materials shall be collected by the department; provided, that such materials may be stored in receptacles as hereinafter described. Garbage and rubbish may be placed in separate receptacles or in the same receptacles having tight-fitting covers. 
(c)  All domestic garbage shall be wrapped. Commercial garbage, including garbage from establishments for group eating such as hotels, clubs, restaurants, drive-ins and institutions and garbage resulting from the handling, preparation or distribution of food or food products by such establishments as grocery stores, markets, butcher shops, fruit and vegetable stands and bakeries, shall be wrapped before it is placed in proper portable receptacles as herein defined; provided, that commercial garbage which is placed in proper nonportable receptacles as herein defined need not be wrapped. 
(d)  Undrained garbage of a liquid or semiliquid nature will not be collected, and is hereby declared to be a nuisance when placed on public or private property, whether in containers or not. 
(e)  Small dead animals will be collected without charge upon notification to the department. 
(f)  Animal and fowl manure and other noxious wastes shall be considered as commercial rubbish. The department shall be responsible for its collection and disposal on the terms and conditions herein provided for commercial waste. 
(g)  All bulk rubbish, such as cardboard containers, wooden crates and similar rubbish, shall be flattened and tied in bundles or packed in suitable containers of a size that may be readily handled by one collector, and in no case shall such bundle or container be larger than three feet by three feet by four feet, nor weigh more than 75 pounds. Brush shall be cut into lengths not exceeding three feet and tied into bundles which can be readily handled by an individual collector. Tree limbs exceeding eight inches in diameter will not be collected by the city and should not be included in any bundle for rubbish collection. 
(h)  Construction materials shall not be collected by the city. 
(i)  Industrial refuse shall not be collected by the city; provided, however, that refuse materials resulting from offices, lunchrooms, and restrooms operated in conjunction with industrial or manufacturing operations shall be collected by the city in the same manner, and for the same charge, as hereinafter provided for the normal collection service for commercial refuse as herein defined. 
(Code 1968, § 9-16; Ord. No. 233, §§ 4.0-4.8, 1-17-72; Ord. No. 432, § 1, 9-26-88) 
Sec. 70-6. - Receptacles. 
(a)  The owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of any building, house or structure, used for any purpose whatsoever, where refuse accumulates shall provide and maintain proper refuse receptacles as herein defined, of sufficient number and size to hold one week's accumulation of refuse, and shall place or cause to be placed in said receptacles all refuse accumulating on said premises; provided, that bulk rubbish may be stored in a condition properly prepared for collection as specified herein. 
(b)  The occupant or occupants of every single-family or two-family building where refuse accumulates shall provide, keep clean and in place proper receptacles of a portable type, as herein defined. 
(c)  The owner, lessee, or agent of every building housing more than two families, and every building used for a commercial business shall provide, keep clean and in place proper receptacles of a portable type, as herein defined; provided, that where the city administrator determines that portable receptacles are not practical for multiple dwellings and commercial establishments, he may authorize the use of nonportable receptacles of the type that can be mechanically hoisted by a refuse collection vehicle, and with specifications established and approved by him, and as further defined herein. 
(d)  Portable receptacles for municipal refuse shall be of metal, fiberglass, plastic or other substantial construction approved by the city administrator, shall have handles or bails and tight-fitting covers; they shall not exceed 30 gallons each in capacity nor 75 pounds each in weight when full; provided, that receptacles used exclusively for yard rubbish such as brush and yard clippings need not have covers; and provided further, that the city administrator may approve the use of plastic or waterproof paper bags of a capacity and quality specified by him for the storage and disposal of municipal refuse. 
(e)  Nonportable receptacles for municipal refuse shall be of substantial metal construction, shall have a capacity of not less than one cubic yard nor more than three cubic yards, and shall meet all specifications established by the city administrator on the basis of the requirements of the refuse collection equipment being used by the city or its contractor, and the necessities of health and safety. 
(f)  Receptacles that are badly broken or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this article may be classified as rubbish and, after due notice to the owner, may be collected as rubbish by the department. 
(g)  All receptacles shall be so located that the regularly employed municipal collectors will not have to trespass on private property in order to pick up such receptacles. This point of collection will be either the alley line or the curb, as shall be determined by the city administrator. Such garbage and rubbish containers shall not be set out for collection prior to 4:00 p.m. preceding the day of collection, and after such receptacles are emptied they shall be removed from the street on the same day collections are made. In case an alley is located at the rear or side of developed property in a business or manufacturing zone, garbage and rubbish receptacles shall be placed in the alley or at such other location as may be designated by the city administrator. 
(h)  No refuse receptacle required by this section shall be used by any person other than the owner, occupant, tenant or lessee of the building, house or structure for which such receptacle is provided. 
(Code 1968, § 9-17; Ord. No. 233, §§ 5.1-5.7, 1-17-72; Ord. No. 493, § 1, 3-2-92) 
Sec. 70-7. - Collection and charges. 
(a)  Normal collection service of one collection a week of not more than five portable receptacles per dwelling unit shall be provided without charge for domestic refuse from buildings with not more than two residential units. 
(b)  Normal collection services of one collection a week shall be provided without charge for domestic refuse from buildings with three or more residential units; provided, that a maximum of either 600 gallons in portable containers, or three cubic yards in nonportable containers, but not both, shall be collected for each four residential units or fraction thereof in any one apartment building or complex on each collection day. 
(c)  Normal collection service of one collection a week shall be provided without charge for commercial refuse; provided, that a maximum of either 150 gallons in portable containers, or two cubic yards in nonportable containers, but not both, shall be collected from any one commercial customer on each collection day. No commercial refuse shall be collected by the department unless it complies with the terms and provisions herein. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the city administrator or his duly authorized representative to provide for the collection and disposal of all municipal refuse accumulating within the city. As soon as practicable after January 17, 1972, he shall establish and publish at least once in a newspaper circulating within the city a schedule for the collection of garbage and rubbish throughout the city and shall provide the proper labor and equipment for carrying out such schedule as nearly as practicable. He shall change such schedule whenever he deems such change advisable, but shall give public notice of such change as herein provided in the case of the original schedule. 
(e)  For all domestic or commercial service in excess of the normal collection service as herein defined, there shall be a charge established by the city administrator based on the cost of the city providing such extra service. 
(f)  Commercial or domestic refuse may be hauled by the originator of such refuse or by private collectors to a disposal site, as directed or approved by the city administrator. 
(g)  The collection of municipal refuse is conditioned upon the observance of all provisions of this chapter. Collection is subject to weather and other conditions beyond the city's control. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than municipal street and alley cleaners, municipal refuse collectors or other authorized persons to interfere with garbage and rubbish placed in the streets, alleys and public places of the city for collection by municipal authorities, or to interfere in any manner with garbage and rubbish receptacles in the city. 
(i)  No collection service shall be provided without charge for property appearing on the tax roll of the city as tax exempt. Collection service provided to such tax exempt properties shall be charged in the manner and at the rates hereinabove provided for collection service in excess of the normal collection service as hereinabove defined. 
(Code 1968, § 9-18; Ord. No. 233, §§ 6.1-6.8, 1-17-72; Ord. No. 448, § 1, 11-20-89) 
Sec. 70-8. - Transportation. 
(a)  The transportation of all garbage, offal, rubbish or other waste materials through the streets, alleys or thoroughfares of the city shall be conducted in such a manner as to create no nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport, cart, carry or convey through or over any streets, alleys or public places of the city any garbage, unwashed refuse or unwashed food containers without the written consent of the city administrator. Whenever such permission is granted, the vehicle used for such purposes shall be watertight and provided with a suitable covering. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport or otherwise convey through or over any of the streets or public places of the city any rubbish or other waste material except under written regulations or with the written consent of the city administrator except for rubbish or waste material accumulating on property owned or controlled by him and then only by approved methods of conveyance. 
(b)  Vehicles conveying waste must be of such construction and so operated that the contents shall not spill upon the public streets or alleys, or otherwise create a nuisance. 
(Code 1968, § 9-19; Ord. No. 233, §§ 7.1, 7.2, 1-17-72) 
Sec. 70-9. - Scattering by wind, creating odors, attracting rodents; prevention required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or permit to remain anywhere in the city any municipal refuse, industrial refuse, or construction materials in such a manner so that the same can be blown away by the wind, or can cause unpleasant odors, or can encourage habitation by rats or other rodents. 
(Code 1968, § 9-20(c); Ord. No. 233, § 8.3, 1-17-72) 
Chapter 71 - BLIGHT 

Sec. 71-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be designated as "The Blight Ordinance of the City of Saline." 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms are defined below: 
(a)  Blighted structure or building. Any dwelling, garage, accessory or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse, or any other structure or part of a structure which: 
(1)  Because of fire, wind, other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for the purpose for which it was originally intended; 
(2)  Is partially completed and which is not presently being constructed under an existing, valid building permit issued by or under the authority of the city; 
(3)  Is not structurally sound, weather-tight, waterproof or vermin-proof; 
(4)  Is not covered by a water resistant paint or other waterproof covering so as to protect said structure from the adverse effects of the elements or from physical deterioration; 
(5)  Which causes or tends to cause devaluation of the subject property or other properties in the area; or 
(6)  Which has any of the following conditions: 
a.  Peeling paint. 
b.  Sagging and deteriorating roof. 
c.  Missing and/or damaged siding. 
d.  Broken or deteriorating window. 
e.  Unfinished exterior. 
f.  Collapsing porch or deck. 
g.  Cracked and broken foundation/chimney. 
h.  Garish exterior. 
i.  Graffiti. 
(b)  Building, material. Any lumber, bricks, concrete, cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, cement, nails, screws, or other materials commonly used in the construction or repair of any buildings or structures. 
(c)  Enforcement officer. The city manager, the city building inspector, or any other individual that has been given enforcement duties by the city council. 
(d)  Garish. Any structure which, because of gaudy or glaring paint color or because of painting method (e.g., but not limited to haphazard multicolor), is determined by the enforcement officer to be devaluing of subject property or other adjacent or nearby properties in the area. 
(e)  Graffiti. Any mark or marks on any surface or structure made without the prior permission of the property owner and made in any manner, including but not limited to, writing, inscribing, drawing, tagging, sketching, spray-painting, painting, etching, scratching, carving, engraving, scraping, or attaching. Chalk marks on sidewalks are not graffiti. 
(f)  Issuance of the notice. Any of the following events: 
(1)  The posting of the notice on the premises, in conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party's last known address; 
(2)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by email, as indicated in a notification of receipt; 
(3)  Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; 
(4)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by certified U.S. mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt; or 
(5)  The reading of the notice to the responsible party over the phone. 
(g)  Junk. Any abandoned, discarded, unusable objects or equipment, any object or equipment unused for its originally intended purpose, including, but not limited to, furniture, furniture intended for indoor use which is placed outdoors, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, barrels, implements, parts of motor vehicles, machinery, cloth, rubber, bottles, any metals, boxes, cartons or crates. 
(h)  Responsible party. A person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, whether as owner, occupant, lessee, agent, operator, servant, or employee shall, except as herein otherwise provided. 
(i)  Trash and rubbish. Any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise classified. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-3. - Blighted structures or buildings prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, building, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store or warehouse in the city. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-4. - Blighted exterior and maintenance requirement of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to improve and maintain all property under the person's control so as to comply with the following minimum requirements: 
(a)  All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from debris, brush, severed tree limbs, junk, rubbish, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation. 
(b)  All stored firewood shall be in neat, orderly stacks, unless shielded from view from all adjoining properties. 
(c)  The storage and accumulation of any building material shall only be for a period that is reasonably necessary for the future use of such materials, which shall in no event be longer than 90 days. Building materials must be piled off the ground so as not to become a suitable environment for rats, rodents or similar vermin. 
(d)  In no case shall usable or unusable machinery, building materials, or other items be stored on a permanent basis in a truck trailer or other type of trailer, with or without its wheels. 
(e)  Yard or garage sales in which items are for sale to the public shall be no longer than seven calendar days within a 90-day period. No yard or garage sale shall offer new items which could be sold as new in a retail business. 
(f)  Scaffolding may remain on a building only for a period that is reasonably necessary for the completion of the construction or maintenance activities for which it is erected, which shall in no event be longer than 90 days or the length of the related building permit, whichever is longer. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-5. - Paved driveways and parking spaces. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to maintain a paved parking lot or driveway under the person's control so as to meet the following minimum requirements, regardless of whether the lot or driveway is required to be paved under the city's zoning ordinance: 
(a)  All exterior property areas shall be properly maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, free from debris, brush, severed tree limbs, junk, rubbish, physical hazards, rodent harborage and infestation. 
(b)  The paved area shall not have any cracks exceeding one inch in width. 
(c)  The paved area shall not have any potholes or loose or missing chunks of concrete. 
(d)  Any cracks in the paved area shall be kept reasonably free of weeds, grass, or other vegetative growth from the surface beneath the pavement. 
(e)  The paved area shall be kept reasonably free from dirt and other debris. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-6. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Any person that violates this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction subject to a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to be a separate violation. 
(b)  Before commencing prosecution under this chapter, the enforcement officer shall issue notice to the responsible party charged with the violation, setting forth the violation specifics. The notice shall state the name of the person that the city considers to be the responsible party, and shall specify that failure to remedy the violation within no fewer than 12 days of the issuance of the notice shall result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation. The notice shall also state that the recipient has the right to appeal the notice to the planning commission. 
(c)  If the responsible party fails to abate the blight within the required time frame, the city may take action to abate the blight and may charge the cost of such abatement to the responsible party. The city treasurer shall bill the cost, plus an administration fee of 25 percent, to the responsible party. Such bills shall become due within 30 days of issuance, and it shall be a violation of this chapter to fail to pay a bill when due. Abating the nuisance is not in lieu of, or an alternative to, the civil infraction. Both civil infraction and abatement of the nuisance may be pursued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-7. - Appeal of notification of violation. 
(a)  A person receiving a notification of violation under section 71-6 of this chapter may appeal to the planning commission by filing an appeal form with the city superintendent no later than ten days after the issuance of the notice. The appeal must be submitted on a standard appeal application form available in on the city's website or in the office of the city clerk. The appeal application must include a thorough description of the reason for appealing and shall be accompanied by any fee that may be required by the city council from time to time. 
(b)  The planning commission shall set a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal within 30 days from the date on which the application form is received. The planning commission shall provide the appellant, by first class mail, one notice of the public hearing date, time, and location. 
(c)  The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals, and review on appeal any order, requirement, decision or determination, made by the enforcement officer in applying the requirements of this chapter. Upon such appeal the planning commission may reverse or affirm the enforcement officer's determination in whole or in part. The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the full commission shall be necessary to reverse the determination of the enforcement officer. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 71-8. - Interpretation. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit conduct or conditions expressly permitted under the city's zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 766 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Chapter 74 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 66; subdivisions, ch. 78; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Street improvements; notice and public hearing. 
    Prior to the allocation of funds for street improvements, excluding routine maintenance and emergency work, or the execution of any contract for such improvements, the city council shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of receiving all objections to, or support of, the proposed street improvement; and notice of the hearing shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 14 days prior to the hearing, and shall be mailed by regular mail to the owners of record of all lands which abut the street adjacent to the location where such street improvements are proposed to be made at the address shown on the tax assessment roll of the city, and shall be mailed by certified mail to all public utilities affected. The notice herein provided for is intended as a courtesy only and neither the giving nor receipt thereof shall be deemed a legal condition precedent to the allocation or expenditure of funds for street improvements. 
(Code 1968, § 16-1; Ord. No. 302, § 1, 4-4-77) 
Sec. 74-2. - Use permit required. 
    No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private, shall have the right to the use of the highways, streets, alleys or other public places in the city for wire, poles, pipes, tracks, conduits or other utility facilities, without the consent of the city council, or to transact local business therein without first obtaining a franchise or license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 1, 4-21-97) 
Sec. 74-3. - Construction permits. 
(a)  No person shall have the right to commence construction of any facility or structure in public rights-of-way or other public places without first obtaining a construction permit from the city superintendent. 
(b)  Permits for construction in the rights-of-way may impose conditions on the work to be performed, including requirements for traffic control and submission of as-built drawings upon completion. 
(c)  The city superintendent may deny a permit application for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  The applicant does not have a franchise or license authorizing use of the right-of-way where the proposed facility or structure is to be located. 
(2)  The applicant has failed to comply with a permit issued by the city under this section within the last two years. 
(3)  The proposed facility or structure would interfere with a present or future use of the right-of-way. 
(4)  The proposed facility or structure would impair clear vision or otherwise create a traffic hazard. 
(5)  The proposed facility does not comply with construction or installation standards established by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 1, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 774 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-4. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 or 90 days in jail or both, not excluding (in addition to) civil damages. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 1, 4-21-97) 
Secs. 74-5-74-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT FINANCING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Special assessments, § 9.5. 

Sec. 74-26. - Improvements-Land within city. 
    All public improvements constructed by the city which specially benefit a parcel or parcels of land within the city shall be financed by special assessment levied against the land specially benefited in accordance with section 9.5 of the charter. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 2, 2-17-64; Code 1968, § 16-11) 
Sec. 74-27. - Same-City at large. 
    All public improvements constructed by the city which benefit the city at large shall be financed from funds derived from the city at large. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 2, 2-17-64; Code 1968, § 16-12) 
Sec. 74-28. - Same-Land in city and city at large. 
    All public improvements constructed by the city which benefit both specified areas of the city and the city at large shall be financed as provided in section 74-26 to the extent that a specified area is specially benefited, and as provided in section 74-27 to the extent that the city at large is benefited, as respectively determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 172, § 3, 2-17-64; Code 1968, § 16-13) 
Sec. 74-29. - Same-Land outside city. 
(a)  All public improvements constructed by the city which specially benefit specified areas outside the city shall be financed as provided in section 74-27 until such time as such areas are annexed to the city, at which time that part of the cost of such improvements which is proportional to the special benefit conferred on such areas shall be recovered by the city as provided in section 74-26, or by annexation agreement. 
(b)  Prior to the construction of all public improvements described in subsection (a) above, the city council shall determine by resolution the area outside the city to be specially benefited and the amount of the city's recoverable share of the cost of such public improvements. A certified copy of the resolution shall be promptly recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county. 
(Ord. No. 172, §§ 4, 5, 2-17-64; Code 1968, § 16-14) 
Secs. 74-30-74-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-51. - Adoption of standard specifications. 
    All public improvements shall comply with all specifications required by the city council, which may be in addition to or in place of the requirements of this article. It shall be the duty of the city superintendent to prepare standard specifications for the construction of public improvements and from time to time review and improve such standard specifications to reflect current construction methods and engineering practices which are in the best interest of the city. After review by the city administrator, such standard specifications shall be submitted to the city council for approval by resolution after a public hearing thereon. Not less than 15 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall be published in a paper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall state that a copy of such proposed standard specifications is available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular working hours. After the public hearing, the city council may adopt, or amend, such proposed standard specifications by resolution. Such standard specifications, together with all modifications and amendments thereto, which have been duly adopted by resolution of the city council, shall be published by printing in a paper of general circulation in the city a notice to the effect that such specifications, or amendments thereto, are available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk during regular working hours, and that copies thereof may be obtained upon payment of a reasonable fee for reproduction established by resolution of the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 16-25; Ord. No. 489, § 1, 9-9-91) 
Sec. 74-52. - Authority to alter, waive requirements. 
    Any and all requirements of this article can be altered or waived by the council as conditions require after review and recommendation by the Saline Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 8, 5-26-60; Code 1968, § 16-26; Ord. No. 539, § 1, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-53. - Contractors to protect public. 
    All contractors making public improvements shall provide necessary insurance, bonds, barricades, lights, flagmen, etc., to protect the public from injury or liability. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 8, 5-26-60; Code 1968, § 16-27) 
Sec. 74-54. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 539, § 2, adopted Aug. 15, 1994, repealed former § 74-54, relative to backfilling, which derived from Ord. No. 150, § 1, adopted May 26, 1960; Ord. No. 164, § 1, March 4, 1963; and Code 1968, § 16-28. 
Secs. 74-55-74-64. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR CONSTRUCTION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 539, § 4, adopted Aug. 15, 1994, repealed the substantive provisions of former Divs. 2-6, relative to various construction standards, and enacted a new Div. 2 to read as herein set out. Additionally, § 6 of said Ord. No. 539 renumbered former Div. 7 of this article as Div. 3 hereof. The provisions of former Divs. 2-6 derived from Ord. No. 150, §§ 1-5, adopted May 26, 1960 and Code 1968, §§ 16-34-16-39, 16-45-16-52, 16-58-16-64, 16-70-16-73, 16-80-16-84. 

Sec. 74-65. - General construction specifications. 
    Construction work, methods, and materials shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Michigan Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Construction for the following areas: 
(a)  Earthwork; 
(b)  Aggregate base courses and surface courses; 
(c)  Bituminous and concrete pavements; 
(d)  Structures; 
(e)  Miscellaneous construction; 
(f)  Mixtures; 
(g)  Materials. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-66. - Supplemental specifications and special provisions. 
    The Saline Standard Specifications shall include those supplemental specifications and special provisions that have been approved by city council in accordance with section 74-51 and 74-52. Unless otherwise directed by the city, the supplemental specifications and special provisions shall supersede the general specifications. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-67. - Standard details and plans. 
    The Saline Standard Specifications shall include the most recent edition of the Michigan Department of Transportation Road Standard Plans, excepting that the City of Saline Standard Details shall supersede. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-68. - Sanitary sewer specifications. 
    Sanitary sewer construction work, methods, and materials shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of: 
(a)  Saline Standard Specifications-Sanitary Sewers. 
(b)  Supplemental Specifications and Special Provisions-Sanitary Sewers. 
(c)  Standard Details and Plans, reference section 74-67. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-69. - Water main specifications. 
    Water main, including leads, hydrants, valves, shutoffs, valve manholes and related items shall be constructed in accordance with the most recent edition of: 
(a)  Saline Standard Specifications-Water Mains. 
(b)  Supplemental Specifications and Special Provisions-Water Mains. 
(c)  Standard Details and Plans, reference section 74-67. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-70. - Minimum concrete and bituminous concrete design requirements. 
(a)  Roadways and parking lots which serve the general public shall contain concrete curbs, curbs and gutters, and sidewalk with the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Curb and Gutter - MDOT type C-4. 
(2)  Straight Curb - Saline Standard Detail 11-31DS. 
(3)  Combination Curbwalk - Saline Standard Detail 11-31DS. 
(4)  Combination Sidewalk and Ramps - MDOT Standards. 
(5)  Residential drive approaches shall be six inches thick; commercial and industrial approaches shall be eight inches thick with mesh reinforcement. 
(6)  All exterior concrete work shall be a minimum six-sack mix, air-entrained and placed on a four-inch granular base. 
(b)  Bituminous pavements, roadways, streets, parking lots, and drives shall have the minimum design detail as shown on the Saline Detail B-1A. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-71. - Alternatives to specifications requirements. 
    Any proposed alternatives or substitutions for any standard specifications, plans, and details shall be submitted to the city superintendent for review and recommendation to the city council for their consideration under section 74-52. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Sec. 74-72. - Engineering, inspection and quality assurance testing. 
    All plans, specifications, details, inspections, and testing related to public improvement projects shall be prepared and accomplished under the supervision of an engineer or architect registered in the State of Michigan. All inspection and testing records shall be submitted to the city superintendent in order to perform final review and approval of the completed project. 
(Ord. No. 539, § 4, 8-15-94) 
Secs. 74-73-74-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STREETS AND PAVEMENT 

Sec. 74-151. - Arterial streets. 
    Arterial streets are streets which provide a continuous route connecting various areas of the community and high traffic generation points. Arterial streets, where possible, shall be designed to define the limits of the subdivision or neighborhood. 
(Code 1968, § 16-90; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-152. - Collector streets. 
    Collector streets are streets which provide for traffic movement between arterial and local streets, and provide direct access to abutting properties. 
(Code 1968, § 16-91; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-153. - Local streets. 
    Local streets are streets which serve only as a means of access to abutting residential property. 
(Code 1968, § 16-92; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-154. - Subdivision street plans. 
    The design of subdivision streets shall conform to the following principles: 
(1)  Adequate vehicular and pedestrian access should be provided to all parcels. 
(2)  Local street systems should be designed to minimize through traffic movements through the use of curvilinear alignment, discontinuities in the street patterns and application of cul-de-sac design. A maximum 1,000-foot length or a provision for a maximum of 20 dwelling units should guide the development of the cul-de-sac. To ensure free movement of such vehicles as moving vans and emergency vehicles, a minimum radius of 55 feet to the face of the curb should be recognized. 
(3)  Street patterns should minimize the need for circuitous movement. 
(4)  Local streets should be designed to discourage excessive speeds. 
(5)  Pedestrian vehicular conflict points should be minimized. 
(6)  There should be a minimum number of intersections. 
(7)  The centerline offset between intersections shall be at least 150 feet. 
(8)  A minimum angle for any intersection should be 75 degrees and most intersections should be at or close to 90 degrees. 
(9)  Local circulation systems and land development patterns should not detract from the bordering arterial streets. 
(10)  Elements in the local circulation system should not have to rely on extensive traffic regulations in order to function efficiently and safely. 
(11)  Traffic generators within residential areas should be considered in planning the local circulation pattern. 
(12)  Planning and construction of residential streets should clearly reflect their local function. 
(13)  Local streets should be related to topography from the standpoint of both economics and amenities. 
(14)  The number of streets intersecting at any one location should not exceed two. Multiple intersections create signing and signal problems, produce confusion and have a high accident potential. 
(Code 1968, § 16-93; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-155. - Street design standards. 
    All streets hereafter constructed in the city shall conform to the following design standards: 
TABLE A 
Local Street 
(1)  Number of lanes ..... 2 
(2)  Street width-parking one side, face to face of curb ..... 32 feet 
(3)  Street width-parking both sides, face to face of curb ..... 38 feet 
(4)  Border area (minimum), back curb/RW ..... 10 feet 
(5)  Minimum right-of-way ..... 66 feet 
(6)  Sidewalks (if required) ..... 4 feet 
(7)  Design speed ..... 25-30 mph 
(8)  Minimum stopping sight distance ..... 200 feet 
(9)  Maximum curvature ..... 23 degrees 
(10)  Maximum grade ..... 8 percent 
(11)  Minimum grade ..... 0.5 percent 
(12)  Curb radii ..... 25 feet 
(13)  Intersection to first curb cut from intersection 
(14)  Corner radii ..... 20 feet 
(15)  Drives: 
a.  Minimum length of tangent curb between drives ..... 4 feet 
b.  Amount of property frontage in drives (maximum) ..... 30 percent 
c.  Width of drive at property line (maximum) ..... 24 feet 
TABLE B 
Collector Street 
(1)  Number of lanes ..... 2 
(2)  Street width-no parking, face to face of curb ..... 24 feet 
(3)  Street width-parking one side, face to face of curb ..... 32 feet 
(4)  Border area (minimum), back curb/RW ..... 11 feet 
(5)  Minimum right-of-way ..... 66 feet 
(6)  Sidewalks (if required) ..... 4 feet 
(7)  Design speed ..... 35 mph 
(8)  Minimum stopping sight distance ..... 275 feet 
(9)  Maximum curvature ..... 16 degrees 
(10)  Maximum grade ..... 6 percent 
(11)  Minimum grade ..... 0.5 percent 
(12)  Curb radii ..... 25 feet 
(13)  Intersection to first curb cut from intersection 
(14)  Corner radii ..... 40 feet 
(15)  Drives: 
a.  Minimum length of tangent curb between drives ..... 4 feet 
b.  Width of drives at property line (maximum) ..... 24 feet 
c.  Amount of property frontage in drives (maximum) ..... 40 percent 
TABLE C 
Arterial Street 
(1)  Number of lanes ..... 4 
(2)  Street width, face to face of curb ..... 50 feet 
(3)  Border area (minimum), back curb/RW ..... 13 feet 
(4)  Minimum right-of-way ..... 80 feet 
(5)  Sidewalks (if required) ..... 4 feet 
(6)  Design speed ..... 40 mph 
(7)  Minimum stopping sight distance ..... 315 feet 
(8)  Maximum curvature ..... 10 degrees 
(9)  Maximum grade ..... 6 percent 
(10)  Minimum grade ..... 0.5 percent 
(11)  Curb radii ..... 35 feet 
(12)  Intersection corner radii to first curb cut ..... 40 feet 
(13)  Drives: 
a.  Minimum length of tangent curb between drives4 feet 
b.  Width of drives at property line (maximum)24 feet 
c.  Amount of property frontage in drives (maximum)40 percent 
(Code 1968, § 16-94; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-156. - Pavement design standards. 
    All pavement hereafter constructed in the city, including pavement installed to meet offstreet parking requirements, shall conform to the following design standards: 
(1)  Soil supporting strength. The subgrade shall be determined by a recognized soil testing laboratory, a university, or assume the poorest soil conditions for this area (CBR 3 or K = modulus of subgrade reaction 100). 
(2)  An economical analysis as to pavement type shall be performed. Major resurfacing will be assumed when the present serviceable index drops to 2.5. A design life of 20 years shall be used. 
(3)  The following references are acceptable for design use: 
a.  The Design of Concrete Pavements for City Streets by the Portland Cement Associations (latest edition). 
b.  Thickness Design for Concrete Pavements by the Portland Cement Association. 
c.  Thickness Design-Asphalt Pavement Structure for Highways and Streets by the Asphalt Institute (latest edition). 
d.  Thickness Design Procedures by American Association of State Highways and Transportation Officials (AASHO). 
(4)  Pavement design shall be based on equivalent daily 18,000 pound single axle application. Actual or estimated traffic counts shall be required for each street. A local street shall have a 20-year design subjected to at least four axles per lane per day at the legal load limit. A collector street shall have a 20-year design subjected to at least 30 axles per lane per day at the legal load limit. An arterial street shall have a 20-year design subject to at least 100 axles per lane per day at the legal load limit. 
(5)  Design calculations shall be submitted with copy of indicated soil test for approval by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 16-95; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-157. - Nonconforming streets and pavement. 
    The provisions of this division shall not be construed to require the replacement of existing nonconforming streets and pavement with streets and pavement conforming to the provisions of this division; provided, however, that when such replacement is deemed necessary by the city council, it shall conform to the provisions of this division in all cases where deemed economically, legally and aesthetically feasible by the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 16-96; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-158. - Conflicting ordinances. 
    The provisions of all other ordinances governing design standards for streets and pavement in the city, insofar as they conflict with the provisions of this division, are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1968, § 16-97; Ord. No. 297, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 74-159. - Naming of new streets. 
    No new street in the city shall be named the same as any existing street in the Saline Fire District. 
(Ord. No. 550, § 1, 7-10-95) 
Secs. 74-160-74-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 775 , § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 2015, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 74-181-74-186, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 102, §§ 1, 2, 4, 5, 8, 1938; and Code 168, §§ 16-111-16-120. 

Sec. 74-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(a)  Actual cost means labor, material, equipment, and contractor costs incurred by the city. 
(b)  Issuance of the notice means any of the following events: 
(1)  The posting of the notice on the premises, in conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party's last known address; 
(2)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by email, as indicated in a notification of receipt; 
(3)  Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; 
(4)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by certified U.S. mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt; or 
(5)  The reading of the notice to the responsible party over the phone. 
(c)  Property owner means a person who holds record title to a parcel of real estate. 
(d)  Responsible party generally means the property owner owning the parcel abutting the sidewalk. However, when circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that a person other than the property owner or a prior owner caused a sidewalk condition of the type described in subsection 74-183(a), that person may be considered the responsible party instead of the property owner. 
(e)  Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
(f)  Sidewalk section means a contiguous (or formerly contiguous) square or rectangular slab of sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 775 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-182. - Construction of new sidewalks. 
(a)  Sidewalks accompanying new buildings and structures. The city may require a property owner to construct a sidewalk in the public right-of-way as a condition of site plan approval for a new building, structure, subdivision, or other development. Further, for buildings or structures that do not require site plan approval, the city may require the property owner to construct a sidewalk in the public right-of-way as a condition of granting a certificate of use and occupancy, so long as the city informs the property owner of such condition when issuing the building permit. 
(b)  Sidewalk construction permit . Any private party constructing a sidewalk in the city shall first obtain a construction permit pursuant to section 74-185. 
(c)  Construction standards . All sidewalks constructed in the city shall conform to the standards established by the city engineering department or its successor official or department. Those standards may include standards regarding grade lines, width, materials, mode of construction, and place of construction. 
(d)  Special assessments for nonconforming lots . From time to time, the city may require the construction of a sidewalk abutting a property that does not currently have one, or the construction of a new sidewalk in place of a nonconforming sidewalk. The cost and expense of such construction may be levied as a special assessment against the abutting property in accordance with section 9.5 of the charter. 
(Ord. No. 775 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-183. - Duty to repair sidewalks. 
(a)  Repair by property owners . All property owners in the city shall keep and maintain the sidewalks abutting their properties in good repair. A property owner shall repair or replace the abutting sidewalk, pursuant to a permit issued under section 74-185, to the extent needed to remedy the following conditions: 
(1)  A rise or drop of more than one inch between any two sidewalk sections, or a vertical discontinuity of more than one inch within a sidewalk section. 
(2)  Three or more cracks at least one-quarter inch in width within two square feet of one another. 
(3)  A sidewalk section tilted in excess of a two percent cross slope from inside edge to outside edge. 
(4)  A crater in a sidewalk section at least one-quarter inch deep, whether caused by deterioration or otherwise. 
(5)  Conditions causing a sidewalk section to rock or seesaw when bearing weight. 
(6)  The absence of a sidewalk section (or portion of such section), such that the sidewalk is noncontiguous. 
(7)  Any other condition of similar severity that has a detrimental effect on public safety and/or aesthetics. 
(b)  Repair by other responsible parties . When circumstances indicate that it is more likely than not that an individual or entity other than the property owner or a prior owner caused a sidewalk condition of the type described in subsection (a), the city may require that party (instead of the property owner) to repair or replace the sidewalk pursuant to the procedure in section 74-184. 
(Ord. No. 775 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-184. - Enforcement of duty to repair. 
(a)  Repair notice . Upon detecting a sidewalk condition requiring repair, the city may issue a notice to the responsible party stating that the city plans to repair or replace the sidewalk at the responsible party's expense if the responsible party fails to do so within 30 days. The notice also shall state: 
(1)  The name of the person the city considers to be the responsible party; 
(2)  The reason why the city considers that person to be responsible; and 
(3)  That the person deemed responsible has the right to request a hearing before the city superintendent (or, if the superintendent was involved in issuing the repair notice, the city manager), within 15 days of the issuance of the notice, to show cause as to why the proposed repair or replacement is not required, or as to why the city's determination of responsibility is in error. 
(b)  Extensions for substantial progress. The city may extend the time for the responsible party to repair or replace the sidewalk if the responsible party demonstrates that it made substantial progress toward undertaking the required work. 
(c)  Cost recovery by fee . If the responsible party fails to repair or replace the sidewalk within 30 days of the issuance of the repair notice (or within any extended period offered pursuant to subsection (b)), and fails to successfully appeal the repair notice, the city may perform the proposed work and bill the responsible party for the actual cost of such work, plus an administrative fee of the percent. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-185. - Permits for sidewalk construction and repairs. 
    No sidewalk shall be laid or repaired within the city by a private person unless a permit has first been obtained from the city superintendent. The permit application shall set forth the location of the sidewalk by street and number of premises adjacent thereto or by such other sufficient designation, the name of the applicant who will cause the sidewalk to be laid or repaired, the name of the person who will actually perform the repair or construction work, and the dates on which the work will be performed. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-186. - Construction and repairs at city expense. 
    The city council may, from time to time, adopt policies and programs providing for the construction and repair of sidewalks at city expense. Any such policy or program shall include detailed criteria for determining when the city will assume all or part of the expense of a sidewalk project. 
(Ord. No. 778, § 1, 8-17-15) 
Secs. 74-187-74-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - CURB CUTS 

Sec. 74-211. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut a driveway entrance or exit out of any curb in the city without first obtaining a written permit from the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 1, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-131) 
Sec. 74-212. - Application for, issuance of permit. 
    A permit required by this article shall be issued to any owner of the land adjoining the curb where such cut is proposed, or the duly authorized agent of such owner, upon application therefor made in writing to the city superintendent in the discretion of the superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 3, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-132) 
Sec. 74-213. - Appeal from permit denial. 
    If a curb cut permit is denied by the superintendent the applicant may appeal to the city council by requesting that the city clerk place the matter on the agenda of the next regular council meeting. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 4, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-133) 
Sec. 74-214. - Adoption of standard specifications; attachment to permit. 
    The city council shall adopt by resolution a set of standard specifications for making such curb cuts, and a copy of the specifications shall be attached to the permit upon issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 2, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-134) 
Sec. 74-215. - Compliance with specifications. 
    Any person obtaining a curb cut permit shall comply fully with the specifications attached thereto in making such curb cut. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 5, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-135) 
Sec. 74-216. - Notice, opportunity to repair prerequisite to prosecution. 
    No prosecution for violation of the provisions of this article shall be commenced until 30 days after the alleged violator shall have been notified in writing to repair the curb in accordance with the specifications within the 30-day period and has failed to comply with such notice to repair. 
(Ord. No. 162, § 7, 12-3-62; Code 1968, § 16-136) 
Secs. 74-217-74-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL 

Sec. 74-236. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Easily walkable path means a path encompassing the full width of the sidewalk or, if the sidewalk exceeds 42 inches in width, a path of at least 42 inches. 
    Issuance of the notice means any of the following events: 
(1)  The posting of the notice on the premises, in conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party's last known address; 
(2)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by email, as indicated in a notification of receipt; 
(3)  Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; 
(4)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by certified U.S. mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt; or 
(5)  The reading of the notice to the responsible party over the phone. 
    Property owner means a person who holds record title to a parcel of real estate. 
    Responsible party generally means the property owner, except that: 
(1)  A tenant or other person shall be the responsible party (in addition to the property owner) upon expressly assuming responsibility in a written contract with the property owner; and 
(2)  The manager of a business shall be a responsible party (in addition to the property owner) with respect to the property on which the business is situated. For purposes of this section, the term "manager" means the individual that exercises the most control over the day-to-day operations of the business on the property. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(Code 1968, § 16-141; Ord. No. 375, § 1, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 767 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-237. - Snow and ice to be removed from sidewalks. 
(a)  Clearance required. The responsible party for each private property in the city that abuts a public sidewalk shall remove snow and ice from such sidewalk so as to create an easily walkable path, within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. A responsible party that violates this section shall responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that the prohibited condition continues shall be a separate offense. For single-family residences, the first offense in each winter season shall be punished by a fine of $25.00, the second offense shall be punished by a fine of $100.00, and each offense thereafter shall be punished by a fine of $200.00. For all properties other than single-family residences, the first offense in each winter season shall be punished by a fine of $100.00, the second offense shall be punished by a fine of $250.00, and each offense thereafter shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. The city also reserves the right to seek a court order authorizing city personnel to clear the snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk at the responsible party's expense, with the cost of performing the work being a lien on the property. 
(c)  Removal notice. In addition or in the alternative to pursuing a municipal civil infraction violation, the city may issue a notice to the responsible party stating that the city plans to remove snow or ice from the sidewalk, so as to create an easily walkable path, at the responsible party's expense if the responsible party fails to do so within 24 hours of the issuance. The notice shall state the name of the individual or entity that the city considers to be the responsible party. In cases where the property appears to be vacant, the city shall make reasonable efforts to notify the responsible party by expedient means other than posting the notice on the property (i.e. telephone or email, if reasonably available). The city shall also use expedient means of providing notice in cases where the responsible party has specifically requested that it do so by providing a telephone number or email address to the city superintendent. 
(d)  Recovery of costs. If the responsible property fails to remove the snow or ice from the sidewalk, so as to create an easily walkable path, within 24 hours of the issuance of the notice, the city may cause the snow or ice to be removed and the responsible party for a fee in an amount established by the city council from time to time. The city reserves the bill the responsible party for the actual cost of performing the work (instead of the otherwise applicable fee) in cases where the cost of the work are unusually high due to the size of the property, severity of the conditions, etc. The bill shall inform the recipient of the right to request a hearing before the city superintendent (or, if the superintendent was involved in issuing the removal notice, the city manager), within 15 days of the issuance of the bill, to show cause as to why the person receiving the bill should not be held financially responsible for the cost of the work. 
(Code 1968, §§ 9-20(b), 16-142; Ord. No. 375, § 2, 4-4-83; Ord. No. 466, § 1, 11-19-90; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 12-17-90; Ord. No. 767 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 74-238. - Removal of snow and ice from garbage and trash containers. 
    Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow from the front, rear and sides of all trash containers. 
(Code 1968, § 16-143; Ord. No. 375, § 3, 4-4-83) 
Sec. 74-239. - Snow and ice to be removed from roofs, awnings, overhangs. 
    Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of snow and ice on the building or other structure, which is liable to fall on any sidewalk, roadway or other public way. Such work shall be completed within a reasonable time, but not later than the end of the first eight hours of daylight after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain. 
(Code 1968, § 16-144; Ord. No. 375, § 4, 4-4-83) 
Sec. 74-240. - Depositing restricted. 
    No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow and ice on or against a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway or loading and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow and ice may be windrowed on public roadways incident to the cleaning thereof or windrowed on curbs incident to the cleaning of sidewalks in business districts. 
(Code 1968, § 16-145; Ord. No. 375, § 5, 4-4-83) 
Sec. 74-241. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 767 , § 2, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed § 74-241, which pertained to removal by city upon failure of owner or occupant; recovery of costs and derived from Code 1968, § 16-146; Ord. No. 375, § 6, adopted April 4, 1983; Ord. No. 419, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 1987; Ord. No. 441, § 1, adopted Sept. 11, 1989; Ord. No. 466, § 2, adopted Nov. 19, 1990; Ord. No. 471, § 2, adopted Dec. 17, 1990; Ord. No. 474, § 1, adopted Feb. 4, 1991; Ord. No. 476, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 1991; and Ord. No. 613, §§ 1, 2, adopted Aug. 8, 16, 1999. 
Secs. 74-242-74-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PLACEMENT, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF NEWSRACKS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 556, adopted Nov. 6, 1995, has been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. VII, §§ 74-251-74-265. 

Sec. 74-251. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  Findings. 
(1)  The uncontrolled placement and maintenance of newsracks in public rights-of-way presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using such rights-of-way; including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility, traffic control and emergency services. 
(2)  Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons using public rights-of-way, and unsightly newsracks located therein, constitute public nuisances. 
(3)  It is a matter of public necessity that the city protect children and unconsenting adults in and on its public streets, sidewalks, transportation facilities and other public rights-of-way from viewing public displays of offensive sexual material. Such displays are thrust indiscriminately upon unwilling audiences of adults and children and constitute assaults upon individual privacy. 
(4)  These factors constitute an unreasonable interference with and obstruction of the use of public rights-of-way, constitute an unwarranted invasion of individual privacy, are injurious to health, offensive to the senses, and constitute such an obstruction of the free use of property as to interfere in the comfortable enjoyment of life and property by the entire community. 
(5)  The council recognizes, however, that the use of such rights-of-way is so historically associated with the sale and distribution of newspapers and publications that access to those areas for such purposes should not be absolutely denied. The council further finds that these strong and competing interests require a reasonable accommodation which can only be satisfactorily achieved through the means of this article which is designed to accommodate such interests regulating the time, place and manner of using such newsracks. 
(b)  Purpose. The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals, and general welfare of persons in the city in their use of public rights-of-way through the regulation of placement, appearance, number, size, and servicing of newsracks on the public rights-of-way so as to: 
(1)  Provide for pedestrian and driving safety and convenience; 
(2)  Ensure no unreasonable interference with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including ingress to, or egress from, any place of business or from the street to the sidewalk; 
(3)  Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of sidewalks, poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes, and similar appurtenances, and access to locations used for public transportation purposes; 
(4)  Reduce visual blight on the public rights-of-way, protect the aesthetics and value of surrounding properties, and protect the quiet of residential areas; 
(5)  Reduce exposure of the city to personal injury or property damage claims and litigation; and 
(6)  Protect the right to distribute information protected by the United States and State of Michigan Constitutions through use of newsracks. 
(c)  Preservation of Constitutional rights. It is not the intent of this article to in any way discriminate against, regulate, or interfere with the publication, circulation, distribution, or dissemination of any printed material that is constitutionally protected. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 1, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-252. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates: 
    Block means one side of a street between two consecutive interacting streets. 
    City superintendent refers to the city superintendent or the designee of the city superintendent. 
    Distributor means the person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack in a public right-of-way. 
    Newsrack means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale newspapers or other news periodicals. 
    Obscene means material which depicts or describes sexual conduct that is objectionable or offensive to accepted standards of decency which the average person, applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interests; or material which depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by applicable state law, and taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
    Parkway means the area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, the area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway that is not open to vehicular travel. 
    Person means any person or persons, or entity including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, unincorporated association or joint venture. 
    Roadway means that portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. 
    Sidewalk means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians. 
    Street means all the area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 2, 11-6-95) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 74-253. - Newsracks prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which projects onto, into, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon the roadway of any public street. 
(b)  No person shall install, use, or maintain any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in, or over any public sidewalk or parkway: 
(1)  When such installation, use, or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property; 
(2)  When such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes, or other governmental use, such as mailboxes; 
(3)  When such newsrack unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, including parked or stopped vehicles; the ingress in or egress from any residence or place of business; the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, or other objects permitted at or near said location; 
(4)  When such newsrack interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery, including snow and ice removal; or 
(5)  In any other manner inconsistent with or in violation of the provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 3, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-254. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, place, maintain or operate, on any public street or sidewalk, or in any other public way or place, in the city any newsrack without first having obtained a permit from the city superintendent specifying the exact location of such newsrack. One permit may be issued to include any number of newsracks, and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 4, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-255. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Application for such permit shall be made, in writings to the city superintendent upon such form as shall be provided by him, and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the proposed specific location of said newsrack, and shall be signed by the applicant. 
(b)  From the above application information the city superintendent shall approve the locations. He shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in this article. In any case where the city superintendent disapproves of a particular location, such disapproval shall be without prejudice to the registrant designating a different location or locations. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 5, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-256. - Conditions for permit. 
(a)  Permits shall be issued for the installation of a newsrack or newsracks without prior inspection of the location but such newsrack or newsracks and the installation, use or maintenance thereof shall be conditioned upon observance of the provisions of this article. Permits shall be issued within 72 hours (excluding Saturday, Sunday and legal holidays) after the application has been filed. A permit fee as established by resolution of the Saline City Council shall be required. 
(b)  Such permits shall be valid for three years and shall be renewable pursuant to the procedure for original applications referred to in section 74-255 and upon payment of the permit fee, as established by resolution of the Saline, City Council. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 6, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-257. - Hold harmless. 
    Every owner of a newsrack who places or maintains a newsrack on a public sidewalk or parkway in the city shall file a written statement with the city superintendent in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, whereby such owner agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, and employees, from any loss, liability, or damage, including expenses and costs, for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use and/or maintenance of a newsrack within the city. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 7, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-258. - Newsrack identification required. 
    Every person who places or maintains a newsrack on the streets of the city shall have his permit number, name, address, and telephone number affixed to the newsrack in a place where such information may be easily seen. Prior to the designation of location by the city superintendent under section 74-259 herein, the registrant shall present evidence of compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 8, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-259. - Location, placement, and number of newsracks. 
(a)  Any newsrack which rests in whole or in part upon, or on any portion of a public right-of-way or which projects onto, into, or over any part of a public right-of-way shall be located in accordance with the following provisions of this section: 
(1)  No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into, or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part upon, along, or over any portion of the roadway of any public street. 
(2)  No newsrack shall be chained, bolted, or otherwise attached to any fixture located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks. 
(3)  Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight feet along a curb, and a space of not less than three feet shall separate each group of newsracks. 
(4)  No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained: 
(i)  Within five feet of any marked crosswalk. 
(ii)  Within 15 feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk. 
(iii)  Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility. 
(iv)  Within five feet of any driveway. 
(v)  Within three feet ahead or 25 feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop. 
(vi)  Within five feet of the outer end of any bus bench. 
(vii)  At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet. 
(viii)  Within three feet of or on any public area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, trees or other landscaping, or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such a manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes. 
(ix)  Within 100 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the same publication. 
(x)  On any access ramp for disabled persons. 
(5)  No more than eight newsracks shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of 200 feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than 16 newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. In determining which newsracks shall be permitted to be located or to remain if already in place, the city superintendent shall be guided solely by the following criteria: 
(i)  First priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications which have been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for the city, pursuant to the procedure set forth in the Michigan Government Code. 
(ii)  Second priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for the city. 
(iii)  Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation for the city. 
(b)  As between newspapers included within any single category of priority above, the city superintendent shall also be guided by the following criteria of priorities whenever more than eight newsracks are proposed for any one location (200-foot space) or more than 16 newsracks are proposed for any one block; 
(1)  First priority shall be daily publications (published five or more days per week). 
(2)  Second priority shall be publications published two to four days per week. 
(3)  Third priority shall be publications published one day per week. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 9, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-260. - Standards for maintenance and installation. 
    Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards: 
(a)  No newsrack shall exceed five feet in height, 30 inches in width, or two feet in thickness. 
(b)  No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale, or purchase of the newspaper or news periodical sold therein. 
(c)  Each newsrack shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate refund in the event the person is unable to receive the paid for publication. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order. 
(d)  Each newsrack shall have affixed to it in a readily visible place so as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for in this article. 
(e)  Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in good repair at all times. Specifically, but with out limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that: 
(1)  It is reasonably free of dirt and grease; 
(2)  It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof; 
(3)  It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereon; 
(4)  The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration; 
(5)  The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and 
(6)  The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 10, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-261. - Display of certain matter prohibited. 
    Publications offered for sale from newsracks placed or maintained on or projecting over the street or sidewalk shall not be displayed or exhibited in a manner which exposes to public view from the street or sidewalk any of the following: 
(a)  Any publication or material which exposes to public view any pictorial material that is obscene; 
(b)  Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs, or excrement where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification, or affront. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 11, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-262. - Violations. 
    Upon determination by the city superintendent that a newsrack has been installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, an order to correct the offending condition shall be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall specifically describe the offending condition, suggest actions necessary to correct the condition, and inform the newsrack distributor of the right to appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending condition within five days (excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the order or to appeal the order within three days after its receipt shall result in the offending newsrack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed property. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to owner under the provisions of section 74-258 hereof, it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property. An impound fee, which shall be measured by the city's cost and expense of impounding, shall be assessed against each newsrack summarily removed. The city superintendent shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected condition or of a newsrack reinstalled after removal under this section. The distributor of said newsrack shall be charged an inspection fee as established by resolution of the Saline City Council, for each newsrack so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and charges required under this article. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 12, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-263. - Appeals. 
    Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal and shall be appraised of his right to appeal to the city's appeals board, which shall consist of the city superintendent, the police chief and a command officer chosen by the police chief. An appeal must be perfected within three days after receipt of notice of any protested decision or action by filing with the office of the city superintendent a letter of appeal briefly stating therein the basis for such appeal. A hearing shall be held on a date not more than ten days after receipt of the letter of appeal. The appellant shall be given at least five days notice of the time and place of the hearing. The appeals board shall give the appellant, and any other interested party, a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in order to show cause why the determination of the city superintendent should not be upheld. At the conclusion of the hearing, the appeals board shall make a final and conclusive decision. This decision shall be immediately appealable to a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 13, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-264. - Abandonment. 
    In the event that a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30 continuous days, the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as provided in section 74-262 for newsracks in violation of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 14, 11-6-95) 
Sec. 74-265. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 556, § 15, 11-6-95) 
Secs. 74-266-74-270. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - COMPLETE STREETS 

Sec. 74-271. - Definition. 
    Complete streets is defined as a design principle to promote a safe network of access for pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists of all ages and abilities. 
(Ord. No. 731, § 1, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 74-272. - Complete streets improvements. 
    The City of Saline will plan for, design, and construct all transportation improvement projects, both new and retrofit activities, to provide appropriate accommodation for bicyclists, pedestrian, transit users, and persons of all ages and abilities in accordance with the City of Saline Non-motorized Transportation Plan. 
    In furtherance of that policy: 
(a)  The City of Saline Non-motorized Transportation Plan shall be referenced and its implementation considered prior to construction or reconstruction within city rights-of-way. 
(b)  The non-motorized transportation plan will include, at a minimum, accommodations for accessibility, sidewalks, curb ramps and cuts, trails and pathways, signage, bike lanes, and shall incorporate principles of complete streets and maximize walkable and bikeable streets within the City of Saline. 
(c)  The accommodations shall also be designed and built using guidance from the most recent editions of the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO) Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities , the Michigan Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MMUTCD) (MDOT), and the Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines (ADAAG). Methods for providing flexibility within safe design parameters, such as context sensitive solutions and design, will be considered. 
(d)  The City of Saline Non-motorized Transportation Plan will be updated every five years from the date of its initial adoption. 
(e)  It will be a goal of the city to fund the implementation of the non-motorized transportation plan, which shall include expending State Act 51 funds received by the city annually in accordance with Public Act 135 of 2010, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 731, § 1, 9-20-10) 
Sec. 74-273. - Exceptions. 
    Facilities for bicyclists, pedestrians, transit users, and people of all ages and abilities are not required to be provided in instances where a documented exception is recommended by the city manager and granted by the city council based on findings of one or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  Where their establishment would be contrary to public health and safety; 
(b)  When the cost would be excessively disproportionate to the need or probable use; 
(c)  When the cost would result in an unacceptable diminishing of other city services; 
(d)  Where there is no identified long-term need; 
(e)  Where the length of the project does not permit a meaningful addition to the non-motorized network; or 
(f)  Where reconstruction of the right-of-way is due to an emergency. 
(Ord. No. 731, § 1, 9-20-10) 
Secs. 74-274-74-279. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MAILBOXES 

Sec. 74-280. - Location of mailboxes. 
    All private mailboxes in the city shall be: 
(a)  Located so as not to obstruct visibility at the intersection of streets in the manner prohibited by section 7.04 of the zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Located so as not to interfere with or obstruct the view of any authorized traffic control device. 
(c)  If facing toward the edge of a roadway, located such that: 
(1)  The inside floor of the mailbox or point of mail entry (for locked-design mailboxes) is 41 to 45 inches vertically from the road surface. 
(2)  The opening of the mailbox is six to eight inches horizontally from the vertical plain of the front face of the curb, or, on streets without curbs, the edge of the paved roadway or shoulder. 
(Ord. No. 776 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 74-281. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    Any violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 776 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Chapter 78 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; environment, ch. 38; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; utilities, ch. 94; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Saline." 
(Ord. No. 173, § 1, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-1) 
Sec. 78-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alley means a minor way used primarily for vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    Block means an area of land within a subdivision entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, parks or a combination thereof; or by the exterior boundary or boundaries of the subdivision. 
    Community unit plan means a plan submitted and approved pursuant to the provisions of article XV of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
    Easement means a grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by the public, a corporation or persons, for specific uses and purposes, and shall be designated a public or private easement depending on the nature of the user, and in conformance with the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), of the state, as amended. 
    Final plat means a map of all or part of a subdivision prepared, and its accuracy certified by, a registered engineer or land surveyor in accordance with requirements of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended; and suitable for recording in the county register of deeds. 
    Improvements means grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks, crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, culverts, bridges, utilities and other appropriate items, with appurtenant construction. 
    Lot means a parcel, tract or portion of land separated from other parcels or portions by descriptions as in a subdivision or on a record survey map or by metes and bounds for purpose of sale, lease or separate use. 
    Lot splits means the division of a parcel of land, whose boundaries are fixed in a recorded plat, into more than two but not more than four lots or tracts. 
    Master plan means the master plan for the city as approved by the planning commission and including any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Master thoroughfare plan means the master thoroughfare plan for the city as approved by the planning commission. 
    Official map means the map established by the city council showing the streets, highways and parks theretofore laid out, adopted and established by law and any amendments thereto adopted by the city council or additions thereto resulting from the approval of subdivision plats by the planning commission and subsequent filing of such plats. 
    Owner means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or any combination of them which may hold any ownership interest in not less than 20 acres of land whether recorded or not. 
    Preliminary plat means the preliminary map, drawing or chart indicating the proposed layout of the subdivision to be submitted to the planning commission for its consideration. 
    Public open spaces means land dedicated or reserved for use by the general public. It includes parks, parkways, recreation areas, school sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways and public parking spaces. 
    Public utility means a firm, corporation, co-partnership or municipal authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer, transportation, or other services of a similar nature. 
    Street means any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct, alley, or other way which is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; or a street or way shown on a plat heretofore approved pursuant to law or approved by official action; or a street or way on a plat duly filed and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds; and including the land between the street lines whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas, and other areas within the street lines. Types of streets are as follows: 
(1)  Arterial street means a street of considerable continuity which carries a large volume of both private and commercial vehicles and is used primarily as a traffic artery for intercommunication between large areas. 
(2)  Collector street means those streets which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Cul-de-sac means short streets having one end open to traffic and being terminated at the other end by a permanent vehicular turnaround. 
(4)  Marginal access streets means minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways; and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Minor streets means streets which are used primarily for access to abutting residential properties. 
    Street width means the shortest distance between the lines delineating the right-of-way of streets. 
    Subdivider means any individual, firm, corporation or any other legal entity presenting a subdivision for approval. 
    Subdivision means the subdivision of land as defined in Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended. 
    Technical staff means the city superintendent and/or his duly delegated representatives. 
    Zoning ordinance means the city zoning ordinance set out in this volume as appendix A. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 3, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-3; Ord. No. 268, § 1, 4-1-74; Ord. No. 285, § 1, 4-19-76) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-3. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city, in order to promote the safety, public health, and general welfare of the community. This chapter is also formulated to aid in the enforcement of development standards required in the building code, zoning ordinance and the master plan for the city. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 2, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-2) 
Sec. 78-4. - Variances due to hardship. 
    Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with this chapter it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan, this chapter or the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-4) 
Sec. 78-5. - Variances for large developments. 
    The standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified by the planning commission in the case of a plan and program for a new town, a complete community, or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the planning commission provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air, and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-5) 
Sec. 78-6. - Conditions of variances. 
    In granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-6) 
Sec. 78-7. - Vote required on variances. 
    Variances to the regulations in this chapter may be granted only by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of all members of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 7, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-7) 
Sec. 78-8. - Lot splits. 
    The owner of any platted lot in the city who desires to divide such lot into three or four parcels without replatting pursuant to this chapter and the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended, shall submit his plans to the planning commission in the same manner, as nearly as possible, as herein required for preliminary plats, and request that the planning commission make a recommendation thereon to the council for approval or disapproval by resolution of the council as provided in the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-8; Ord. No. 285, § 2, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 78-9. - Division of unplatted land-Prior approval required. 
    Land in the city shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the city assessor, or other officials designated by the city manager, provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to the State Land Division Act and/or the City Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
(2)  A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with the State Land Division Act and/or the City's Subdivision Control Ordinance. 
(3)  An exempt split, which is defined as the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof, or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns, that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent so long as all of the resulting parcels are accessible. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 78-10. - Application for land division approval. 
    Whenever city's review and approval is required by this division or the Act, the proprietor shall make application to the city assessor or other officials designated by the city manager and provide all supporting documents and information necessary for the city to ascertain whether the requirements of this division and the Act are satisfied. The city's review and approval pursuant to this division and the Act is required prior to making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development. At a minimum, application for land division approval shall include all of the following: 
(1)  A complete application on such form as may be approved by the city. 
(2)  Proof that the applicant holds fee ownership of the land proposed for division. 
(3)  Proof of the right to make the proposed division by such evidence as is acceptable to the city assessor or other designated person that shows the history and succession of division rights from the parent tract or parcel to the parcel or tract proposed for division. If ownership interest was obtained after March 31, 1997, for a previous division or exempt split, a copy of the deeds(s) conveying ownership must specify land division rights. 
(4)  A tentative parcel map drawn to a minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet and showing all of the following: 
a.  A scale drawing that includes the following: 
1.  Parent parcel boundaries, area and dimensions (as of March 31, 1997). 
2.  Parcel lines, boundaries and area of all previous division made from the parent parcel or tract after March 31, 1997. (indicate when made and recorded, or none) 
3.  The parcel lines, area, boundaries and dimensions of all resulting parcels from the proposed division(s). 
4.  Existing and proposed road/easement rights of way. 
5.  Existing and proposed easements for public utilities from each resulting parcel that is a development site to existing public utility facilities. 
6.  Any existing improvements (building, wells, septic system, driveways, etc., building setback distance from lot lines). 
b.  A copy of any deed or conveyance that transfers to the applicant the right to make the proposed division. 
c.  Other (please list). 
(5)  Legal description of parent parcel(s) or tract(s) and each resulting parcel. 
(6)  For each resulting parcel that is a development site, adequate easements for public utilities from the parcel to existing public utilities must be established. 
(7)  Proof that all other standards of the State Land Division Act and this division have been met. 
(8)  If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed transfer of division rights. A proprietor transferring the right to make future divisions exempt from platting under this division or the Act shall give written notice to the city assessor within 45 days of the transfer on the form prescribed by the state tax commission under section 27a of the general property tax, Public Act 206 of 1893, MCL 211.27a. 
(9)  Evidence that there are no unpaid taxes or special assessments upon the property. 
(10)  All applicable fees as may from time to time be established by resolution of the city council for land division reviews pursuant to this division to cover the cost of review of the application and administration of this division and the State Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 78-11. - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
(a)  The city assessor or other designee shall approve or disapprove the land division applied for within 45 days after receipt of a complete application conforming to the requirements of this division and the State Land Division Act, and shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision, and if denied, the reason for denial in writing. 
(b)  Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the assessor or designee may, within 30 days of said decision, appeal the decision in writing to the zoning board of appeals or such other body or person designated by the zoning board of appeals which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of said board or the appellate designee within 30 days of the filing of the appeal. The applicant shall receive no less than seven days notice of the meeting date which the appeal will be heard. 
(c)  The assessor or designee shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. The official record shall also be filed with the city clerk. 
(d)  Approved land division shall be reorganized by the assessor and placed on the assessment roll in the year immediately following the year of approval. Splits occurring prior to the first Monday in May, may, with written request, be placed on the ensuing assessment roll in the year approved. 
(e)  The city shall submit an approved land division to Washtenaw County Equalization for parcel identification number(s) and verification of legal description(s). Any approved land division that is returned from equalization without assigned parcel identification number(s) and properly verified legal description(s) shall be null and void. The applicant shall be notified of a voided land division under this subsection within seven days of the return date. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 78-12. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
    A proposed land division reviewable by the city shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the division does not exceed four to one ratio. The depth of a parcel created by the division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of each parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement. This subsection does not apply to any resulting parcel greater than ten acres, not does it apply to any remainder of the parent parcel or tract retained by the applicant. 
(2)  The proposed land division(s) comply with the all requirements of this division and the State Land Division Act. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Sec. 78-13. - Consequences of compliance and noncompliance with land division approval requirement. 
    Any division of land in violation of any provision of this division shall not be recognized as a land division on the city tax roll or assessment roll until the assessing officer refers the suspected violation or potential nonconformity to the county prosecuting attorney and gives written notice to the person requesting the division, and the person suspected of the violation or potential nonconformity of such referral to the prosecuting attorney. The city shall further have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to prevent any violation or continuance of any violation of this division. Any division of land in violation of this division shall further not be eligible for any zoning or building permit for any construction or improvement thereto. 
    Any unlawful division or split shall also be voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the forfeiture of all consideration received or pledged therefor, together with any damages sustained by the purchaser, recoverable in an action at law. 
    Approval of a division is not a determination that the resulting parcels comply with other ordinances or regulations. The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable for approving a land division if building permits for construction on the parcels are subsequently denied. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 1, 8-24-98) 
Secs. 78-14-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATS, PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 78-31. - Preapplication sketch. 
    The proprietor may submit to the planning commission a sketch of his proposed subdivision for discussion and review prior to preparation and filing of a preliminary plat. This is recommended but not required. Such a sketch shall be known as a prepreliminary plat and the proprietor, if he elects such review by the planning commission prior to the filing of the preliminary plat with the city, shall file an application and fee, as established by resolution of the city council for such optional review by the planning commission. 
(Code 1968, § 17-19; Ord. No. 285, § 3, 4-19-76; Ord. No. 437, § 1, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-32. - General information required. 
    The proprietor shall submit to the city all information required by the city as set forth in the subdivision review checklists duly adopted by the planning commission. The checklists shall show the date of their adoption by the planning commission, and shall be distributed to all persons who express an interest in platting land in the city. 
(Code 1968, § 17-20; Ord. No. 285, § 3, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 78-33. - Preliminary plat-Generally. 
(a)  Before making or submitting a final plat for approval, the proprietor shall make a preliminary plat and submit copies to the city clerk. A preliminary plat shall show the name, location and position of the subdivision and the subdivision plan and layout in sufficient detail on a topographic map to enable a determination of whether the subdivision meets requirements for lots, streets, roads and highways including drainage and floodplains. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall be drawn to a scale of not more than 200 feet to one inch and may be an original drawing or reproduction, on unbacked paper. It shall contain proper identification of the parcel of land to be divided, the name of the plat and proposed division of the land, the name and address of the proprietor and the name, address and seal of the surveyor who prepared it, all legibly printed or typewritten. Additional preliminary land development plans may be made by other qualified persons to assist approving authorities to visualize the type and scope of the development planned. 
(Code 1968, § 17-26; Ord. No. 285, § 4, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 78-34. - Same-Filing. 
(a)  The proprietor shall submit ten copies of the preliminary plat and other data to the city clerk, together with an application and fee, as established by resolution of the city council, for review for tentative approval. 
(b)  The city council, within 90 days from the date of filing, shall tentatively approve and note its approval on the copy of the preliminary plat to be returned to the proprietor, or set forth in writing its reasons for rejection and requirements for tentative approval. 
(c)  The city council may require the submission of other related data as it deems necessary, if the requirement for such data has previously been adopted and published. 
(d)  Tentative approval under this section shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of one year from the date approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. 
(e)  The city council, prior to granting tentative approval or rejecting said preliminary plat, shall refer the same to the planning commission for recommendations to the council regarding tentative approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1968, § 17-27; Ord. No. 285, § 4, 4-19-76; Ord. No. 437, §§ 2, 3, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-35. - Public hearing by planning commission. 
    Prior to making such recommendations to the council, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing on the preliminary plat with notice to be given in accordance with the provisions of section 18.03 of the zoning ordinance of the city and shall submit to the council a written summary of the comments submitted at the public hearing together with its recommendations regarding tentative approval or rejection of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-28; Ord. No. 437, § 4, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-36. - Tentative approval of preliminary plat by council required. 
    The subdivider shall obtain tentative approval of his preliminary plat from the city council before he may proceed with the filing of the final plat. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-31; Ord. No. 285, § 4, 4-19-76) 
Sec. 78-37. - Contents of preliminary plat. 
    The preliminary plat shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name of the proposed subdivision. 
(2)  Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider and engineer. 
(3)  Date, north arrow and scale, written and graphic. 
(4)  Boundary lines and acreage of the tract to be subdivided. 
(5)  Names of abutting subdivisions. 
(6)  A key map locating the subdivision by section, township and range and identifying major and collector roads. 
(7)  Street names, rights-of-way and roadway widths of all existing and proposed streets within and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(8)  Utilities on and adjacent to the tract; location, size and invert elevation of sanitary, storm and combined sewers; location and size of water mains; location of gas lines, fire hydrants, electric and telephone poles, and street lights; if water mains and sewers are not on or adjacent to the tract, indicate the direction and distance to, and size of nearest ones, showing invert elevation of sewers. 
(9)  Sites proposed to be acquired for recreation areas, schools and other public uses. 
(10)  Lot lines, approximate lot dimensions and lot numbers. 
(11)  All existing structures and other physical features which would influence the layout and design of the subdivision. 
(12)  Location, width and purpose of easements. 
(13)  Proposed building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
(14)  Exact location of the subdivision and the description of all monuments found or placed in making the survey. 
(15)  Any additional data as may be required by the city superintendent. 
(16)  Subsurface conditions on the tract if required by the planning commission: location and results of tests made to ascertain subsurface soil, rock and groundwater conditions; depth to groundwater unless test pits are dry at a depth of five feet. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-32) 
Sec. 78-38. - Final approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  After approval of the preliminary plat by the authorities required under the provisions of the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the proprietor shall submit all approved copies to the city clerk together with an application and fee, as established by resolution of the city council, for review of the preliminary plat, including preparation of the required subdivision agreement. The city council shall then: 
(1)  Refer the preliminary plat to the planning commission for review and recommendations to the council regarding final approval of the preliminary plat and conditions to be attached to approval of the final plat and included in the required subdivision agreement. 
(2)  Consider and review the preliminary plat at its next meeting, or within 20 days from the date of submission, and approve it if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of the preliminary plat. 
(3)  Instruct the clerk to promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing, and if rejected to give the reasons. 
(4)  Instruct the clerk to note all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting which minutes shall be open for inspection. 
(b)  Final approval of the preliminary plat approval under this section shall confer upon the proprietor for a period of two years from date of approval, the conditional right that the general terms and conditions under which preliminary approval was granted will not be changed. The two-year period may be extended if applied for by the proprietor and granted by the city council in writing. Written notice of the extension shall be sent by the city council to the other approving authorities. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-33; Ord. No. 285, § 4, 4-19-76; Ord. No. 437, § 7, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-39. - Final plat approval-By council. 
    When the final plat has been approved by the drain commissioner and the county road commissioners, the proprietor shall submit all copies of the plat to the city clerk together with an application and fee, as established by resolution of the city council for review of final plat. At its next regular meeting, or at a meeting called within 20 days of the date of submission, the city council shall: 
(1)  Approve the plat if it conforms to all of the provisions of this act and instruct the clerk to certify on the plat to the city council's approval, showing the date of the city council's approval, the approval of the health department, when required and the date thereof as shown on the approved preliminary plat; or 
(2)  Reject the plat, instruct the clerk to give the reasons in writing as set forth in the minutes of the meeting, and return the plat to the proprietor. 
(3)  Instruct the clerk to record all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which shall be open for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-34; Ord. No. 285, § 4, 4-19-76; Ord. No. 437, § 7, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-40. - Same-By planning commission. 
    Upon submission by the proprietor of all copies of the final plat to the city clerk, the city clerk shall forthwith refer said final plat to the planning commission for approval, modification, or disapproval as required by MCL 125.45. No plat shall be acted on by the planning commission without affording a hearing thereon to the adjoining land owners and to the person named on the plat who shall be sent notice of such hearing by registered mail at the address shown on the plat not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the county auditor's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the city. If the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for approval of the final plat, the planning commission shall approve the final plat and such approval shall be entered in writing on the plat by the chairman or secretary of the planning commission. The planning commission shall take action on the final plat and communicate such action to the city council in sufficient time so that the city council may take action on the final plat within 20 days from the date of its submission to the city clerk as required by MCL 560.167. 
(Code 1968, § 17-34.1; Ord. No. 437, § 8, 3-6-89) 
Sec. 78-41. - Improvements prohibited until subdivision agreement signed. 
    No installation or construction of any improvements shall be made until the required subdivision agreement has been signed and all engineering plans have been approved by the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 4, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-35; Ord. No. 446, § 1, 10-16-89) 
Sec. 78-42. - Design to conform to zoning or to community unit plan. 
    The design standards for all land parcels subject to this chapter shall be those standards set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city, or, in the case of tracts of land approved for community unit plan development, those standards set forth in the approved community unit plan. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 5, 4-20-64; Code 1968, § 17-36; Ord. No. 268, § 4, 4-1-74) 
Sec. 78-43. - Subdivision agreement required; contents. 
    The city shall, prior to final approval of the final plat by the council, require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city, which agreement shall define the respective responsibilities of the city and the subdivider in regard to the conditions of approval and the physical development of the subdivision. Such agreement shall include but may not be limited to: 
(1)  Any exception or modification of any requirements of this chapter. Provided however, that such exceptions or modifications shall not authorize the violation of the then effective zoning ordinances of the city. 
(2)  A progress schedule of the order and time of the installation of improvements in the subdivision. 
(3)  A provision that the subdivider shall construct the following improvements in accordance with the order and time schedule, and in accordance with the aforementioned design standards, at no expense to the city: 
a.  Streets. 
b.  Curbs and gutters. 
c.  Sidewalks and crosswalks. 
d.  Water mains, laterals and manholes. 
e.  Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
f.  Storm sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
g.  Grading which will prevent surface stormwater from causing damage to lots within the subdivision or to land adjacent to subdivision. 
h.  All improvements necessary to comply with the soil erosion ordinance of the city. 
i.  All street name signs. 
j.  All trees on lawn extensions in accordance with FHA specifications. 
k.  Metal corner stakes on each lot in the subdivision. 
l.  Water shutoff valves at the locations shown on the construction plans approved by the city. 
(4)  A provision that the owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines within a subdivision (excepting such facilities as are required by the state public service commission to be aboveground) for telephone and all other communications systems and electric service to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways. 
(5)  A provision that the subdivider shall reimburse the city for all inspection costs incurred by the city in hiring the services of a registered civil engineer to inspect the improvements required by the ordinances of the city to determine compliance with the ordinances and the design standards therein set forth. 
(6)  A provision that the subdivider shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of all improvements required to be constructed outside of the subdivision to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public as a result of the development of the subdivision; together with a description of the required improvements, the estimated cost thereof, the share of the estimated cost to be paid by the subdivider, and the proposed date of completion of the required improvements. 
(7)  A provision that all improvements required to be constructed inside and outside the subdivision shall be constructed in accordance with all statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules in effect at the time of construction. 
(8)  A provision that all internal subdivision streets, and all streets providing direct access to the subdivision, shall be designed and constructed so that they shall be not more than six inches below the established 100-year floodplain. 
(9)  A provision that the storm drainage system for the subdivision shall be designed and constructed to adequately convey any and all storm waters underground in the event of at least a ten-year storm of a 30-minute duration. 
(10)  A provision that all provisions of the soil erosion ordinance of the city shall be complied with during construction of the subdivision. 
(11)  A provision that all street right-of-ways to be dedicated within the plat, or lying outside the plat but on land owned by the subdivider and planned for future development related to the plat, shall meet the requirements of the city master plan and/or the inter-county highway plan. 
(12)  A provision that all sidewalks adjacent to land owned by the subdivider and necessary to serve the subdivision, whether lying inside or outside the boundaries of the plat, shall be constructed by the subdivider prior to the time they are needed for use by the residents of the subdivision, or as soon thereafter as feasible, together with a description of the sidewalks and the proposed date of completion thereof. 
(13)  A provision that all buildings constructed within a floodplain area as shown on the plat shall be constructed to the standards provided in the latest edition of the floodproofing regulations from the office of the chief of engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C. 
(14)  A provision that the subdivider shall provide, or make all necessary arrangements for the provision of, adequate street lights in the subdivision prior to the issuance of occupancy permits with the understanding that no occupancy permits shall be issued by the city for any house not adequately served by street lights. 
(15)  A provision that all required stormwater retention areas shall be designed and constructed to adequately store the volume of water projected to accumulate during a 100-year storm, and a description of the manner in which the cost of maintaining such areas will be born in the future. 
(16)  A provision that all plans and specifications for the subdivision improvements shall be provided by the subdivider in sufficient number for review by the council, the planning commission, the staff, and the city engineers; and that all costs incurred by the city in connection with the review, approval or inspection of the plans, specifications and improvements shall be charged to and paid for by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 173, § 6, 4-20-64; Ord. No. 188, § 1, 4-4-66; Code 1968, § 17-37; Ord. No. 268, §§ 2, 3, 4-1-74; Ord. No. 285, §§ 5, 6, 4-19-76; Ord. No. 305, § 1, 9-13-76; Ord. No. 333, § 1, 7-10-78) 
Sec. 78-44. - Community unit plan agreement required; contents. 
    The city shall, prior to final approval of a community unit plan, require the owner to enter into an agreement with the city, which agreement shall define the respective responsibilities of the city and the owner in regard to the conditions of approval and the physical development of the land covered by said plan. Such agreement shall include, but may not be limited to, the following provisions: 
(1)  A provision authorizing the owner to develop the land in accordance with the provisions, plans and specifications set forth in the approved community unit plan and the ordinance adopting the plan. 
(2)  A provision defining the uses permitted in each specified area of the land included in the plan and stating the number of acres to be developed for each use, the total number of units of each type to be constructed, and the density per acre. 
(3)  A progress schedule of the order and time of installation of improvements shown in the plan. 
(4)  A provision requiring the owner to construct the following improvements in accordance with the order and time schedule, and in accordance with the approved community unit plan and the ordinances and regulations of the city, at no expense to the city: 
a.  Streets. 
b.  Curbs and gutters. 
c.  Sidewalks and crosswalks. 
d.  Private streets and pedestrian walkways. 
e.  Water mains, laterals and manholes. 
f.  Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
g.  Storm sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
h.  Grading which will prevent surface stormwater from causing damage within the tract of land developed under the community unit plan and from causing damage to lands outside the tract of land. 
i.  All improvements necessary to comply with the soil erosion ordinance of the city. 
j.  All street name signs. 
k.  Metal corner stakes on each lot in the community unit plan. 
l.  Water shutoff valves at the locations shown on the construction plans approved by the city. 
m.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes on streets abutting the tract of land being developed under the community unit plan which are used for access to the tract, if needed for the traffic safety of persons entering and leaving the development. 
n.  Recreational facilities shown on the community unit plan. 
o.  Buildings and other improvements conforming as near as is reasonably possible to the design concepts set forth in the approved community unit plan. 
p.  A provision that the owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines within a subdivision (excepting such facilities as are required by the state public service commission to be aboveground) for telephone and all other communications systems and electric service to be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways. 
(Code 1968, § 17-38; Ord. No. 268, § 5, 4-1-74; Ord. No. 333, § 2, 7-10-78) 
Chapter 82 - TAXATION[1] 
  

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 777 , § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 2015, repealed the former Ch. 82, §§ 82-1-82-8, and enacted a new Ch. 82 as set out herein. The former Ch. 82 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 163, § 2, adopted March 4, 1963; Code 1968, §§ 18-1-18-6; Ord. No. 502, § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 1992; Ord. No. 714, § 1, adopted Feb. 11, 2008; and Ord. No. 750 , § 2, adopted Sept. 30, 2013. 
Charter reference- Taxation generally, ch. 9; ordinance required fixing proceedings of board of review, § 9.2. 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 

Sec. 82-1. - Board of review. 
    The board of review shall have the powers and duties provided in the General Property Tax Act, Act 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, as amended, and chapter 9 of the City Charter. Meetings of the board of review shall be conducted at times and intervals consistent with the provisions of those authorities. 
(Ord. No. 777 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 82-2. - Protests in writing. 
    A resident taxpayer may file a protest before the board of review by letter, without a personal appearance before the board. The option to file a protest by letter shall be noted in each assessment notice and each board of review meeting notice issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 777 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 82-3. - Alternate members. 
    The city council may appoint not more than two alternate members of the board of review. Alternate members shall be appointed in the same manner and for the same terms as regular members appointed pursuant to section 9.2 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 777 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Chapter 83 - SERVICE CHARGE IN LIEU OF TAXES 

Sec. 83-1. - Preamble. 
(a)  Proper public purpose. It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose for the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its elderly and low income citizens and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 e. seq. ) (the "Act"). 
(b)  Benefit to the city. It is further acknowledged that such housing is a public necessity, and, as the city is benefited by such housing, the encouragement of its development by providing a real estate tax exemption is a valid public purpose. 
(c)  Authorization to exclude certain classes. The city is authorized to provide by ordinance that the tax exemption under the Act does or does not apply to certain classes of housing projects within its boundaries. 
(d)  Authorization to establish a service charge. The city is authorized by the Act to establish and change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at an amount established by ordinance not to exceed the taxes it would be paid but for the Act. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-2. - Definitions. 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, 1966 PA 346, as amended, MCL 125.1401 et seq. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    City means the City of Saline, Michigan. 
    Contract Rents are as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 USC 1437 et seq.), as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 USC 5301 et seq. ). 
    Elderly shall have the same meaning as Section 11(o) of the Act. 
    Federally aided mortgage means any of the following: 
(1)  A mortgage insured, purchased, or held by the HUD Secretary or the Secretary for the United State Department of Agriculture - Rural Development ("USDA-RD"); 
(2)  A mortgage receiving interest credit reduction payments provided by HUD or USDA-RD; 
(3)  A housing development to which the authority allocates low income housing tax credits under Section 22b of the Act; or 
(4)  A mortgage receiving special benefits under other federal law designated specifically to develop low and moderate-income housing, consistent with the Act. 
    Housing development means a residential development that contains a significant element of housing supported by Section 8 or other federal or state subsidies for elderly persons and/or persons of low income with elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities that the authority determines shall improve the quality of the development as it relates to housing for the elderly and/or persons of low income. 
    Low income or moderate income persons shall have the same meaning as Section 11(g) of the Act. 
    Municipal services contract means a contract between the city and a sponsor in which the city agrees to provide certain municipal services to a housing development in exchange for valuable consideration. 
    Sponsor means persons or entities that have applied for federal subsidies that, if granted, would result in the creation of a federally aided mortgage. 
    Utilities means charges for fuel, water, sanitary sewer service, and/or electrical service that are paid by a housing development. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-3. - Limited applicability. 
    Any tax exemption established under this chapter shall apply only to the housing development and sponsor specifically described in the section establishing the exemption. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-4. - Annual assessment. 
    The city assessor shall assess the taxable value of all housing developments that are exempt from taxation under this chapter, pursuant to the assessment process described in section 82-5 of this Code. The sponsor of a housing development can contest an assessment of taxable value pursuant to section 82-6 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-5. - Effect of repeal. 
    If the city council later repeals a section of this chapter that establishes a tax exemption for a particular housing development, the property on which the housing development is located shall be placed back on the ad valorem tax roll on December 31 following the repeal. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-6. - Severability. 
    The various sections and provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be severable. Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by any court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any section or provision other than the section or provision declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Sec. 83-7. - Maple Heights Apartments. 
(a)  Plan for substantial renovations. The city acknowledges that the PK Maple Heights Limited Dividend Housing Association (the "Maple Heights Association") is a sponsor that has offered, subject to an allocation of low income housing tax credits from the authority, to own, operate, and substantially renovate a housing development identified as the "Maple Heights Apartments", on property located in the City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan, as more accurately described as follows: 
Commencing at the South 1/4 Corner, Section 31, T3S, R6E, City of Saline, Washtenaw County, Michigan; thence N88°37'05" W 1320.00 feet along the South line of said section; thence N 1°34'55" E 1180.55 feet along the east line of the West 1/2 of the SW Fractional 1/4 of said section for a PLACE OF BEGINNING; thence N88°31'50" W 469.14 feet; thence N 2°21' E 62.85 feet; thence N 87°39' W 190.50 feet; thence N 2°21' E 254.06 feet along the centerline of Maple Road; thence S 89°21'50" E 655.46 feet; thence S 1°34'55" W 329.34 feet along the east line of the West 1/2 of the SW Fractional 1/4 of said section to the Place of Beginning, being a part of the SW Fractional 1/4 of said Section 31. 
    The Maple Heights Association plans to invest approximately $1,500,000.00 in the Maple Heights Apartments and utilize low income housing tax credits provided by HUD to serve the elderly and low income persons. The Maple Heights Association has further offered to pay the city an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes with respect to the Maple Heights Apartments. The Maple Heights Association's ability to secure an allocation of low income housing tax credits from the authority and is contingent upon the enactment of this section. 
(b)  Establishment of the exemption and service charge. 
(1)  The Maple Heights Apartments and the property on which they are located (the "Maple Heights Property") shall be removed from the ad valorem tax roll as of December 31 after the Maple Heights Association acquires the Maple Heights Property, satisfies the requirements in subsection (b)(2), and completes the certification process in section 15a(1) of the Act by November 1. The Maple Heights Property shall not be exempt from property taxes until all these events have occurred. 
(2)  Before filing a completed affidavit of exemption to the authority as required by section 15a(1) of the Act, the Maple Heights Association shall first secure an allocation of low income housing tax credits from the authority and enter into a municipal services contract that specifies a requisite level of investment in the Maple Heights Apartments. 
(3)  In any year in which the Maple Heights Property is exempt from property taxes, the Maple Heights Association shall pay an annual service charge on or before the first business day of September. The service charge shall equal ten percent of the difference between the contract rents collected and the utilities paid during the prior year. The annual service charge is payable in the same manner as general property taxes and is subject to the same penalties and interest charges if not paid in a timely manner. The city treasurer shall distribute the service charge in the same proportions as would apply to ad valorem property taxes. 
(c)  Term. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the tax exemption established under this section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate as long as the Maple Heights Association has a federally aided mortgage that remains outstanding and unpaid or as long as the authority, HUD, or USDA-RD has any interest in the housing development, including, but not limited to, an interest pursuant to a regulatory agreement, as insurer of the sponsor's federally aided mortgage, or as a provider of federal subsidies. The city may repeal this section and revoke the tax exemption for any reason expressly provided in the municipal services contract required under subsection (b)(2). 
(d)  Contractual effect of ordinance. A contract between the city and the Maple Heights Association to provide a tax exemption and to accept payments in lieu of property taxes as previously described is effected by enactment of this section. The authority, HUD, and/or another lender shall serve as a third party beneficiary to such contract. 
(Ord. No. 750 , § 1, 9-30-13) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Law enforcement, ch. 50; offenses, ch. 58; parks and recreation, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq., regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
(a)  The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL §§ 257.1 to 257.923, as may subsequently be amended, is adopted by reference. 
(b)  MCL 257.625(1)(C), as may subsequently be amended, of the Michigan Vehicle Code is specifically adopted by reference, pursuant to Public Act 7 of 2012. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-2. - References in code. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Saline. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-3. - Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-4. - Definitions. 
    Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, the words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the Michigan Vehicle Code, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-5. - Parking violations bureau. 
(a)  A parking violations bureau is by the provisions of this chapter established for the city. This bureau shall be operated by the city treasurer in conjunction with his or her other duties, and he or she shall be known as the parking violations bureau administrator. The parking violations bureau administrator may designate a person as deputy administrator. 
(b)  The parking violations bureau administrator or deputy shall have full charge of the parking violations bureau and of all books and records relating thereto, and shall be responsible only to the city manager. 
(c)  The parking violations bureau administrator shall maintain an office in conjunction with his or her present office in the city hall or police department convenient to the public. The city shall furnish all records, books, violation notices, citations, and other supplies necessary to the office. 
(d)  When the complaining officer or authorized city official issues a violation notice under this chapter, he or she will deliver or send a duplicate thereof to the parking violations bureau. The parking violations bureau shall keep a record of all such violation notices, whether the same are issued by an officer or on the complaint of any other person. 
(e)  The violator of any of the provisions of this Code pertaining to the parking of vehicles shall be served personally by the complaining officer, or other authorized city official, with a violation notice or citation in a form similar to the Michigan Uniform Traffic Violation Notice and designated parking violation notice; or if the violator is not present, the violation notice or citation may be placed in a conspicuous place on the vehicle. Parking violation notices must indicate the address of the parking violations bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the penalty scheduled for the offense for which the notice was issued and advise that a citation may be filed with the district court if the person issued the parking violation fails to respond within the time limit. 
(1)  Any person who has received such a violation notice may, within the time limited in such violation notice or citation, appear at the parking violations bureau to answer the charge set forth in such notice. He or she may plead responsible to the charge, waive a formal hearing in court and pay the fine and costs as prescribed for the violation charged. Such fine and costs shall be in complete satisfaction for the violation charged. If the violator shall not appear before the parking violations bureau as provided herein within the time limited, or have paid the fine by first-class mail postmarked within the time limited, the complaining officer or other authorized city official may take a citation to the district court of the city as set forth in this section. 
(2)  If an admission of responsibility is not made by a person who has received a violation notice under this chapter, and the fines and costs, if any, prescribed by the for the violation are not paid at the parking violations bureau, or by first-class mail as provided herein, a citation may be filed with the district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first-class mail upon the registered owner of the vehicle at the owner's last known address. The citation filed with the court need not comply in all particulars with MCL 257.727c and MCL 257.743, but must consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the parking violation notice and must fairly inform the respondent how to respond to the citation including the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond before the court. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-6. - Authority to regulate parking; notice of regulations. 
(a)  Whenever in the opinion of the city council traffic conditions in any particular location or any particular street seem to require the aid of parking regulations, including but not limited to time and manner restrictions, the city council may by resolution authorize and require such regulations. 
(b)  Notice of parking regulations shall be given by the police department by paint of distinguishing color and/or signs or devices indicating the distances, place and space. The police department shall also provide for the erection of uniform and suitable signs or the painting of curbs, giving notice thereon of the parking regulations and any limited parking permitted. 
(c)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such limitation, restriction or prohibition. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-7. - Authority to serve parking notices and citations. 
    Authorized city officials including, but not limited to, police officers, city code enforcement officers, city building inspectors, volunteers trained pursuant to MCL 257.675d, or corresponding successor statute, and any other trained city personnel authorized by the city manager, may authorize and serve parking violation notices and citations under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-8. - Responsibility for violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is the driver, owner or person in charge of or control over a motor vehicle to permit said motor vehicle to remain or to be placed or to place such vehicle in any parking zone where any sign, device, or other notice of parking limitation installed pursuant to this chapter is displaying a sign or signal showing that such motor vehicle shall have already parked beyond the period of time fixed by the city council for such parking zone, or be parked for longer than the maximum time indicated or in violation of any parking rule or regulation set forth pursuant to this chapter or adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-9. - Penalties. 
(a)  The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference; provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days, provided, however, that a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(C) is punishable by one or more of the following: 
(1)  Community service of not more than 360 hours; 
(2)  Imprisonment for not more than 180 days; and 
(3)  A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(b)  A violation of any provision of this chapter not designated under the Michigan Vehicle Code is a civil infraction, unless otherwise designated by this Code. 
(c)  Parking violation notice and citation penalties shall be paid in accordance with the schedule of fines set by resolution of the city council. If a citation has been issued for a violation, a parking violation notice may no longer be paid at the parking violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-10. - Impoundment. 
(a)  A vehicle parked in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to a vehicle with six or more unpaid parking violation notices or citations, or in any other circumstance in which impoundment is authorized under the Michigan Vehicle Code, including but not limited to section 252d, is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by any police officer or other authorized city official in either of the following ways: 
(1)  By placing a parking violation notice or citation tag on said vehicle which shall plainly state the nature of the violation; or 
(2)  By placing a parking violation notice or citation tag on such vehicle as in the preceding paragraph, and by removing or causing said vehicle to be removed to the vehicle pound in accordance with the procedures for impoundment authorized under the Michigan Vehicle Code. 
(b)  Whenever a parking violation notice or citation tag is placed on a vehicle, a copy of such tag shall be transmitted to the parking violations bureau where a file record shall be made and kept of said violation. 
(c)  The owner or operator of any vehicle upon which a parking violation notice or citation tag has been placed and which has been removed to the vehicle pound may have said vehicle released by paying all violation charges at the parking violations bureau which are due against said vehicle and paying all costs of impoundment to the towing contractor of the city, however the total amount required for the owner or operator to obtain release of the vehicle shall not exceed $500.00 pending final adjudication of the case. Following final adjudication of the case, the owner or operator of the vehicle may be responsible for any additional unpaid violation charges and costs of impoundment. 
(d)  Any lienholder may claim an impounded vehicle by entering into an indemnity agreement with the city to save harmless the city from any and all liability the city may incur at the hands of the registered owner for releasing said vehicle to said lienholder, and upon all charges due against said vehicle. The aforementioned charges shall include, but not be limited to, all parking violation penalties presently outstanding against the vehicle, and all levies and costs of towing and storage and other impoundment expenses. 
(e)  Whenever a parking violation tag has been placed on a vehicle and where the necessary steps have been taken to have said vehicle removed but is released to the owner or operator thereof prior to such actual removal, the owner or operator thereof shall pay to the towing contractor of the city all costs and expenses by reason of the institution of those steps necessary for removal of the vehicle. The towing contractor of the city may release the vehicle without removal as above mentioned by accepting payment of all costs and expenses to which he or she would be entitled for removal of the vehicle, however such amount shall not exceed $500.00. 
(f)  Whenever any person authorized by this Code to enforce this chapter shall determine that a vehicle parking in violation of this chapter shall be ticketed with a parking violation tag and removed to the vehicle pound, as provided, it shall thereafter be unlawful for any person to drive or otherwise remove said vehicle from the scene of the violation in disobedience of a direct verbal order given by such authorized person that the vehicle not be moved. This provision, however, shall not prohibit the towing contractor of the city from removing such vehicle as authorized by this section. A vehicle which has been impounded shall not be removed from the vehicle pound except as authorized by the city. 
(g)  All fine(s) shall be paid as set forth in section 86-9. All costs of impoundment shall be paid directly to the towing contractor of the city. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Secs. 86-11-86-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKING METERS AND DEVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 787 , § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 86-26-86-30, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to vehicle code and derived from Code 1968, § 19-4; Ord. No. 361, § 5, adopted June 15, 1981; Ord. No. 374, § 2, adopted March 14, 1983; Ord. No. 389, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1984; Ord. No. 396, § 1, adopted Jan. 13, 1986; Ord. No. 492, § 1, adopted Dec. 16, 1991; Ord. No. 580, § 1, adopted May 19, 1997; Ord. No. Ord. No. 622, §§ 1-5, adopted Feb. 28, 2000; and Ord. No. 728, § 1, adopted June 7, 2010. 

Sec. 86-26. - Parking meters and other devices authorized. 
(a)  Wherever by reason of traffic congestion or other cause, the public safety is imperiled, the convenience of the public cannot be served, the traffic regulations cannot be adequately enforced without the assistance to be obtained through the installation and maintenance of parking meters or other parking devices (collectively "parking devices"), or traffic conditions in any particular location or any particular street seem to require the aid of such parking devices, such devices may be installed under and in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city council may by resolution fix the fees to be charged for parking of motor vehicles in any place where such devices are placed and for any period of time, anything herein to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  The coins or other form of payment required to be deposited in the parking devices as provided in this article are levied under police authority as a regulation of city traffic, and for the purpose of paying inspection fees to cover the cost of city regulation and inspection of the motor vehicles referred to in this chapter occupying the streets, and the fees shall be sufficient, when fixed by the city, for the operation, installation, control and use of the parking zones. 
(d)  No person shall park a motor vehicle in violation of such limitation, restriction or prohibition contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-27. - Installation and maintenance of parking devices. 
(a)  The city council may by resolution authorize and require the installation of parking devices and designate the location and fix the time that parking is permitted. 
(b)  The city shall maintain the meters and devices in good working condition. 
(c)  Notice of parking reservation and the limited parking permitted shall be given by the police department by paint of distinguishing color and/or signs or devices of uniform character indicating the distances, place and space. The police department shall also provide for the erection of uniform and suitable signs or the painting of curbs, giving notice thereon of the parking reservations and the limited parking permitted. 
(d)  Each motor vehicle parked alongside of such parking device shall park within the lines or marks as are established. It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle across any such line or mark, or to park the vehicle in such way that the same shall not be fully within the area so designated by such lines or markings. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-28. - Display of signal; overtime parking prohibited. 
(a)  Each parking device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of a coin, money of the United States, or other form of payment designated on the parking device, therein for a period of time conforming to the parking limit set out in appropriate resolutions passed by the city council for that part of the street upon which the devices are placed. 
(b)  Each parking device shall also be so arranged that upon the expiration of the parking time limit, it will indicate by a mechanically or digitally operated signal that the lawful parking period as fixed by the resolution has expired, and in such cases, the right of the motor vehicle to occupy such space shall cease and the driver, possessor, or person having control thereof, shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Parking meters or devices, when installed, shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk alongside of or next to parking device zones to be designated as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  Each parking device shall be so set as to show or display a signal that the parking space alongside the same is or is not lawfully occupied. 
(f)  The owner, operator, one having control of, or driver of the motor vehicle shall upon entering the parking device zone immediately deposit a coin, United States money, in the parking device alongside of or next to the parking device zone, and the parking device zone may then be used by the motor vehicle, and the driver, owner, possessor or one having control thereof, during the time of the parking limit, as provided for by the resolution of the city council for that part of the street in which the parking device zone is limited. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any driver, owner, possessor or one having control thereof of any motor vehicle to allow such vehicle to remain parked in any such parking device zone beyond the parking time limit as fixed by resolution of the city council for such zone, or after the parking device meter has expired and the same shall constitute a violation of this chapter, subject to the penalties provided herein. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking device a coin or other payment for the purpose of extending the parking time beyond a time fixed by the resolution of the city council for parking in the zone alongside of, or next to which the parking device is placed, unless such person shall be the agent or associate of the owner or driver or manager of the car. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-29. - Days, hours limits effective. 
(a)  The parking time limit as herein provided for shall apply from 8:00 a.m. until 6:00 p.m. of each Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday; provided however, that there shall be no parking time limit during Sunday and the following legal holidays: 
(1)  New Year's Day; 
(2)  Memorial Day; 
(3)  Independence Day; 
(4)  Labor Day; 
(5)  Thanksgiving Day; and 
(6)  Christmas Day. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-30. - Slugs and tampering prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking device a slug or other object as a substitute for the coin of the denomination of the United States, required to operate the parking device. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person not so authorized, to deface, injure, tamper, open or to willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking device installed under the terms of this article, or aid and abet in doing same. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-31. - Loading zones. 
(a)  The city council reserves the right to establish loading zones and to omit parking devices from such loading zones, if it should find it advisable and necessary from the standpoint of safety, traffic conditions and for the conduct of business and use of property by the abutting property owner or his lessees or assigns. "Loading zone" shall be defined as the space or section of the street next to the curb which has been set aside for the exclusive use of loading or unloading persons or property. 
(b)  No vehicle may remain in a loading zone for a period of time longer than is necessary to unload or load either passengers or property, nor while the operator thereof is engaged otherwise than in the loading or unloading of the vehicle, except that a reasonable time shall be allowed to secure a receipt for delivery of property. The use of time zone space, where such parking devices have been installed for loading or unloading of property, will be permitted before the hour of 10:00 a.m. without the depositing of a coin in the parking devices of such spaces, provided that the vehicle is loaded or unloaded in a single space and in the manner hereinbefore described. The provisions for loading zones are in addition to and not in derogation of regulations now or hereafter adopted in pursuance of law. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-32. - Collections from meters; deposit, use of receipts. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city manager to designate some person to make regular collections of the funds deposited in such parking devices. It shall be the duty of such persons so designated to take out the funds, which are deposited in the devices, and to deliver the same to such person as shall be designated by the city manager to receive the same. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of such person or persons designated by the city manager to receive the funds to deposit the same with the city treasurer, who shall deposit the same to such account as shall be provided by resolution of the city council, and which fund shall be disbursed by resolution of the city council for the payment of all inspection, purchase or rental cost or other charges incurred in connection with the purchase, rental or use of such devices; to further improve traffic regulations; and to establish a fund for the purpose of acquiring real estate for parking purposes. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Secs. 86-33-86-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADDITIONAL VIOLATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 787 , § 1, adopted Sept. 19, 2016, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 86-51-86-71, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to public parking and derived from Ord. No. 128, §§ 1-13, 15, 16, adopted June 2, 1953; Ord. No. 128-1, adopted Jan. 4, 1954; Ord. No. 145, § 1, adopted March 3, 1958; Code 1968, §§ 19-16-19-36; and Ord. No. 759, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2014 

Sec. 86-51. - Driving a motorized vehicle on land other than hard surfaced streets, driveways, and parking areas. 
    No person shall drive a motorized vehicle, other than an official emergency vehicle, on any land in the city which is not a hard surfaced street, driveway, or parking area, without the consent of the owner of said land. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-52. - Parking on lawn extension. 
(a)  No person shall drive upon, park or stand any vehicle between the curb or curbline and the lot line nearest the street, said area being commonly known as the lawn extension, whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually in place on such street; provided, however, that said lawn extension area may be used for parking purposes by persons who are authorized to park vehicles in said area by the owner of the abutting lot, if said owner has obtained a lawn extension parking permit from the city council. 
(b)  Such a permit shall be issued by the city council to said owner upon proper application by said owner making a satisfactory showing of the following facts: 
(1)  That there is a reasonable need for such parking for business or a public purpose; 
(2)  That no unreasonable traffic hazard will be created by such parking; and 
(3)  That no undue hardship will be suffered by the owners of neighboring lots. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-53. - Use of private driveways and parking lots restricted. 
    No person shall drive, turn around, or park a motor vehicle on the private driveway or parking lot of a business, industry, school, church, or residential dwelling unit or units, except for a purpose related to the activities and functions of the owner or occupant of said private driveway or parking lot, or unless the express consent of the owner, the occupant, or their agents, has been first obtained. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-54. - Pedestrians crossing streets. 
(a)  No pedestrian shall cross a street at a location other than at a crosswalk into which vehicle traffic is then restricted by a traffic control device unless such crossing may be done safely and without interfering with motor vehicle and bicycle traffic on that street. 
(b)  No operator of a motor vehicle or bicycle shall interfere with pedestrian or bicycle traffic in a crosswalk into which vehicle traffic is then restricted by a traffic control device. 
(c)  When traffic-control devices are not in place or are not in operation at any crosswalk marked with a "yield to pedestrian" sign, the driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is on the half of the roadway on which the vehicle is traveling or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in danger, but a pedestrian shall not suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into a path of a vehicle that is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield. 
(Ord. No. 787 , § 1, 9-19-16) 
Sec. 86-55. - Motor vehicle and motorcycle insurance required. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section will have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Automobile insurance means that term as defined in MCL 500.2102. 
(2)  Highway means that term as defined in MCL 257.20. 
(3)  Motorcycle means a vehicle having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider, designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, which is equipped with a motor that exceeds 50 cubic centimeters piston displacement. The wheels on any attachment to the vehicle shall not be considered as wheels in contact with the ground. Motorcycle does not include a moped, as defined in MCL 257.32b. Motorcycle does not include an ORV. 
(4)  Motor vehicle means a vehicle, including a trailer, operated or designed for operation upon a public highway by power other than muscular power which has more than two wheels. Motor vehicle does not include a motorcycle or a moped, as defined in MCL 257.32b. Motor vehicle does not include a farm tractor or other implement of husbandry which is not subject to the registration requirements of the Michigan vehicle code pursuant to MCL 257.216. Motor vehicle does not include an ORV. 
(5)  Owner means any of the following: 
a.  A person renting a motor vehicle or having the use thereof, under a lease or otherwise, for a period that is greater than 30 days. 
b.  A person who holds the legal title to a vehicle, other than a person engaged in the business of leasing motor vehicles who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a lease providing for the use of the motor vehicle by the lessee for a period that is greater than 30 days. 
c.  A person who has the immediate right of possession of a motor vehicle under an installment sale contract. 
(6)  Registrant does not include a person engaged in the business of leasing motor vehicles who is the lessor of a motor vehicle pursuant to a lease providing for the use of the motor vehicle by the lessee for a period that is greater than 30 days. 
(b)  An owner or registrant of a motor vehicle or motorcycle with respect to which security is required by MCL 500.3101, MCL 500.3102, or MCL 500.3103, may not operate the motor vehicle or motorcycle or permit it to be operated upon a public highway in the City of Saline, without having in full force and effect security complying with those sections. 
(c)  A person may not operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon a public highway in the City of Saline with the knowledge that the owner or registrant does not have security in full force and effect as required by MCL 500.3101, MCL 500.3102, or MCL 500.3103 for that motor vehicle or motorcycle. 
(d)  The failure of a person to produce evidence that a motor vehicle or motorcycle has in full force and effect security complying with MCL 500.3101, MCL 500.3102, or MCL 500.3103 on the date of the issuance of the citation, creates a rebuttable presumption in a prosecution that the motor vehicle or motorcycle did not have in full force and effect security complying with those sections on the date of the issuance of the citation. 
(e)  A person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $200.00 nor more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 800 , § 1, 2-12-18) 
Secs. 86-56-86-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCKS, COMMERCIAL VEHICLES, ETC.[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 555, adopted Aug. 21, 1995, has been codified herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. IV, §§ 86-101-86-106. 

Sec. 86-101. - Enforcement. 
(a)  All the provisions of this article [Ordinance No. 555] shall be enforced by any officer of the police department of the city; and each of them is hereby authorized to enforce all the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When any such police officer is performing his duties under this section, he shall have all the powers conferred upon peace officers by the general laws of this state, and especially all such powers conferred on officers authorized to enforce the provisions of law dealing with the weights and dimensions of trucks. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 86-102. - Size, weight and load limitations generally. 
(a)  Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or moved on any street or highway in the city a vehicle or vehicles of a size, weight, or load exceeding the limitations stated in this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article governing size, weight and load shall not apply to fire apparatus, or to implements of husbandry incidentally moved upon a highway, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit. 
(c)  Each overweight axle on a vehicle shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 2, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 86-103. - Truck routes. 
    As used in this section "truck" shall mean "truck," "truck tractor," "trailer," "semi-trailer," as defined in Act 300, Public Acts of Michigan, 1949, or any combination thereof. 
(1)  The operation of any truck exceeding 22 feet in length or five tons gross weight (including operator and cargo) is prohibited upon every street in the city except upon truck routes designated as such by traffic control orders. 
(2)  Provided however, that no provision of this section shall prohibit: 
a.  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
b.  The operations of vehicles owned or operated by the city, any contractor or material provider while engaged in the repair, maintenance, or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
c.  The operation of a truck upon any officially established detour in any case where such trucks could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
d.  Any truck which is taking departure from or proceeding to a destination on a prohibited street from operating on such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary in traveling to or from, as the case may be, the nearest street intersection on a street wherein such truck is permitted to operate. 
e.  Any truck while engaged in one or more local pickups or deliveries from using such prohibited streets as may be reasonably necessary in so doing, provided that such truck shall upon completion of the last pickup or delivery, return by the shortest route to the nearest street upon which it is permitted to operate. 
(3)  It shall be the duty of any person who shall be driving or in charge or control of any truck which may at that time be upon any street in the city upon which truck travel is limited or restricted, upon the demand of any police officer, to proceed to any public or private scale available for the purpose of weighing and determining whether the weight thereof is in excess of the weight limit permitted upon such street. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 3, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 86-104. - Truck identification. 
    No person shall engage in commerce in the operation on the public streets of the city a motor truck, tractor, trailer or semi-trailer unless it shall have painted or otherwise lettered upon it the name of the business, the business address, the phone number of the registered owner of the vehicle and the lessee of the vehicle if the vehicle is being operated under lease. The letters of this information shall not be less than three inches in height. The information shall be conspicuously placed on the outside of the vehicle. This section shall not be applicable to trucks eligible for and equipped with farm commercial license plates. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 4, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 86-105. - Commercial vehicles; equipment and operation. 
    A motor carrier or driver shall not operate or cause or permit to be operated any vehicle in violation of Act 181 of 1963 as amended (Motor Carrier Safety Act MCL 480.11 et seq.) or rules adopted under it. The words of this section mean the same as defined within Act 181 of 1963 as amended and rules adopted under it. Any violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by up to a $500.00 fine and/or 90 days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 5, 8-21-95) 
Sec. 86-106. - Size, weight and load. 
    Unless specifically declared to be a civil infraction, it is a misdemeanor for a person to drive or move or for the owner to cause or permit to be driven or moved on a street or highway a vehicle or vehicles of a size or weight exceeding the limitations stated in, or otherwise in violation of, the following provisions of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code, Act 300 of 1949, as amended: MCL 257.716 through MCL 257.726b, which provisions are hereby adopted by reference, including, but not limited to, all provisions relating to fines and costs imposed thereunder for weight and all other violations; provided, however, that the penalty for a violation of the criminal provisions of this article shall not exceed a fine of $500.00, or imprisonment for 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 6, 8-21-95) 
Chapter 90 - TREES AND VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 62; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City superintendent or superintendent means the city superintendent or his representative designated for purposes of the enforcement of this chapter. 
    Park means all public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city, or to which the public has free access. 
    Public utility means any person, organization, firm or corporation, public or private, duly authorized to supply electric, gas, telephone, telegraph or water service to, or for the general benefit of, the public. 
    Right-of-way means any public street, highway, alley or avenue of the city. 
    Trees and shrubs means all woody vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 1, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-1; Ord. No. 210, § 1, 6-2-69; Ord. No. 286, § 2, 1-6-75) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 90-2. - Applicability. 
    The terms of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated, shall apply only to public streets, alleys, highways, highway easements, parkways, parks and other land publicly owned or controlled by the city. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 2, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-2) 
Sec. 90-3. - Enforcement by department of public works. 
    The department of public works shall be charged with the duty of enforcing the provisions of this chapter and shall discharge all duties that may be required or imposed by the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 2, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-3) 
Sec. 90-4. - General control by superintendent in accordance with recommendations of parks and beautification commission. 
    The city superintendent shall have control over all trees, shrubs and plants in the streets, alleys and parks of the city and is empowered to plant, prune, spray, cultivate and preserve all trees and shrubs within the confines of the streets, alleys, parks and public areas of the city in accordance with written recommendations duly made by the parks and beautification commission. In areas of policy or procedure where the parks and beautification commission has failed to make a written recommendation, the city superintendent shall have the authority to exercise his own discretion; provided, however, that in areas where such written recommendations have been made by the parks and beautification commission, they shall be followed by the city superintendent, unless overruled by the council. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 3, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-4; Ord. No. 210, § 2, 6-2-69) 
Sec. 90-5. - Permission required to prune, spray, plant, remove. 
    No person shall prune, spray, plant or remove any shrubs or trees upon the rights-of-way or parks without first obtaining a written permit from the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 3, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-5) 
Sec. 90-6. - Permit required to cut, break down, destroy. 
    No person shall cut or break down or destroy any trees or shrubs in the rights-of-way or parks at any time without first obtaining the written permission of the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 3, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-6) 
Sec. 90-7. - Planting regulated. 
    No person shall plant any shade or ornamental trees in the rights-of-way or parks except by permission of the superintendent, and then only if they are of a variety or size acceptable to the department of public works. In no event shall any tree be planted in the rights-of-way where police, fire, street lighting, traffic signal or public utility, overhead wires and equipment are located that will exceed a maximum growth of 40 feet. No person shall have the right to plant any variety of poplar, willows, box elders, soft maples, tree of heaven, prickly ash, wild chestnut, cottonwood or other quick-growing trees in such a location that their roots are likely to injure sewers or heave walk or street surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 3, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-7; Ord. No. 438, § 1, 3-20-89) 
Sec. 90-8. - Fastening things to trees. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any tree as an anchor, and no material shall be fastened to or hung on any tree in any rights-of-way or park. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 4, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-8) 
Sec. 90-9. - Excavations, driveways near trees. 
    Excavations and driveways shall not be placed within six feet of any tree without written permit from the city superintendent or his authorized agent. Any person making such excavation or construction shall guard any tree within six feet thereof with a good substantial frame box to be approved by the department of public works, and all building material or other debris shall be kept at least four feet from any tree. All persons desiring to make such excavation or construction shall deposit with the city treasurer a sum sufficient to cover the cost of inspection and any damage which may result therefrom, provided that such charge shall not be less than $2.00 in any case. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 5, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-9) 
Sec. 90-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 773 , § 2, adopted Aug. 17, 2015, repealed § 90-10, which pertained to trimming of growths on private property and derived from Ord. No. 137, § 6, adopted Sept. 19, 1956; Code 1968, § 20-10; and Ord. No. 636, § 1, adopted Dec. 4, 2000. 
Sec. 90-11. - Placing materials on public property. 
    No person shall place on public property any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other material which will in any way impede the full and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 7, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-11) 
Sec. 90-12. - Protection from gas leaks. 
    Gas pipes or mains within any public right-of-way or on any public property shall be so maintained as to avoid any leakage therefrom. In the event a leak exists or occurs, it shall be reported to the owner of such pipe and main, and the leak shall be repaired within 24 hours. Any damage to trees, shrubbery or grass resulting from the escape of gas from a pipe or main shall be repaired and the cost of the work, including the cost or removal and the replacement of any trees, shall be levied against the owner of the pipe or main causing the damage. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 8, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-12) 
Sec. 90-13. - Damaging generally. 
    No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree or shrub, or set any fire or permit any fire, or the heat thereof, to injure any portion of any tree. No toxic chemicals or other injurious materials shall be allowed to seep, drain or be emptied on, near or about any tree; provided, however, that this shall not prohibit the use of city approved chemical control of trees and brush growth. No electric wires or installation, or any other lines or wires shall be attached to any tree in any manner that shall cause damage thereto. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 9, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-13) 
Sec. 90-14. - Interfering with trimming or removal. 
    All persons having under their care, custody or control, facilities which may interfere with the trimming or removal of any tree subject to this chapter, shall, after notice thereof by the city superintendent, promptly abate such interference in such a manner as shall permit the trimming or removal of any tree by the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 9, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-14) 
Sec. 90-15. - When planting, removal may be done by city in public places. 
    The planting or removal of trees and shrubs in the public rights-of-way, parkways, parks and other public areas of the city may be done either upon resolution of the city council or petition of parties owning a majority of the lineal footage of the property fronting on the line of such street. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 10, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-15) 
Sec. 90-16. - Superintendent to recommend planting, removal; special assessments. 
    Whenever deemed necessary by the city superintendent to lay out and plant trees and shrubs upon any public rights-of-way within the city or to remove undesirable species of trees, other than those so specified in this article, it shall be the duty of the city superintendent to report such fact to the city council. Such planting or removal shall be deemed to be a public improvement. The cost thereof may be paid, in whole or in part, by levying and collecting special assessments upon property especially benefited thereby in accordance with the provisions in the charter governing special assessments. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 11, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-16) 
Charter reference- Special assessments, § 9.5. 
Sec. 90-17. - Spacing, location of trees. 
(a)  In all planting of shade trees in the rights-of-way, such trees shall be spaced not less than 50 feet apart, except that trees may be planted less than 50 feet from an existing tree in the rights-of-way, provided the existing tree has been approved for removal within a period of two years from the date of planting of the new tree, and except that in exceptional cases, any owner of a single lot may, in order to provide a shade or ornamental tree in front of his lot, secure special permission from the department of public works to have a tree planted closer than 50 feet from an existing tree, but in no case shall such planting be within 30 feet of any existing tree on the rights-of-way. 
(b)  No tree shall be planted in planting strips between the curb and sidewalk less than 21/2 feet from the sidewalk; trees on private property adjacent to the sidewalk shall be planted not less than three feet therefrom. No trees shall be planted in planting strips where the distance between the back of the curb and the sidewalk is less than four feet, six inches in width. No trees shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any two or more streets than 25 feet from the point of intersection of two rights-of-way lines. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 12, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-17) 
Sec. 90-18. - Authority to remove undesirable trees, shrubs. 
(a)  The city superintendent is hereby authorized to direct the department of public works to remove any undesirable trees or shrubs growing on any rights-of-way, park or public place in the city, after approval of such removal by the parks and beautification commission. 
(b)  The city superintendent is hereby authorized to direct the department of public works to remove any trees or shrubs growing on any rights-of-way, park or public place in the city when such trees or shrubs are interfering with fire hydrants, sewers and water mains, visibility at street intersections, traffic control devices or construction affecting the public health and safety within rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 137, §§ 15, 16, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-18; Ord. No. 210, § 3, 6-2-69) 
Sec. 90-19. - Removal of trees-Dead, diseased. 
    All dead trees and trees afflicted with any fatal or communicable disease shall be removed by the department of public works with the approval of the city forester, or such other tree expert as the city superintendent shall deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 13, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-19; Ord. No. 210, § 4, 6-2-69; Ord. No. 607, § 1, 11-9-98) 
Sec. 90-20. - Same-At request of property owner. 
(a)  Living trees may be removed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, when the owner of the property in front of which the tree is situated requests in writing the removal of such tree and the parks and beautification commission approves of such removal. 
(b)  Where an owner of property requests the removal of a tree the superintendent is authorized, in his discretion, to require as a condition precedent to granting of approval for such removal that such property owner make the removal in accordance with regulations established by the department of public works, assume all or any part of the costs of removing such tree, and also to further require that such tree be replaced at some other location in the immediate vicinity, by planting another tree of a type permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 13, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-20; Ord. No. 210, § 5, 6-2-69) 
Sec. 90-21. - Notice, hearing on removal of trees. 
    The abutting property owner shall be notified in the event of the intended removal of any living tree. In the event of an objection from the abutting property owners, the trees shall not be removed until after a public hearing has been held by the city council to consider its removal. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 13, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-21) 
Sec. 90-22. - Control, trimming by utilities. 
    The city clerk shall, upon request of any interested public utility, issue an annual permit, and shall annually thereafter renew such permit, granting permission to the public utility to chemically control and trim and keep trimmed all trees and shrubs intruding into the air space over, or growing within the confines of, the streets, alleys, parks, rights-of-way and public places of the city in such a manner as shall keep the overhead lines and equipment of the public utility safe and accessible, and clear of all tree growth which endangers or may endanger the overhead lines or equipment and the public health and safety. Such chemical control and trimming shall be done in accordance with approved practices and under the general direction of the superintendent. The permit, as provided for in this section, shall require reasonable prior notice to the city before any work is commenced thereunder. In the event of an emergency requiring immediate maintenance work on the overhead lines of the public utility, prior notice of commencing work under the permit shall not be required. The word "emergency" as used in this section, shall be defined to mean the occurrence or happening of an event which could not be expected or prevented by the exercise of reasonable care and foresight and which endangers or may endanger the overhead lines of the public utilities and the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 137, § 14, 9-19-56; Code 1968, § 20-22) 
Secs. 90-23-90-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRIMMING AND REMOVAL OF TREES AND SHRUBS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 773 , § 1, adopted Aug. 17, 2015, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 90-46-90-49, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to diseased and infested plants and derived from Ord. No. 130, §§ 2-5, adopted Feb. 1, 1954 and Code 1968, §§ 20-33-20-36. 

Sec. 90-46. - Definitions. 
    These words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this article: 
    Actual cost means labor, material, equipment, and contractor costs incurred by the city. 
    Issuance of the notice means any of the following events: 
(1)  The posting of the notice on the premises, in conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party's last known address; 
(2)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by email, as indicated in a notification of receipt; 
(3)  Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; 
(4)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by certified U.S. mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt; or 
(5)  The reading of the notice to the responsible party over the phone. 
    Property owner means a person who holds record title to a parcel of real estate. 
    Responsible party generally means the property owner, except that: 
(1)  A tenant or other person shall be a responsible party (in addition to the property owner) upon expressly assuming responsibility in a written contract with the property owner; and 
(2)  The manager of a business shall be a responsible party (in addition to the property owner) with respect to the property on which the business is situated. For purposes of this section, the term "manager" means the individual that exercises the most control over the day-to-day operations of the business on the property. 
(Ord. No. 773 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 90-47. - Duty to maintain trees and shrubs. 
    The responsible party for each private property in the city shall: 
(1)  Trim the branches of any tree, shrub or plant on the property so that the branches: 
a.  Do not obstruct the view of any street intersection or traffic control device. 
b.  Do not interfere or threaten to interfere with any utility facilities owned by the city or a private utility company with a franchise granted by the city. 
c.  Remain at least 12 inches from the vertical plane drawn from the edge of the sidewalk (or from the edge of the right-of-way where no sidewalk exists), except that the branches may extend over the sidewalk at a height of nine feet or higher and over the rest of the right-of-way at a height of 16 feet or higher. 
(2)  Spray, trim, or otherwise treat diseased or infested trees, shrubs, or plants on the property. 
(3)  Remove any diseased or infested trees, shrubs, or plants on the property when necessary to prevent the spread of disease or infestation. 
(4)  Remove any dead trees, shrubs, or plants standing on the property. 
(5)  Remove fallen branches from any tree on the property from public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 773 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 90-48. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A responsible party that violates this article shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and any violating condition shall be considered a public nuisance. The city reserves the right to seek a court order authorizing city personnel to perform work needed to abate the nuisance at the responsible party's expense, with the cost of performing the work being a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 773 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 90-49. - Abatement notice. 
(a)  Issuance and abatement period. In addition or in the alternative to pursuing a municipal civil infraction violation, the city may issue a notice stating that the city plans to abate a condition in violation of this article at the responsible party's expense if the responsible party fails to do so within seven days of the issuance of the notice, or, if the condition poses an imminent threat to public health or safety, within 24 hours of the issuance of the notice. 
(b)  Expedient means of providing notice. In cases where the property appears to be vacant, the city shall make reasonable efforts to notify the responsible party by expedient means other than posting the notice on the property (i.e. telephone or email, if reasonably available). The city shall also use expedient means of providing notice in cases where the responsible party has specifically requested that it do so by providing a telephone number or email address to the city superintendent. 
(c)  Contents of notice. The notice shall state the name of the individual or entity that the city considers to be the responsible party, and shall state the means of abatement that the city considers to be necessary (e.g. spraying, trimming, or removal). In cases where the superintendent considers removal to be necessary but not imminent, the removal notice shall inform the recipient of the right to request a hearing before the city superintendent (or, if the superintendent was involved in issuing the abatement notice, the city manager), within three days of the issuance of the notice, to show cause as to why the tree should not be removed. 
(Ord. No. 773 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Sec. 90-50. - Recovery of costs. 
    If the responsible party fails to remedy the conditions cited in an abatement notice within the specified time period, the city may perform the work and bill the responsible party for the actual cost of the work, plus an administrative fee of ten percent. The bill shall inform the recipient of the right to request a hearing before the city superintendent (or, if the superintendent was involved in issuing the abatement notice, the city manager), within 15 days of the issuance of the bill, to show cause as to why the person receiving the bill should not be held financially responsible for the cost of the work. 
(Ord. No. 773 , § 1, 8-17-15) 
Secs. 90-51-90-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - GRASS AND WEEDS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 768 , § 1, adopted March 16, 2015, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 90-71-90-74, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to noxious weeds and derived from Ord. No. 142, §§ 1-4, adopted June 3, 1957; Code 1968, §§ 23-1-23-4; Ord. No. 226, § 1, adopted Aug. 16, 1971; Ord. No. 339, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1979; and Ord. No. 620, § 1, adopted Dec. 20, 1999. 

Sec. 90-71. - Definitions. 
    These words and phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this article: 
    Ground-cover vegetation means any of a variety of low-growing or trailing plants used to cover patches of ground. 
    Issuance of the notice means any of the following events: 
(1)  The posting of the notice on the premises, in conjunction with the mailing of the notice to the responsible party's last known address; 
(2)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by email, as indicated in a notification of receipt; 
(3)  Personal delivery of the notice to the responsible party; 
(4)  The responsible party's receipt of the notice by certified U.S. mail, as indicated in a notification of receipt; or 
(5)  The reading of the notice to the responsible party over the phone. 
    Noxious weeds means the following plants only: Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), dodders (any species of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard, and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior I.), and poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), and poison sumac (Toxicodendron vernix). 
    Property owner means a person who holds record title to a parcel of real estate. 
    Responsible party generally means the property owner, except that: 
(1)  A tenant or other person shall be a responsible party (in addition to the property owner) upon expressly assuming responsibility in a written contract with the property owner; and 
(2)  The manager of a business shall be a responsible party (in addition to the property owner) with respect to the property on which the business is situated. For purposes of this section, the term "manager" means the individual that exercises the most control over the day-to-day operations of the business on the property. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-72. - Duty to remove noxious weeds and maintain grass. 
    The responsible party for each private property in the city shall be required to keep the property free from noxious weeds and (except as provided in section 90-74) ensure that grass and other ground-cover vegetation on the property does not grow in excess of seven inches in height. The duties established under this section extend to the portions of the abutting public right-of-way that would become part of the property if the right-of-way were vacated. The responsible party shall have discretion in determining how to landscape and maintain the vegetation in the abutting right-of-way, so long as the landscaping and maintenance complies with all applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances and so long as it does not overhang any sidewalk or other public way in a manner that will interfere or brush against any person using that public way and as long as it does not interfere with the clear vision of vehicle drivers or pedestrians entering and exiting the property. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-73. - Burning of vegetation prohibited. 
    No person shall intentionally burn grasses, weeds, shrubs, bushes, or other vegetation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-74. - Natural landscaping. 
    This article shall not prohibit a responsible party from maintaining a natural lawn consisting of historically native grasses or other ground-cover vegetation exceeding seven inches in height, so long as the vegetation does not create a public nuisance, does not overhang into the right-of-way or impair visibility, and does not violate section 90-10 or any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-75. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A responsible party that violates this article or violates the conditions of a natural landscaping permit shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. Each day that the prohibited condition continues shall be a separate offense. For single-family residences, the first offense in each spring/summer season shall be punished by a fine of $25.00, the second offense shall be punished by a fine of $100.00, and each offense thereafter shall be punished by a fine of $200.00. For all properties other than single-family residences, the first offense in each spring/summer season shall be punished by a fine of $100.00, the second offense shall be punished by a fine of $250.00, and each offense thereafter shall be punished by a fine of $500.00. The city also reserves the right to seek a court order authorizing city personnel to remove noxious weeds or cut grass at the responsible party's expense, with the cost of performing the work being a lien on the property. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-76. - Removal notice. 
    In addition or in the alternative to pursuing a municipal civil infraction violation, the city may issue a notice stating that the city plans to remove noxious weeds or cut grass at the responsible party's expense if the responsible party fails to do so within 48 hours of the issuance of the notice. The notice shall state the name of the individual or entity that the city considers to be the responsible party. In cases where the property appears to be vacant, the city shall make reasonable efforts to notify the responsible party by expedient means other than posting the notice on the property (i.e. telephone or email, if reasonably available). The city shall also use expedient means of providing notice in cases where the responsible party has specifically requested that it do so by providing a telephone number or email address to the city superintendent. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Sec. 90-77. - Recovery of costs. 
    If the responsible party fails to remedy the conditions cited in a removal notice within 48 hours of the issuance of the notice, the city may perform the work and bill the responsible party for a fee in an amount established by the city council from time to time. The city reserves the bill the responsible party for the actual cost of performing the work (instead of the otherwise applicable fee) in cases where the cost of the work are unusually high due to the size of the property, severity of the conditions, etc. The bill shall inform the recipient of the right to request a hearing before the city superintendent (or, if the superintendent was involved in issuing the removal notice, the city manager), within 15 days of the issuance of the bill, to show cause as to why the person receiving the bill should not be held financially responsible for the cost of the work. 
(Ord. No. 768 , § 1, 3-16-15) 
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; planning, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and public improvements, ch. 74; subdivisions, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec 94-1. - Rates, fees, and charges. 
    The method for establishing the following rates, fees, and charges and the amounts of such rates, fees, and charges shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council in a manner consistent with this section. 
(1)  Water and sewer service. The city shall bill its customers for water and sewer service at least once per quarter at rates sufficient to satisfy the financial obligations of the water and sewer system, including debt service. The rates for water and sewer service shall consist of at least two components: a readiness-to-serve charge and a consumption charge. 
(2)  Second meter option. Users may request permission from the city manager to install a water meter at the user's sole expense to measure the water that is not discharged into the city's sanitary sewer system. When such meter has been installed with the permission of the city manager, the user shall not be charged for sanitary sewer service for the portion of water that is not discharged into the sanitary sewer system. The city manager shall develop criteria for considering requests to install such meters and shall only grant permission in cases where a substantial amount of the water consumed by the user bypasses the sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Fire hydrant charge. For water used through fire hydrants and for the availability of such water, the city shall pay a fixed charge based on the number of fire hydrants located in the city. The city shall pay this charge at least once per quarter, in advance, from the proceeds of taxes levied for that purpose. 
(4)  Extra strength sewer charge. All users with extra strength sewage shall be assessed a surcharge based on the loading of the following compatible pollutants: 
a.  Biological oxygen demand (BOD). 
b.  Suspended solids (SS). 
c.  Phosphorus. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 8-30-54; Ord. No. 159, § 1, 3-19-62; Code 1968, § 22-11; Ord. No. 241, § 1, 5-15-72; Ord. No. 251, §§ 1, 2, 9-18-72; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 5-21-74; Ord. No. 281, § 1, 12-2-74; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 6-2-80; Ord. No. 369, § 1, 6-21-82; Ord. No. 387, § 1, 6-18-84; Ord. No. 397, § 2, 8-19-85; Ord. No. 421, § 1, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 518, § 1, 10-18-93; Ord. No. 527, § 1, 7-11-94; Ord. No. 571, § 1, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 637, § 1, 11-20-00; Ord. No. 671, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 707, § 1, 6-18-07; Ord. No. 724, § 1, 8-3-09; Ord. No. 726, § 1, 12-7-09; Ord. No. 754 , § 1, 1-13-14) 
Sec. 94-2. - Billing; when charges due; delinquency penalty. 
(a)  Billing for water and sewer charges shall be made on or before the first day of the month quarterly, bimonthly, or monthly as determined from time to time by resolution of the city council and shall be due and payable on the first city business day (i.e. a day on which the city hall is open and staffed) of the following month, except on Saturday, Sunday, or holiday. 
(b)  For all bills not paid when due, a late payment fee, interest and an administrative fee shall be added, as specified by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 8-30-54; Ord. No. 159, § 2, 3-19-62; Code 1968, § 22-12; Ord. No. 421, § 2, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 633, § 1, 8-28-00; Ord. No. 704, § 1, 4-16-07; Ord. No. 752 , § 1, 11-4-13) 
Sec. 94-3. - Connection permit charges. 
(a)  In order to assure sufficient revenues to pay for improvements, enlargements, extensions and repairs from time to time to the water supply system and sewage disposal system of the city and in addition to the actual cost of labor and materials for each connection to the water supply system or the sewage disposal system of the city, a connection permit charge shall be levied against every property newly connected to the systems to provide the property's fair share of the cost of additions to the systems resulting from service demand growth or from additional connections to the systems, and to bear its fair share of the amortized cost of the existing improvements not financed by special assessment. The connection permit charge shall become payable at the time of occupancy at the rates set forth in this section. 
SCHEDULE OF CONNECTION PERMIT CHARGES 
(1)  Residence buildings. Including mobile home sites and all other structures designed for residential use: 
For each dwelling unit: 
Water Sewer $1,841.00 $3,704.00  
(2)  Other building. Including industrial and commercial buildings and all other miscellaneous structures publicly or privately owned (including school buildings) not specifically otherwise classified herein: 
Water meter size 
(in inches) Water Sewer 3/4 $ 1,841.00 $  3,704.00 1   3,069.00    6,174.00 11/2   6,137.00   12,348.00 2   9,819.00   19,756.00 3  19,638.00   39,512.00 4  30,684.00  61,738.00 6  61,367.00  123,475.00 8  98,187.00  197,560.00  
The city shall establish the water meter size needed on the basis of the applicant's water- use needs as estimated by the city. 
(b)  No payment of charges determined under this section will be accepted by the city prior to the preliminary approval of an occupancy permit by the city, i.e. complete occupancy readiness other than sewer and water. 
(c)  An additional connection charge shall be levied against certain properties connecting directly or indirectly to extensions and additions to the water or sewage systems. Such properties shall be determined by council resolution which shall also determine such charge in an amount to provide the payment of the property's fair share of the cost of extensions and additions to the water or sewage systems for which such property had not theretofore paid its fair share. The resolution shall be promptly recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county. 
(d)  The additional connection charges shall be payable at the time of connection to the water or sewage systems; and council may, by resolution, permit the payment of the charges to be made in installments over a period of years with interest not less than that which the city is or had been paying on the city's recoverable share of the cost of the extensions and additions. 
(e)  A reduced water and sewer connection permit charge may be provided for by council resolution for multiple residence facilities such as homes for the elderly, other than foster care facilities, which can be shown to use less water and sewer by design and/or usage than provided for by this ordinance with the reduction in said charge to be in proportion to such reduced design and/or usage. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 8-30-54; Ord. No. 159, § 3, 3-19-62; Ord. No. 165, § 1, 4-4-63; Ord. No. 170, § 1, 12-16-63; Code 1968, § 22-13; Ord. No. 241, § 2, 5-15-72; Ord. No. 246, § 1, 7-17-72; Ord. No. 271, § 1, 5-6-74; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 5-19-76; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 554, § 1, 8-21-95; Ord. No. 562, § 1, 1-15-96; Ord. No. 564, § 1, 2, 2-5-96; Ord. No. 571, §§ 2, 3, 5-20-96; Ord. No. 592, § 1, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 696, § 1, 9-18-06; Ord. No. 740, § 1, 5-21-12) 
Sec. 94-4. - Meter sizing, installation, and ownership. 
(a)  All meters shall be supplied by the city and shall remain the property of the city after installation thereof. The actual cost of all meters, meter parts, and installation labor, for all meters installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall be charged to the user, and no water shall be turned on to be measured by such city owned and supplied meters until such actual costs have been paid in full by the user to the city. The actual cost of repair or replacement thereof resulting from negligent use or care thereof shall be charged against the user as an additional charge on the next water and/or sewer bill sent to the user. In all cases where water is turned on or turned off, either at the request of the user or for nonpayment of charges, and in all cases where a meter is installed or removed by the city, at the owner's request, a reasonable service charge to be established by the city council shall be made. Such service charge shall be charged to the user as an additional charge on the next water and sewer bill sent to the user. Maintenance expense on such city owned and supplied meters shall be charged against the user as part of the regular rates to be charged for water and sewer service. 
(b)  Applicants requesting the installation of a water meter, in other than a one- and two-family structure, shall submit the following information to the code official: meter installation drawings signed and sealed by a design professional; meter design calculations in accordance with the adopted plumbing code. 
(c)  The use of multiple water meters for a single facility or building must be reviewed and approved by the city. 
(d)  No meter size shall be changed unless approved by the city. Sizing shall be determined and approved as required in subsection (b). The property owner shall reimburse the city for costs incurred by the city to change the meter, including the cost of any required plumbing inspection. When an increase in meter size is approved for any nonresidential structure, the property owner shall pay a connection fee equal to the difference in the connection charges listed in section 94-3. When a decrease in meter size is approved, no refund of connection charge will be considered, and the newly installed meter size becomes the size of record. 
(Ord. No. 159, § 4, 3-19-62; Code 1968, § 22-14; Ord. No. 628, § 1, 4-17-00; Ord. No. 697, § 1, 10-16-06) 
Sec. 94-5. - Lien for delinquent charges; enforcement; deposit required. 
    The charges for water and sewer services which are under the provisions of section 21, Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1933 (MCL 141.120 et seq.), as amended, made a lien on all premises served thereby, unless notice is given that a tenant is responsible, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien and whenever any such charge against any piece of property shall be delinquent for six months the city official or officials in charge of the collection thereof shall certify annually, on July 1 of each year, to the tax assessing officer of the city, the fact of such delinquency, whereupon such charge shall be by him entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general city taxes against such premises are collected, and the lien thereof enforced; provided, however, where notice is given that a tenant is responsible for such charges and service as provided by section 21 no further service shall be rendered to such premises until the cash deposit of not less than the amount of the estimated bill for such service for one quarter for a like use as determined by the city treasurer shall have been made as security for payment of such charges and service. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 8-30-54; Code 1968, § 22-15; Ord. No. 252, § 1, 10-2-72) 
Sec. 94-6. - Discontinuing service for nonpayment; charge for resuming service. 
    In addition to other remedies provided, the city shall have the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water and sewer service to any premises for the nonpayment of water and sewer rates when due. If such charges are not paid within 30 days after the due date thereof, then water and sewer services to such premises shall be discontinued. Water and sewer services so discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing shall be paid, plus a turn-on charge as established by resolution of the Saline City Council. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 10, 8-30-54; Code 1968, § 22-16; Ord. No. 541, § 1, 9-19-94) 
Sec. 94-7. - Special sewage; right to charge extra, require treatment. 
    If the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable additional burden upon the sewers of the water supply and sewage disposal system, an additional charge may be made over and above the regular rates, or it may be required that such sewage be treated by the person responsible therefor before being emptied into the sewer, or the right to empty such sewage may be denied if necessary for the protection of the sewer and sewage disposal facilities of the system or the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 131, § 12, 8-30-54; Code 1968, § 22-18) 
Sec. 94-8. - Deposit, use of revenues-Wastewater user charges. 
(a)  Wastewater enterprise funds. All revenues collected from the user charge shall be set aside as collected and deposited in a separate depository account in a bank duly qualified to do business in Michigan and insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. The deposit shall be in an account to be designated as a wastewater enterprise fund and the revenue so deposited shall be pledged for the purpose of operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater collection and treatment system. 
(b)  Wastewater operation and maintenance fund. Out of the revenues generated from the wastewater enterprise fund, there shall be set aside monthly amounts into a separate depository account designated as wastewater operation and maintenance funds, with the sum deposited being sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's current expenses of administration and operation of the system, and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same facilities in good repair and working order. 
(c)  Wastewater replacement fund. There shall be established and maintained a separate depository account designated as wastewater replacement fund which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacement to the wastewater collection and treatment system. There shall be deposited into the account in quarterly installments, after providing for all requirements of the wastewater operation and maintenance fund, an amount not less than $19,280.00 per quarter until such fund shall total $1,928,000.00. If at any time it shall be necessary to use the monies in said fund for such purposes as replacements to the system, the money so used shall be replaced from future revenues in the wastewater enterprise fund, which are not required for the wastewater operation and maintenance cost. 
(d)  City council review. The city council shall, on an annual basis, review the balances in the wastewater operation and maintenance fund and in the wastewater replacement fund to examine the amount of funds available and any fund balance that has accumulated. These funds shall be used for no other purposes than those designated. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance and replacement funds shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustments to the user charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The user charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within six months of the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed. 
(e)  Budget. The city council, prior to the commencement of each operating year, shall adopt a budget covering the foregoing expenses for each year and such total expenses shall not exceed the total amount specified in the budget, except by a vote of three-fifths of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 22-19; Ord. No. 408, § 2, 4-20-87) 
Sec. 94-9. - Same-Water user charges. 
(a)  Water enterprise funds. All the revenues collected from user charge shall be set aside as collected and deposited in a separate depository account in a bank duly qualified to do business in Michigan and insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation. The deposit shall be in an account to be designated as water enterprise fund, and the revenue so deposited shall be pledged for the purpose of operation, maintenance and replacement of the water production and distribution system. 
(b)  Water operation and maintenance fund. Out of the revenues generated from the water enterprise fund, there shall be set aside monthly amounts into a separate depository account designated as water operation and maintenance funds, with the sum deposited being sufficient to provide for the payment of the next month's current expenses of the administration and operation of the system, and such current expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same facilities in good repair and working order. 
(c)  Water replacement fund. There shall be established and maintained a separate depository account designated as water replacement fund which shall be used solely for the purpose of making major repairs and replacement to the water production and distribution system. There shall be deposited into said account in quarterly installments, after providing for all requirements of the water operation and maintenance fund, an amount of not less than $2,500.00 per quarter until such fund shall total $100,000.00. If at any time it shall be necessary to use the monies in the fund for such purposes as replacements to the system, the money so used shall be replaced from future revenues in the water enterprise fund, which are not required for the water operation and maintenance cost. 
(d)  City council review. The city council shall, on an annual basis, review the balances in the water operation and maintenance fund and in the water replacement fund to examine the amount of funds available and any fund balance that has accumulated. These funds shall be used for no other purposes than those designated. Monies which have been transferred from other sources to meet temporary shortages in the operation, maintenance and replacement funds shall be returned to their respective accounts upon appropriate adjustments of the service charge rates for operation, maintenance and replacement. The use charge rate shall be adjusted such that the transferred monies will be returned to their respective accounts within six months of the fiscal year in which the monies were borrowed. 
(e)  Budget. The city council, prior to the commencement of each operating year shall adopt a budget covering the foregoing expenses for each year and such total expenses shall not exceed the total amount specified in the budget, except by a vote of three-fifths of the members of the city council. 
(Code 1968, § 22-20; Ord. No. 408, § 2, 4-20-87) 
Sec. 94-10. - Equal operation, maintenance and repair rates. 
    Equal operation, maintenance and repair rates, proportionate to use, shall be charged to all users of the system, inside and outside the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-21; Ord. No. 418, § 1, 11-23-87) 
Sec. 94-11. - Annual notification to users of breakdown of charges. 
    The city shall at least annually notify each user of the system of the breakdown of charges into debt service, replacement, and operation, maintenance and repair (OM&R) components. 
(Code 1968, § 22-22; Ord. No. 418, § 1, 11-23-87) 
Sec. 94-12. - Shutting off water service from portion of city; notice. 
    Should it become necessary to shut off water from any section of the city because of accidents or for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, the city will endeavor to give timely notice to the consumers affected thereby and will, so far as practical, use its best efforts to prevent inconvenience and damage arising from any such causes, but the failure to give such notice shall not render the city responsible or liable for damages which may result therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 101, § 7, 8-6-34; Code 1968, § 22-29) 
Sec. 94-13. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the water supply cross connection rules of the state department of environmental quality being R 325.11401 to R 325.11407. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the city superintendent to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city superintendent and as approved by the state department of environmental quality. 
(c)  The representative of the city superintendent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  The city superintendent is hereby authorized and directed to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this section. All testable backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested initially upon installation to be sure that the assembly is working properly. Subsequent testing of assemblies shall be tested on an annual basis as required by the city and in accordance with state department of environmental quality requirements. Only individuals that are approved and state certified shall be qualified to perform such testing. That individual(s) shall certify the results of his/her testing. 
(e)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this section and by the state and the city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(f)  This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and existing city ordinances but is supplementary to them. 
(g)  Any person or customer found guilty of violating any of the provisions of this section, or any written order of the city superintendent, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00 for each violation. Each day upon which a violation of the provisions of this section shall occur shall be deemed a separate and additional violation for the purpose of this section. 
(Code 1968, § 22-30; Ord. No. 256, §§ 1-7, 5-7-73; Ord. 706, §§ 1-3, 5-21-07) 
Sec. 94-14. - Wells. 
(a)  All water wells shall comply with MCL 333.12701 et seq. 
(b)  This Code shall not restrict a registered well drilling contractor or registered pump installer, registered under MCL 333.12701 et seq., from engaging in his legally recognized trade. 
(c)  The registered drilling contractor or pump installer may install either within or without both habitable structures or commercial buildings, such pumps, pressure tanks, pipes, fittings and controls as shall be necessary to properly operate, service and test the well and water system. 
(Code 1968, § 6-97; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 5-7-90) 
Sec. 94-15. - Maintenance and repair of water service. 
    The cost of all repair, maintenance, and replacement of existing building water services, shutoffs, and their connection to the public water main, from the building to the city water main, shall be the responsibility of the property owner. Such owner shall make application to perform such work with the building department, and all work shall be in accordance with city codes and regulations. In the event the city requires emergency repair, or in the event that the property owner fails to make repairs, the city may make the repairs and charge the property owner for all actual costs. 
(Ord. No. 628, § 2, 4-17-00) 
Sec. 94-16. - Entry on premises-Failure to permit. 
    All property owners and/or persons in possession of premises served by city utilities shall permit authorized city officials to enter such premises for the purpose of installation, repair, maintenance, inspection, testing and/or meter reading of such utilities as necessary for the proper operation of such utilities, and failure to permit such entry shall subject such person or persons to discontinuance of service until compliance is obtained as well as such other penalties as are provided by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 652, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Secs. 94-17-94-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-36. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act, the act, Federal Water Pollution Control Act, the Clean Water Act are used interchangeably in this article and refer to Public Law 92-500, as adopted in 1972 and amended by Public Law 95-217 in 1977, and any succeeding amendments. 
    Alternative discharge limit means limits set by the city in lieu of the promulgated national categorical pretreatment standards, for integrated facilities in accordance with the combined waste stream formula as set by the EPA. 
    Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function; 
(2)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; and 
(3)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above if (a) such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates; (b) the authorization is in writing and (c) the written authorization is submitted to the POTW. 
    BOD 5 , biochemical oxygen demand means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees Celsius (20°C), expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building means any structure constructed within the city, including houses, garages and mobile homes. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil and other drain pipes conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
    Chlorine demand means the difference between the amount of chlorine added to water or waste water and the amount of residual chlorine remaining at the end of a specified contract period. The demand for any given water varies with the amount of chlorine applied, time of contact and temperature. 
    City means the city and/or the duly authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    COD, chemical oxygen demand means the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in wastewater. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Combined wastestream means the wastestream at industrial facilities where regulated process effluent is mixed with other wastewater (either regulated or unregulated) prior to treatment. 
    Compatible pollutant means the pollutants which are treated and removed to a substantial degree by the treatment works. These pollutants are biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, fecal coliform, phosphorus and its compounds, and nitrogen and its compounds. 
    Cooling water means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
    Daily average means an average over a 24-hour period commencing and ending at midnight or other time of day established by the building official. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    Holding tank waste means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    Industrial user means any nongovernmental, nonresidential user of a publicly owned treatment works which discharges more than the equivalent of 25,000 gallons per day (gpd) of sanitary wastes or is identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented under one of the following divisions: A, B, D, E and I. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes from industrial processes as distinct from domestic sanitary sewage. 
    Integrated facilities means industrial facilities with a combined wastestream. 
    Interference means any discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, both: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW and any of its process or operations, or its sludge use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal. 
    Mg/l means milligrams per liter. 
    MDNR means the Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    National categorical pretreatment standard means any federal regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA which applies to a specific category of industrial users. 
    NPDES permit means national pollution discharge elimination system permit according to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by Public Law 92-500. It prohibits any person from discharging pollutants into a waterway from a point source unless this discharge is authorized by a permit issued either by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or by an approved state agency. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means any building, structure, facility or installation of which the construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) (33 U.S.C. 1317) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that (i) the construction is a site at which no other source is located; or (ii) the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or (iii) the production or wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
    Normal strength domestic wastes means wastes which have a BOD of less than 200 milligrams per liter, suspended solids of less than 170 milligrams per liter, phosphorus of less than 10 milligrams per liter, have a pH between 6.5 and 9.5 and do not contain a concentration of other constituents which will interfere with the normal wastewater treatment process. 
    Operation and maintenance (O&M) means all costs, direct and indirect, not including debt service, but inclusive of expenditures attributable to administration, equipment replacement and treatment and collection of wastewater necessary to insure adequate treatment and collection on a continuing basis in conformance with applicable regulations. 
    Pass through means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude of a violation). 
    Person means an individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in moles per liter. 
    ppm means parts per million. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the sewage works. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d). 
    Pretreatment standards means national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal, state or local standards, whichever are applicable. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of foods that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by the city. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Severe property damage means substantial physical damage or property damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory; may is permissive. 
    Significant industrial user: 
(1)  Except as provided in paragraph (2) of this definition, the term means: (i) All industrial users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N; and (ii) Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up to five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or (iii) is designated as such by the POTW on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). 
(2)  Upon finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (1)(ii) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or of violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Significant noncompliance (SNC): 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter. 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, periodic self monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
    Slug discharge means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
    State means the State of Michigan. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, or other liquids, and which are removable by the wastewater treatment process. 
    Total metals means the sum of the concentration of copper (Cu), nickel (Ni), total chromium (Cr) and zinc (Zn). 
    Toxic pollutant means any pollutant or combination of pollutants which is or can potentially be harmful to public health or environment including those listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of CWA 307(a) or other acts. 
    Uncontaminated industrial waste means the water or waste water from a business or industry, to which no solids or organic material has been added. 
    U.S. EPA; EPA; U.S. EPA administrator means the United States Environmental Protection Agency which assures the protection of the environment by abating or controlling pollution on a systematic basis. 
    Wastewater treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treatment of sewage. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(b)  The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
    ASTM: American Society for Testing Materials. 
    BOD: biochemical oxygen demand. 
    CFR: Code of Federal Regulations. 
    COD: chemical oxygen demand. 
    CWA: Clean Water Act. 
    EPA: Environmental Protection Agency. 
    l: liter. 
    MDNR: Michigan Department of Natural Resources. 
    mg: milligrams. 
    mg/l: milligrams per liter. 
    NPDES: national pollutant discharge elimination system. 
    O&M: operations and maintenance. 
    POTW: publicly owned treatment works. 
    SIC: standard industrial classification. 
    SS: suspended solids. 
    USC: United States Code. 
    WEF: Water Environment Federation 
    WPCF: Water Pollution Control Federation. 
(Code 1968, § 22-41; Ord. No. 392, §§ 2, 3, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 408, § 3, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 514, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-93) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-37. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR 403). 
(b)  The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge. 
(2)  Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system. 
(3)  Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the system. 
(4)  Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal wastewater system. 
(c)  This article provides for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through the enforcement of general requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customer's capacity will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(d)  This article shall apply to the city and to persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city POTW. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent of the city POTW shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1968, § 22-40; Ord. No. 392, § 1, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 1.01, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-38. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  Waste deposits. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the city, the county, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  Water pollution. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural watercourse or any storm sewer, within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary wastewater, industrial waste or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the standards established by the MDNR. 
(c)  Privies and septic tanks. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater, within the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-42; Ord. No. 392, §§ 4.01-4.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, §§ 4.01-4.03, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-39. - Suitable facilities, sewer connection required. 
    The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, right-of-way or public utility easement in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article within 180 days after date of the official notice to do so has been issued by the city council provided that the public sewer is located within a public easement contiguous to and not further than 200 feet from any such houses, buildings, structures or properties. 
(Code 1968, § 22-43; Ord. No. 392, § 4.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 4.04, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-40. - Connection limit. 
    In the event that the maximum capacity of the wastewater treatment plant may be exceeded by additional sewer connections, the city council may prohibit future connecting until the wastewater treatment plant is expanded to accommodate additional flow. 
(Code 1968, § 22-43.1; Ord. No. 408, § 4, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 514, § 4.05, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-41. - Private sewage disposal systems. 
(a)  When permitted. Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 94-39, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the regulations and orders of the MDNR, and the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Discontinuance of system. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system as provided in section 94-41(a), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the provisions of this article, and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(c)  Maintenance of system. The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(d)  Additional requirements. No statement contained in this article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the building official, or the MDNR, and the county health department with respect to private sewage disposal. 
(Code 1968, § 22-44; Ord. No. 392, §§ 5.01-5.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, §§ 5.01-5.04, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 94-42-94-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 94-51. - Permit application requirements. 
    Application for use of sewers requires each person or establishment with a potential discharge other than normal strength domestic waste discharge, to do all of the following: 
(1)  Request service for sanitary sewer, storm sewer or other. 
(2)  Request to include all of the following: 
a.  State nature of business or enterprise including appropriate SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual. 
b.  State source and volume of water used both in processing, cooling and waste transportation. 
c.  State volumes in gallons of water to be discharged to sanitary, storm or other surface or ground areas, including daily, seasonal or annual variations. 
d.  List all substances of a chemical, biological or radioactive nature, other than those found in the city's water supply, which are now or will be found in all wastewater discharges. 
e.  Where additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance activities will be required to comply with this article, the user shall provide a declaration of the shortest schedule by which the discharger will provide such additional pretreatment and/or implementation of additional operational and maintenance activities. 
1.  The schedule shall contain milestone dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required to comply with the requirements of this article. 
2.  Under no circumstance shall the city permit a time increment for any single step directed toward compliance with the article to exceed nine months. 
3.  Not later than 14 days following each milestone date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city, including no less than a statement as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress represented by that milestone date and, if not, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the approved schedule. 
f.  Provide plans for buildings, waste treatment works, process flow patterns, outfall lines, and in-plant drainage lines. 
g.  Sample, test and file reports with the city and appropriate state agencies on specified waste characteristics. All schedules, locations and methods shall be approved by the city. 
h.  Place waste treatment facilities, process facilities, waste streams or other facilities generating wastes or possessing potential waste problems under designated control and supervision of a person who has been approved by appropriate state agencies. 
i.  Provide a report on all raw materials entering the process or support systems, including analyses and assays provided by suppliers of raw materials. 
j.  Maintain records and a file report on final disposal of specific liquids, solids, sludges, oils, radioactive material, solvents, or other hazardous wastes as identified in this article. 
(3)  a. 
New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall "start-up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards. 
b.  New sources, when subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, shall submit a baseline monitoring report at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge to the POTW. Sampling required for baseline monitoring reports and 90-day reports include: 
1.  A minimum of four grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics; 
2.  For all other pollutants, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow proportional composite sampling techniques where feasible. The control authority may waive flow proportional composite sampling for any industrial user that demonstrates that flow proportional sampling is infeasible. In such cases, samples may be obtained through time proportional composite sampling techniques or through a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(a); Ord. No. 392, § 8.01, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.01, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-52. - Issuance of sewer use permit. 
    Upon completion of any or all of the items as prescribed in section 94-51 the city will, after reviewing applications, issue a sewer use permit to all significant industrial users which will contain all or part of the following: 
(1)  Statement of duration of permits. The maximum duration shall be five years; 
(2)  State location of discharge points into sanitary, storm sewers, or surface water areas; 
(3)  Designation of maximum allowable volumes of water to be discharged at discharge points; 
(4)  Designation of any general and specific discharge prohibitions as established by section 94-97, discharge restrictions and compliance schedules; 
(5)  Designation of types and sizes of containment facilities to control process spills to the designated sewers; 
(6)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record-keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type, based on the applicable general pretreatment standards; 
(7)  Provisions for notifying the city of any changes in process and/or wastes or proposed additional waste, or connections to the designated or other sewers; 
(8)  Establish limits on specific waste constituents in mg/l and in lbs/day. Effluent limitations shall be based on the more stringent of categorical pretreatment standards, local limits as established by this article, and state and local law; 
(9)  Establishment of any fees deemed necessary to defray costs of sampling and/or analysis by the city; 
(10)  Statement that the city reserves the right, at any time, to reappraise the requirements of any industry for its use permit; 
(11)  Statement of nontransferability as described in section 94-53; 
(12)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties as described in sections 94-59 through 94-66 of this article for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
(13)  Statement regarding permit revocation as described in section 94-60. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(b); Ord. No. 392, § 8.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.02, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-53. - Permit transfer. 
    Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a specific process or operation. A wastewater contribution permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without prior notification to the POTW and provision of a copy of the existing wastewater contribution permit to the new owner or operator. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(c); Ord. No. 392, § 8.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.03, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-54. - Required reports. 
(a)  Within 90 days following the date for final compliance by the discharger with applicable pretreatment standards set forth in this article or 90 days following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the treatment works by a new discharger, any discharger subject to this article shall submit to the city a report indicating the nature and concentration of all prohibited or regulated substances contained in its discharge, and the average and maximum daily flow in gallons. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, what additional operations and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the discharger into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the discharger. 
(b)  Any discharger subject to a pretreatment standard set forth in this article, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new discharger, after commencement of the discharge to the city, shall submit to the city during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently by the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of prohibited or regulated substances in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period. Flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement, provided, however, where cost or feasibility considerations justify, the city may accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated by verifiable techniques. The city, for good cause when considering such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, or other extenuating factors may authorize the submission of the reports on months other than those specified above. 
(c)  Reports of permittees shall contain all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where required by the city. The frequency of monitoring by the user shall be as prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard of this article. All analyses shall be performed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136 and amendments thereto. (Comment: Where 40 CFR Part 136, does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator of the U.S. EPA.) If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirements of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW, using the procedures prescribed in this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(d)  The reports required by this section shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period. The POTW shall require that frequency of monitoring necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(e)  If sampling performed by an industrial user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except the industrial user is not required to resample if: 
(1)  The POTW performs sampling at the industrial user at a frequency of at least once per month, or 
(2)  The POTW performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user received the results of this sampling. 
(f)  The reports required by this section shall include the following certification statement as set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii), and shall be signed by an authorized representative: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(d); Ord. No. 392, § 8.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.04, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-55. - Monitoring facilities. 
    Each discharger shall provide and operate at the discharger's own expense, a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each sewer discharge to the city. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the discharger's premises; except where such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the discharger, the city may concur with the facility being constructed in the public street or sidewalk area providing that the facility is located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(e); Ord. No. 392, § 8.05, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.05, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-55.1. - Hazardous waste notification. 
(a)  Any industrial user, except as specified in subpart (e) below, which discharges to the POTW any substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a listed or characteristic hazardous waste under 40 CFR, Part 261, shall notify the POTW in writing of such discharge. 
(b)  All hazardous waste notifications shall include: 
(1)  The name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR, Part 261; 
(2)  The EPA hazardous waste number; 
(3)  The type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other); and 
(4)  A certification that the user has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(c)  In addition to the information submitted in section 94-55.1(a), industrial users discharging more than 100 kg of hazardous waste per calendar month to the POTW shall provide to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
(1)  An identification of the hazardous constituents in the waste; 
(2)  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
(3)  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
(d)  Hazardous waste notifications shall be submitted no later than 180 days from the discharge of the wastes. Any notification under this provision need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged, although notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under section 94-105.1. 
(e)  Industrial users are exempt from the hazardous waste notification requirement during a calendar month in which they discharge 15 kg or less of non-acute hazardous wastes. Discharge of any quantity of acute hazardous waste as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one time notification. 
(Ord. No. 514, § 8.06, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-56. - Confidential information. 
(a)  Information and data furnished to the city with respect to the nature and frequency of discharge shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the discharger specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets or proprietary information of the discharger. 
(b)  When requested by a discharger furnishing a report, the portions of a report which may disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this article, the national pollutant discharge elimination system, (NPDES) permit, state disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the discharger furnishing this report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(c)  Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the city until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the discharger. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(f); Ord. No. 392, § 8.06, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.07, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-57. - Publication of violations. 
    As required by CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), the city shall annually publish in the major local newspaper a list of the users which were in significant noncompliance with any applicable pretreatment requirements or standards during the 12 previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same 12 months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA and MDNR upon request. 
(Code 1968, § 22-57(g); Ord. No. 392, § 8.07, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 8.08, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-58. - Powers and authority of inspectors. 
(a)  Authority to enter. The building official and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted, at reasonable times, to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, testing, and to examine and copy all records pertaining to a user's discharge in accordance with the provisions of this article. The superintendent or his representatives shall have no authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries, beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge of the sewers or waterways or facilities for waste treatment. 
(b)  Liability. While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to above, the building official or duly authorized employees of the city shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the city employees and the city shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and growing out of the gaging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions. 
(Code 1968, § 22-58; Ord. No. 392, §§ 9.01, 9.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, §§ 9.01, 9.02, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-59. - Emergency suspension of service. 
(a)  The city may suspend wastewater treatment service when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the city, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, causes interference to the sewage works or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
(b)  Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewage works system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall reinstate the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city within 15 days of the date of occurrence. 
(Code 1968, § 22-59; Ord. No. 392, § 10.01, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.01, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-60. - Revocation of permit. 
    Any user who violates the following conditions of this article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this article: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents, and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Code 1968, § 22-60; Ord. No. 392, § 10.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.02, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-61. - Notification of violation. 
    Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, wastewater contribution permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the city may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, the offender shall take such corrective action. 
(Code 1968, § 22-61; Ord. No. 392, § 10.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.03, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-62. - Show cause hearing. 
    The city may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(Code 1968, § 22-62; Ord. No. 392, § 10.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.04, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-63. - Taking evidence. 
(a)  The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the city to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; and 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. 
(b)  At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereto. 
(Code 1968, § 22-63; Ord. No. 392, § 10.05, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.05, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-64. - Discontinuing service. 
    After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed or existing treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1968, § 22-64; Ord. No. 392, § 10.06, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.06, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-65. - Legal action. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the applicable court of this county. 
(Code 1968, § 22-65; Ord. No. 392, § 10.07, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.07, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-66. - Right of appeal. 
    Any discharger or any interested party shall have the right to request in writing an interpretation of ruling by the city on any matter covered by this article and shall be entitled to a prompt written reply. If such inquiry is by a discharger and deals with matters of performance or compliance with this article for which enforcement activity relating to an alleged violation is the subject, receipt of a discharger's request shall stay all enforcement proceedings pending receipt of the aforesaid written reply. Appeal of any final judicial order entered pursuant to this article may be taken in accordance with state law. 
(Code 1968, § 22-66; Ord. No. 392, § 10.08, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 10.08, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-67. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Civil penalties. Any user who is found to have violated an order of the city council or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with this article, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 for each offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder. 
(b)  Falsifying information. Any person who knowingly makes any false statements, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or wastewater contribution permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. 
(c)  Record retention. All discharges subject to the pretreatment standard set forth in this article shall retain all data reports and other pertinent information pertaining to their nondomestic wastes. These records should be retained for at least three years. 
(Code 1968, § 22-67; Ord. No. 392, §§ 11.01-11.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 408, § 7, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 514, §§ 11.01-11.03, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 94-68-94-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BUILDING SEWERS 

Sec. 94-81. - Permit; conformance to specifications. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make or open into, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the building official of the city. All sewers, connections, laterals, house services or other connections to a public sewer shall be made in accordance with requirements of the city's standard specifications. No such construction shall be undertaken without a permit being issued by the city and without a suitable plan of the improvement being filed with, and approved by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-45(a); Ord. No. 392, § 6.01, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 6.01, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-82. - Authorization for connections. 
    All connections with the sanitary sewers of the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the city. 
(Code 1968, § 22-45(b); Ord. No. 392, § 6.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 6.02, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-83. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1968, §§ 6-95, 22-45(c); Ord. No. 392, § 6.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 514, § 6.03, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-84. - Plans and specifications. 
    All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit plans and specifications for all plumbing construction within such building or premises and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the city's code and standard specifications. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the city, a construction permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with the city sewer system. 
(Code 1968, § 22-45(d); Ord. No. 392, § 6.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 6.04, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-85. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the building official when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The building official shall then inspect the building and plumbing construction therein and if such construction permits, a sewer connection permit shall be issued, subject to the applicable provisions of other sections of this article and Code. 
(Code 1968, § 22-45(e); Ord. No. 392, § 6.05, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 6.05, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-86. - Maintenance and repair. 
    The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements of existing building sewers and their connection to the public sewers, from the building to the city sewer line, shall be borne by the property owner. Such owner shall make application to perform such work to the building official. 
(Code 1968, § 22-45(f); Ord. No. 392, § 6.06, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 6.06, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 94-87-94-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - SEWER USE 

Sec. 94-96. - Discharge of unpolluted water. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer, except as hereinafter provided. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city council. Industrial cooling water may be discharged upon approval of the city council, and other necessary authorities, into a storm sewer or natural outlet. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons who are discharging, or are causing to be discharged, into a sanitary sewer, groundwater or subsurface drainage by reason of interior or exterior footing tile being connected directly to a sanitary sewer at a time when such connection was permitted by ordinances then in effect; provided, however, that such persons shall not permit surface water, roof runoff water or any other unpolluted water to flow toward, fall upon or pond in any ground area lying within four feet of a building foundation served by such footing tile connected directly to a sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1968, § 22-46; Ord. No. 392, § 7.01, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.01, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-97. - Prohibited wastes. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge any industrial or commercial type wastes into the city sewer system which are deleterious to the public health and safety of the people of the city. Any waste will be considered deleterious that causes damaging effects as stated in subsection (1) below under general conditions and/or does not conform to the limitations stated in subsection (2) below under specific conditions: 
(1)  General conditions. 
a.  Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials or construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures. 
b.  Mechanical action that will destroy or damage the sewer structures. 
c.  Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of sewer structures. 
d.  Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of the sewer structures. 
e.  Placing of unreasonable demands on the wastewater treatment plant equipment or process. 
f.  Unreasonable limitation of the effectiveness of the wastewater treatment process. 
g.  Danger to public health and safety. 
h.  Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest. 
i.  May cause harm to the aquatic life in the Saline River. 
j.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(2)  Specific conditions. 
a.  Must not have pH below 6.0 or above 9.5. 
b.  Must not contain more than ten ppm of the following gases: hydrogen sulphide, sulphur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen, or any of the halogens. 
c.  Must not contain any explosive substances. 
d.  Must not contain any flammable substance with a closed cup flashpoint of 140 degrees Fahrenheit. 
e.  Must have a temperature within the range of 32 degrees to 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
f.  Must not contain petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that cause interference or pass-through, or that will solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32 degrees and 104 degrees Fahrenheit. 
g.  Must not contain insoluble substances in excess of 10,000 ppm or exceeding a daily average of 500 ppm. 
h.  Must not contain total solids (soluble and insoluble substances) in excess of 20,000 ppm. 
i.  Must not contain soluble substances in concentrations that would increase the viscosity to greater than 1.1 specific viscosity. 
j.  Must not contain insoluble substances having a specified gravity greater than 2.65. 
k.  Must not contain insoluble substances that will fail to pass through a No. 8 Standard Sieve, or having any dimension greater than one-half inch. 
l.  Must not contain any paints, solvents, lacquers, gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in sufficient quantity to impair the waste treatment process or to constitute a hazard to the sewer system or to employees working therein. 
m.  Must not have a chlorine demand greater than 15 ppm. 
n.  Must not contain more than 100 ppm of any antiseptic substance. 
o.  Must not contain phenols in excess of 0.5 ppm. 
p.  Must not contain any toxic or irritating substance which will create conditions hazardous to public health and safety. 
q.  Must not contain in excess of 100 ppm or exceed a 30-day average of 50 ppm of any grease, animal or vegetable fat, or oil or any oily substance. 
r.  Must not contain unshredded garbage. 
s.  No discharge shall be permitted to enter the sanitary sewer containing more than the following daily maximum concentrations: 
6.4 mg/l Arsenic 0.05 mg/l Cadmium 4.1 mg/l Total chromium 2.4 mg/l Copper 0.1 mg/l Cyanide 3.3 mg/l Lead 0.005 mg/l Mercury 3.4 mg/l Nickel 2.1 mg/l Zinc 0.7 mg/l Silver 250 mg/l BOD 300 mg/l SS 600 mg/l COD 12 mg/l Total phosphates as P 1.0 mg/l Methylene Chloride 40 mg/l Total nitrogen (tkn)  
The city will propose any revisions to the limitations necessary to ensure compliance with the NPDES permit or any current federal pretreatment or state pretreatment standards. These revisions shall include limiting discharges to the treatment works which may interfere with the process of sludge disposal. The city may impose limits on ammonia, nitrate, and other fertilizing substances in quantities that may impair treatment or create undesirable conditions in the receiving stream. 
t.  Must not contain any substance in the discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(3)  Application. All of the preceding standards and regulations are to apply at the point where industrial or commercial-type wastes are discharged into a public sewer and all chemical and mechanical corrective pretreatment must be accomplished to practical completion before this point. 
(4)  Dilution prohibition. No industrial user shall increase the use of process water or dilute a discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(5)  Spill prevention and slug control plans: 
a.  1. 
Industrial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge of materials which may interfere with the POTW by developing spill prevention plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and maintained at the owner's or industrial user's expense. Spill prevention plans, including the facilities and the operating procedures shall be approved by the POTW before construction of the facility. 
2.  Industrial users that store hazardous substances shall not contribute to the POTW after the effective date of this article unless a spill prevention plan has been approved by the POTW. Approval of such plans shall not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and regulations governing the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous substances. 
b.  The POTW shall evaluate each significant industrial user at least once every two years, and other industrial users as necessary, to determine whether such user needs a plan to control slug discharges. If the POTW decides that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under section 94-97, with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days; 
4.  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(6)  [ Trucked or hauled pollutants. ] The discharge of any trucked or hauled pollutants shall be restricted to discharge points designated by the POTW, and only after approval by the POTW. 
(7)  Affirmative defenses. A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general or specific prohibitions established in this section where the user can demonstrate that: 
a.  It did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference; and 
b.  1. 
A local limit designed to prevent pass through and interference, as the case may be, was developed in accordance with this section for each pollutant in the user's discharge that caused pass through or interference, and the user was in compliance with each such local limit immediately prior to and during the pass through or interference; or 
2.  If a local limit designed to prevent pass through and/or interference, as the case may be, has not been developed in accordance with this section for the pollutant(s) that caused the pass through or interference, the user's discharge directly prior to and during the pass through or interference did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge activity when the POTW was regularly in compliance with the POTW's NPDES permit requirements and, in the case of interference, applicable requirements for sewage sludge use or disposal. 
(Code 1968, § 22-47; Ord. No. 392, § 7.02, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 10-21-85; Res. of 10-21-85; Ord. No. 408, § 5, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 514, § 7.02, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-98. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    Upon the promulgation of the national categorical pretreatment standards, alternative discharge limits, or other federal or state limitations, for a particular industrial subcategory, the pretreatment standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article and shall be considered part of this article. The city shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements. 
(Code 1968, § 22-48; Ord. No. 392, § 7.03, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.03, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-99. - Interceptors. 
(a)  Grease, oil, sand interceptors and conventional grease traps shall be provided when in the opinion of the city they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. 
(b)  Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1968, § 22-49; Ord. No. 392, § 7.04, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.04, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-100. - Interceptor maintenance. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1968, § 22-50; Ord. No. 392, § 7.05, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.05, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-101. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
    Where necessary, in the opinion of the city, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits as provided for in section 94-97; or 
(2)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for the approval of the city and of the state regulation agencies and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Code 1968, § 22-51; Ord. No. 392, § 7.06, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.06, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-102. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the city, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. The control manhole may be required by the city for any industrial or commercial building sewer whose water supply is from an unmetered private well. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1968, § 22-52; Ord. No. 392, § 7.07, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.07, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-103. - Measurements, tests, analyses. 
    All measurements, tests and analysis of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in section 94-97, shall be determined in accordance with Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 94-102, or upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. If no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. In addition to the standard methods, all testing should conform with Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants as published in October 16, 1973, Federal Register (40 CFR 136). 
(Code 1968, § 22-53; Ord. No. 392, § 7.08, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.08, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-104. - Special agreements. 
(a)  No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment of a surcharge. The strength of such wastes shall be determined by composite sampling at the owner's expense over a period of time sufficient to generate a representative sample. Surcharges will be assessed based on a prorated share of the annual costs of operation and maintenance associated with the treatment and handling of a substance, multiplied by the ratio of weight of excess substance over the normal weight of the substance treated annually. 
(b)  Special agreements under this section can only exist for compatible pollutants for which adequate plant treatment capacity is available. Any agreement between the city and the user shall not allow any waiver of federal prohibited discharge standards or national categorical pretreatment standards except under the mechanisms specified in the general pretreatment regulations. 
(Code 1968, § 22-54; Ord. No. 392, § 7.09, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 408, § 6, 4-20-87; Ord. No. 514, § 7.09, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-105. - Accidental spill reporting. 
(a)  When any discharge in violation of this article or permit conditions, and in the case of any discharge that could cause problems to the POTW, including any slug loadings, as defined in section 94-36 occurs, it will be the immediate responsibility of the user to notify the sewage works by telephone of the incident. Notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration, volume and recommended corrective action. 
(b)  Following any such discharge, it will be the responsibility of the user to submit a written report to the city within five days detailing the cause of the discharge and the measures being implemented to prevent a reoccurrence. Submittal of the report will not relieve the user of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewage works, or fines, civil penalties or other liabilities imposed upon the city as a result of the discharge. 
(Code 1968, § 22-55; Ord. No. 392, § 7.10, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.10, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-105.1. - Notification of changed discharge. 
    All industrial users shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the industrial user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
(Ord. No. 514, § 7.11, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-105.2. - Bypass. 
(a)  Allowed bypasses. An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur which does not violate pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to (b) and (c) below. 
(b)  Notification. 
(1)  If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
(2)  An industrial user shall orally notify the POTW of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or requirements within 24 hours of becoming aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of becoming aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact times and dates, and if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. 
(c)  Exceptions to enforcement action. 
(1)  Bypass is prohibited and the POTW may take enforcement action against an individual user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
b.  There are no feasible alternatives to bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed to prevent bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The industrial user submitted notices as required by paragraph (b) of this section. 
(2)  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (c)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 514, § 7.12, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-105.3. - Upset provisions. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is an unintentional and temporary noncompliance with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c) are met. 
(c)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the industrial user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the POTW and control authority within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(d)  In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(e)  The industrial user shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(Ord. No. 514, § 7.13, 6-21-93) 
Sec. 94-106. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system or treatment plant. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided for in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1968, § 22-56; Ord. No. 392, § 7.11, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 514, § 7.14, 6-21-93) 
Secs. 94-107-94-125. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 94-126-94-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER CONSERVATION 

Sec. 94-136. - Period of emergency defined. 
    A period of emergency shall be defined for the purposes of this division as a period of time during which the adequacy of the supply of water available to the city for all purposes is threatened by any cause whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 1, 5-24-62; Code 1968, § 22-82) 
Sec. 94-137. - Declaration of emergency; regulations authorized. 
    Upon a determination by the city council at any regular or special meeting duly called that a period of emergency, as defined in this division, exists the council shall, by resolution duly passed, establish such regulations and priorities pertaining to the use by the public of city water as it shall deem necessary to ensure the continuation of an adequate supply of water to meet the basic needs of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 2, 5-24-62; Code 1968, § 22-83) 
Sec. 94-138. - Publication, posting of regulations. 
    A copy of the resolution authorized by section 94-137 shall be forthwith published once in a newspaper selected by the council and circulated in the city, and shall be forthwith posted in at least five public places within the city. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 3, 5-24-62; Code 1968, § 22-84) 
Sec. 94-139. - Duration of regulations. 
    The regulations and priorities established by resolution pursuant to this division shall become effective immediately upon such publication and posting, and shall remain in effect until rescinded by resolution of the council duly passed, published and posted as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 4, 5-24-62; Code 1968, § 22-85) 
Sec. 94-140. - Violations. 
    The violation of any regulation adopted pursuant to this division shall constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 5, 5-24-62; Code 1968, § 22-86) 
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 86. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 654, § 1, adopted March 4, 2002, repealed and reenacted art. II, §§ 98-26-98-36, in its entirety to read as herein set out. Formerly, art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 117, § 2, adopted in 1948; Ord. No. 156, § 2, adopted February 19, 1962; the Code of 1968, §§ 21-11-21-21. 

Sec. 98-26. - Definitions. 
    Manager means the city manager or such city officer or employee as the city manager may designate. 
    Taxicab means any vehicle operated on the streets of the city accepting passengers for hire between such points in the city as may be directed by the passenger. The term "taxicab" does not refer to mass transportation vehicles operating over fixed routes, vehicles owned and operated by governmental agencies, school buses, chartered buses or vehicles used solely for funerals, weddings, christenings and similar events. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 98-27. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab within the city unless the vehicle and the driver are currently licensed pursuant to this article. This provision shall not apply to persons operating a taxicab under a valid, current license issued by another governmental jurisdiction authorized by state law to license taxicabs and not having an office, address, or pickup stand authorized by the city located within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02; Ord. No. 667, § 1, 7-7-03) 
Sec. 98-28. - Application for taxicab license. 
(1)  Application for a taxicab license shall be made on forms approved by the manager. 
(2)  The application must be accompanied by the certificate of an automobile mechanic licensed in the state. The certificate must be on a form approved by the manager, must have been issued within 60 days of the date of application, and must indicate that the vehicle sought to be licenses as a taxicab has been thoroughly inspected and has been found to comply with all the requirements of the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. 
(3)  The application must be accompanied by proof of insurance in the minimum amount of $200,000.00 for injury or death to one person, and $500,000.00 for injury or death to all persons arising out of one accident. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-29. - Issuing of taxicab license. 
    A taxicab license shall be issued by the city manager if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The applicant has paid the fee specified for such license in the official fee schedule adopted by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  It appears from the mechanic's certificate and a city inspection of the vehicle that it is clean, safe and in full compliance with the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code and this article of this Code. 
(3)  The vehicle is currently registered in the state and insured for public liability in the amounts provided in subsection 98-28(3) hereof. 
(4)  The vehicle's meter has been inspected and tested by the police department to determine that it is accurate. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-30. - License plate. 
    If a taxicab license is issued to a vehicle, a license plate or decal, as approved by the manager, shall be attached to the vehicle and visibly displayed on the rear thereof. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-31. - Maintenance of the vehicle. 
    No person shall operate any taxicab licensed pursuant to this article unless such vehicle is maintained at all times in the condition required for the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-32. - Revocation of taxicab license. 
    A taxicab license shall be revoked by the manager upon any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  The vehicle is found to be in a condition which would not comply with the maintenance requirements for the issuance of a license. 
(2)  A person is found driving the vehicle for taxicab purposes who does not have a current valid taxicab driver's and chauffeur's license. 
(3)  The owner of the vehicle is convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-33. - Application for and issuance of taxicab driver's license. 
    A taxicab driver's license shall be issued by the administrator after application has been made therefore on forms approved by the manager, if the following conditions are satisfied: 
(1)  The applicant is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  The applicant has a current state chauffeur's license. 
(3)  The applicant is able to read, write and speak the English language. 
(4)  The applicant has no more than six current points for moving violations in accordance with the Michigan Motor Vehicle Code. 
(5)  The applicant has not been convicted of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances, while having a blood alcohol in excess of .10 percent by weight, or while visibly impaired by the of intoxicating liquor or controlled substances within the three years immediately preceding the application. 
(6)  The applicant has not within the previous five years been convicted of a felony involving force or violence. 
(7)  The applicant does not have a physical or mental impairment which would make it unsafe to operate a taxicab. 
(8)  The applicant has not been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article within three previous years. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-34. - Display of taxicab driver's license. 
    The taxicab driver's license issued pursuant hereto shall be at all times conspicuously displayed inside the taxicab while the driver is operating the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-35. - Suspension or revocation of taxicab driver's license. 
    A taxicab driver's license may be suspended or revoked by the manager if any of the following occur: 
(1)  The driver is no longer able to comply with the requirements for the issuance of a license. 
(2)  The driver is found to have falsified any information in his/her application for a license. 
(3)  The driver is convicted of violating any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-36. - Deception of passengers. 
    No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger as to that passenger's destination or rate or fare. No driver shall convey any passenger to a place other than directed by the passenger or employ any longer route to a destination than necessary unless so requested by the passenger. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-37. - Driving and use of controlled substance on duty prohibited. 
    No taxicab driver shall drive or consume any alcoholic beverage or use any controlled substance either prior to the operation of the taxicab or while operating the same. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-38. - Use of taxicab for immoral or illegal purposes. 
    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall use, or permit the use of, any taxicab for immoral or illegal purposes. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-39. - Smoking prohibited. 
    No taxicab driver shall have in his/her possession a lighted cigar or pipe while transporting any passenger in a taxicab. No such driver shall have in his/her possession any lighted cigarette unless the driver first requests and obtains the permission of all passengers. No passenger shall smoke in a vehicle containing a notice stating "No Smoking". 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-40. - Driver appearance. 
    Drivers of taxicabs shall be clean in dress and in person at all times while operating a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-41. - Seating capacity. 
    No driver shall permit a taxicab to be occupied by more persons over the age of two than the number specified as the searing capacity of said vehicle as posted on the rate card. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-42. - Standard taxicab rates. 
    No person shall operate or permit the operation of a taxicab with a taximeter for the purpose of charging meter rates higher than the standard rates approved by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-43. - Baggage and parcels. 
    The rates for carrying the baggage and parcels of passengers shall be subject to the approval procedure provided in section 98-41. The rate charged for delivery of baggage and parcels not in connection with the transportation of passengers is not regulated by this article. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-44. - Rate card. 
    No person shall operate a taxicab that does not have a rate card posted in plan view of the passengers. The rate card must clearly indicate the rates charged and the occupancy limits for the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-45. - Taxicab stands. 
    Taxicab stands may be established by traffic-control orders. The traffic-control orders may specify restrictions on the number of taxicabs which may use the stands at one time, the use of the stands for parking other vehicles, and the hours of any restrictions. The restrictions shall be indicated by traffic control devices at the taxicab stands. No person shall violate the restrictions imposed on the use of taxicab stands. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-46. - Solicitation of passengers. 
    No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers at a location where he/she has not received a current request for taxicab services and where he/she has reason to know the services of another taxicab firm have been requested. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-47. - License term. 
    Taxicab licenses and taxicab driver's licenses shall expire on January 1st of the year following the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-48. - Meter seal. 
    When a taxicab meter is tested and inspected by the police department, the inspecting officer shall place a seal on the meter. No person shall operate a taxicab with a meter without such seal or if the seal is broken. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-49. - Defrauding a taxicab driver. 
    No person shall request services for the purpose of defrauding the owner or driver of the taxicab. The conduct prohibited by this section includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refusal to pay the lawful rate for the taxicab services. 
(2)  Absconding without paying the lawful rate for the taxicab services. 
(3)  Requesting taxicab services for a person or a location where such services are not desired. 
(4)  Refusal to pay for taxicab services with other than a bill greater than twenty dollars ($20.00) over the fare. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-50. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by the decision of the manager regarding the issuance, suspension or revocation of a taxicab license and a taxicab driver's license may appeal the decision to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
Sec. 98-51. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating a section of this article shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and/or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. 
(Ord. No. 654, § 1, 3-4-02) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the zoning ordinance, Ord. No. 661, as adopted by the city council on June 16, 2003. Amendments to the zoning ordinance are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original ordinance. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings, catchlines, capitalization, citation to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text has been used to conform to the Code of Ordinances. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Prior to inclusion of Ord. No. 661, Appendix A derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. Date Ord. No. Date Ord. No. Date 186  2-28-66 346  5-20-80 510  5- 3-93 195  1- 9-67 367 12-21-81 521  3- 7-94 202 10- 2-67 376  9-19-83 532  6-20-94 207  9- 9-68 382  1-23-84 533  6-20-94 209  2-17-69 385  2-20-84 535  6-20-94 214 12-15-69 386  7- 2-84 537  5-15-95 218 11- 2-70 393  5-21-85 543  3-20-95 223  8-16-71 422  4- 4-88 544  3-20-95 228 10- 4-71 425  8- 1-88 548  7-24-95 229  9- 1-72 439  7-24-89 549 10- 2-95 238 10-16-72 443 11- 6-89 561  4-15-96 248 10- 2-72 444 11- 6-89 568  5-20-96 249 10- 2-72 459  7-23-90 579  7- 7-97 270  4-15-74 460  8- 6-90 584  9-29-97 282  1-20-75 465 12-17-90 596  8-24-98 283  4-18-77 469  1-21-91 601 12- 7-98 284  1-20-75 481  7-15-91 602 12- 7-98 276  7-15-74 483  9-23-91 604 12- 7-98 296 12-15-75 488 10- 7-91 605  2-22-99 336  2-19-79 490  9-23-91 606  2-22-99 342 10- 1-79 501  3- 1-93 621  4- 3-00 343 10-15-79 506  3-15-93 638  1-22-01  

ARTICLE 1. - TITLE, PURPOSE, CONSTRUCTION, AND VALIDITY AND SEVERABILITY 

Section 1.01. - Title. 
    This ordinance shall be known and cited as the "City of Saline Zoning Ordinance." 
Section 1.02. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this ordinance is to promote, protect, regulate, restrict and provide for the use of land and buildings within the city; to meet the needs of the state's residents for places of residence, recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure that uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding of land and congestion of population and transportation systems and other public facilities; to facilitate adequate and efficient provision for transportation systems, sewage disposal, water, energy, education, recreation, and other public service and facility needs; and to promote public health, safety, and welfare. 
    The city is divided for those purposes into districts of the number and shape that are considered best suited to carry out this section. For each of those districts, regulations are imposed designating the uses for which buildings or structures shall or shall not be erected or altered, and designating the trades, industries, and the land uses or activities that shall be permitted or excluded or subjected to special regulations. 
    It is also the purpose of this ordinance to provide for the establishment of a board of appeals and its powers and duties; to provide for the administration and enforcement hereof and for penalties for its violation; and to provide for the repeal of any and all ordinances inconsistent herewith. 
Section 1.03. - Scope and construction of regulations. 
(1)  This ordinance shall be liberally construed in such manner as to best implement its purpose. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, the requirements shall be held to be the minimum for the promotion of the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare. 
(2)  No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered, and no new use or change shall be made of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except as permitted by the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Nothing within this ordinance shall be construed to prevent compliance with an order by the appropriate authority to correct, improve, strengthen, or restore to a safe or healthy condition, any part of a building or premises declared unsafe or unhealthy. 
Section 1.04. - Validity and severability clause. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this ordinance to be invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this ordinance not specifically included in said ruling. 
    If a court of competent jurisdiction shall declare invalid the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
Section 1.05. - Conflict with other laws, regulations, and agreements. 
    Where a condition imposed by a provision of this ordinance upon the use of any lot, building, or structure is conflicting with a condition imposed by any other provision of this ordinance, or by the provision of an ordinance adopted under any other law, the provision which is more restrictive shall govern. 
    This ordinance is not intended to modify or annul any easement, covenant, or other private agreement provided that where any provision of this ordinance is more restrictive or imposes a higher standard or requirement than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the provision of this ordinance shall govern. 
Section 1.06. - Vested right. 
    It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this ordinance be held or construed to give or grant to any person, firm, or corporation any vested right, license, privilege or permit. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS AND RULES APPLYING TO TEXT 

Section 2.01. - Rules applying to text. 
    The following rules shall apply to the text and language of this ordinance: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future, words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied." 
(6)  Any word or term not defined herein shall be used with a meaning of common or standard utilization. 
Sec. 2.02. - Definitions-A through B. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases shall mean the following when used in the zoning ordinance: 
(a)  Access, principal. The primary means of vehicular approach or entry to or exit from a lot. 
(b)  Accessory buildings and structures. A supplementary building or structure on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal building occupied by or devoted exclusively to an accessory use. 
(c)  Accessory use. A use reasonably and customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use of the premises. 
(d)  Adult entertainment business. One or a combination of more than one of the following types of businesses: adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult personal service business, adult motion picture theater, or adult novelty business. 
(1)  Adult bookstore. An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade and offers for sale, for any form or consideration, any one or more of the following: 
(A)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, movies, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations that are characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or 
(B)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use as part of, or in connection with, specified sexual activities. 
(2)  Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, lounge, dance hall, or similar establishment where, for any form of consideration, employees and/or entertainers provide patrons, guests or members with exposure to specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities, on a regular, irregular, or special event basis. 
(3)  Adult personal service business. An establishment or business having as a substantial portion of its activities, one or more persons who, for any form of consideration, while nude or partially nude, provide personal services for one or more other persons in a closed room consisting of actual or simulated specified sexual activities, or erotic modeling, rubs, body painting, wrestling, or theatrical performances which are characterized by, or include emphasis on, the display of specified anatomical areas. 
(4)  Adult motion picture theater. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videos, slides, or other photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation is devoted to the showing of material characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
(5)  Adult novelty business. A business which has as a substantial portion of its activity the sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for sexual stimulation. 
(e)  Alley. Any dedicated public way other than a street, providing a secondary means of access to property. 
(f)  Automobile dealer. A building and premises that are used primarily for the sale of new or used automobiles. 
(g)  Automobile filling station. A place used for the retail sale and dispensing of fuel or lubricants together with the fixed equipment from which the fuel is dispensed directly into motor vehicles. Automobile filling stations may also incorporate additional uses as permitted in the zoning district in which the filling station is located and regulated by this ordinance. 
(h)  Automobile repair. A building and premises that are used for the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall painting, and vehicle rustproofing. 
(i)  Automobile service station. A building and/or premises that are used or designed to be used for the retail supply of gasoline and other fuels for motor vehicles, kerosene, motor oil, lubricants or grease, including sale of accessories and services, such as: polishing, washing, cleaning, greasing, undercoating, and minor repairs, but not including bumping, painting, or refinishing thereof. 
(j)  Automobile washes. A building, or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is that of washing vehicles either by automatic or self-service means. 
(k)  Basement. That portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade. 
(l)  Bed and breakfast operations. A use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guests are provided a sleeping room and board in return for payment. 
(m)  Bluff. A landform having a slope in excess of 25 percent drawn from the toe of the bluff to the top of the slope. 
(n)  Boarding house. A building other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging and meals, are provided for three or more persons, but not exceeding ten persons. 
(o)  Building. A combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, forming a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, affording a facility or shelter for use or occupancy by persons, animals or property. 
(p)  Building code. The Michigan Building Code or other codes regarding building maintenance and construction in the city. 
(q)  Building height. The building height is the vertical distance measured from the finished grade level to the highest point of the roof surface if a flat roof; to the deck of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridges of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Where the building may be situated on sloping terrain, this height shall be measured from the average finished grade as defined herein. 

(r)  Building setback line. The line established by the minimum required setbacks forming the area within a lot in which a building may be located. An overhang shall be permitted in the required setback area, but shall not be permitted to extend more than one foot into such area. 
(Ord. No. 679, § 2, 11-22-04; Ord. No. 701, § 1, 2-5-07; Ord. No. 718, § 1, 3-23-09; Ord. No. 736-1, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16; Ord. No. 802 , § 1, 4-16-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 802 , § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 2018, changed the title of § 2.02 from "Definitions" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 2.03. - Definitions-C through E. 
(a)  Commercial event. An event organized by an individual permanent business or group of permanent businesses within the city. 
(b)  Commercial retail. Any activity involving the sale of goods or services carried out for profit. 
(c)  Commercial trailer. A trailer used for any commercial purpose. 
(d)  Commercial vehicle. A commercial vehicle includes all motor vehicles used for the transportation of passengers for hire, or constructed or used for transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, and/or all motor vehicles designed and used for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon either independently or [other than] any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn. For purposes of this ordinance, commercial vehicles shall also include the following terms: 
(1)  Truck. Truck shall mean any motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and not for the carrying of passengers, excepting a pickup truck. 
(2)  Truck-tractor. Truck-tractor means any motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(3)  Semi-trailer. Semi-trailer means a vehicle of the truck type so designed and used in conjunction with the truck-tractor that a considerable part of its own weight or that of its load rests upon and is carried by the truck-tractor and shall include a trailer drawn by a truck-tractor, semi-trailer combination. 
(4)  Special mobile equipment. Special mobile equipment means every vehicle not designed or used primarily for the transportation of persons or property and only incidentally operated or moved over a highway, including, but not limited to, ditch digging apparatus, moving dollies, concession wagons, and other machinery such as asphalt spreaders, bituminous mixers, bucket loaders, tractors other than truck-tractors, ditchers, leveling graders, finishing machines, motor graders, road rollers, scarifiers, earth-moving carryalls, scrapers, power shovels, draglines, self-propelled cranes, and earth-moving equipment. 
(e)  Community event. An annual or semi-annual public, charitable, educational, non-profit or religious event being held within the city. 
(f)  Condominium. Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all of the occupants, such as yards, foundations, basements, floors, walls, hallways, stairways, elevators, and all other related common elements, together with individual ownership in fee of a particular dwelling unit in such building. Condominiums shall be subject to the regulations set forth in Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. 
(g)  Condominium Act. Act No. 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.), as amended. 
(h)  Condominium documents. The master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
(i)  Condominium lot. The condominium unit, including the condominium unit and the contiguous limited common element surrounding the condominium unit, and shall be the counterpart of "lot" as used in connection with a project developed under the Subdivision Control Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.), as amended. 
(j)  Condominium unit. The portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. 
(k)  Convalescent or nursing home. Means a nursing care facility, including a county medical care facility, that provides organized nursing care and medical treatment to seven or more unrelated individuals suffering or recovering from illness, injury, or infirmity. Nursing home does not include a unit in a state correctional facility. Nursing home does not include one or more of the following: 
(1)  A hospital. 
(2)  A veteran's facility created under Act No. 152 of the Public Acts of 1885, being sections 36.1 to 36.12 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
(3)  A hospice residence. 
(l)  Convenience grocery store. A one-story, retail store that is designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a relatively few items (in contrast to a "supermarket"). Convenience grocery stores are designed to attract a large volume of stop-and-go traffic. 
(m)  Child care facilities. The following definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this ordinance: 
(1)  Group day care home. A private residence in which seven but not more than 12 children are received for care and supervision for periods less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, excepting children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks in a calendar year. 
(2)  Child care center. A facility, other than a private residence, receiving more than one or more children for care and supervision for periods less than 24 hours, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility that provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the numbers of hours of care per day. The facility is generally described as a child care center, day care center, day nursery, school, parent cooperative pre-school, pre-kindergarten, play group, or drop in center. This definition does not include the following: 
(A)  Sunday school vacation Bible school, or religious instructional class which is conducted by a religious organization and at which children are in attendance for not more than three hours per day for an indefinite period, or not more than eight hours per day for up to four weeks during a 12-month period, or a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for up to three hours while persons responsible for the children are attending a religious service. 
(B)  A special education program or service conducted under the authority of Article 3 of Act No. 451 of the Public Act of 1976 as amended. 
(C)  A kindergarten, elementary, or secondary school program operated by a local or intermediate school district under the authority of Act No. 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, as amended. This exemption will not apply to pre-kindergarten program or child care center program for school age children operated by a local or intermediate school district. 
(D)  An elementary or secondary school program operated by a nonpublic school. A kindergarten operated as a part of a nonpublic elementary school. This exemption will not apply to pre-kindergarten program or child care center program for school age children operated by a nonpublic school. 
(n)  District. A portion of the city within which certain uses of land and/or buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and requirements apply under the provisions of this ordinance. 
(o)  Drainageway. Minor watercourses which are defined either by soil type or by the presence of year-round or intermittent streams. The following areas are drainageways: 
(1)  Areas with soils, as delineated in the "Soil Survey of Washtenaw County" by the soil conservation service, of the following types: Houghton muck, Pella silty clay loam, and Granby loamy fine sand; 
(2)  The land, except where areas are designated as floodplain, on either side of and within 65 feet of the centerline of any stream or intermittent stream shown on soil survey of the city prepared by the soil conservation service. 
(p)  Driveway. A passageway (primarily for use by vehicles) over private property, leading from a street or other public way to a garage or parking area. 
(q)  Dwelling. A building or portion thereof which is used exclusively as a residence and provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The following additional definitions are provided: 
(1)  Dwelling, multiple-family. A building consisting of three or more dwellings. 
(2)  Dwelling, single-family. A single building designed for, or occupied exclusively by, one family. 
(3)  Dwelling, two-family. A building consisting of two dwellings. 
(4)  Manufactured dwelling. A structure constructed in accordance with state construction code, as promulgated by the state construction code commission under the provisions of 1972, P.A. 230, as amended, in which individual components, none of which in and of itself is suitable for occupancy, are preconstructed and transported to the building site where they are in need of further assembly in order to constitute a complete dwelling ready for occupancy. 
(5)  Manufactured home. A factory built, single-family structure that is manufactured under the authority of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human habitation; but which are not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. 
(6)  Site-built dwelling. A structure constructed in accordance with the state construction code as promulgated by the state construction code commission under the provisions of 1972, P.A. 230, as amended, in which building materials and parts are transported to the building site where they are used to construct the total dwelling unit including its major individual components and systems. 
(r)  Easement. The right of an owner of property by reason of such ownership, to use the property of another for purposes of ingress, egress, utilities, drainage and similar uses. 
(s)  Essential services. Services that are erected, constructed, altered, or maintained by public utilities or municipal agencies of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, poles, and other similar equipment or accessories reasonably in connection therewith for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal agencies. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 2.04. - Definitions-F through K. 
(a)  Family. An individual or a group of two or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, who are living together as a single, domestic, housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or, a collective number of individuals living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent, distinct, continuing and nontransient domestic character and who are cooking and living as a single, noncommercial housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, organization, or group of individuals whose domestic relationship is of a transitory or seasonal nature. 
(b)  Floodplain, 100-year. The relatively flat or lowland area adjoining a river, stream or creek which has a one percent chance of flood occurrence in any given year. Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Inland depressional (one percent) floodplains are floodplains not associated with a stream system, but which are low points which surrounding lands drain to. 
(c)  Floor area, gross. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of walls separating two buildings. 
(d)  Floor area, ratio. An intensity measured as a ratio, derived by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on a lot by the total lot area. 
(e)  Floor area, useable. In the case of residential uses, usable floor area is defined as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story, floor or level of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls without deduction for interior walls, closets or shafts at any level, excluding areas of unfinished attics, breezeways, and unenclosed porches. In the case of nonresidential uses, "usable floor area" is defined as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of each story, floor or level of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls without deduction for interior walls, closets or shafts at any level, but excluding common or multiple tenant hallways, stairways, stairwells, elevator shafts, toilet rooms, mechanical equipment rooms and vaults. 
(f)  Foster care facilities. 
(1)  Adult foster care facility. A governmental or nongovernmental establishment that provides foster care to adults. It includes facilities and foster care homes for adults who are aged, mentally ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include nursing homes, homes for the aged, hospitals, alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, residential centers for persons released from or assigned to a correctional facility, or any other facilities which have been exempted from the definition of adult foster care facility by the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, MCL 400.701 et seq., as amended. 
(2)  Adult foster care family home. A private residence with the approved capacity to receive six or fewer adults to be provided with foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee must be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
(3)  Adult foster care group home. A facility with approved capacity to receive at least seven but not more than 20 adults to be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
(4)  Adult foster care congregate facility. An adult foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
(g)  Front. A lot fronts on the street from which principal access is provided. Lots which front on a service drive shall be considered to front the street to which the service drive is parallel. 
(h)  Frontage. The portion of a lot which abuts the right-of-way of a street or road. 
(i)  Garage, private. An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor driven vehicles, boats, house trailers, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 
(j)  General common elements. The common elements other than the limited common elements. 
(k)  Grade. The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface. 
(l)  Grade, average finished. If the ground is not entirely level, the average finished grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
(m)  Grade, finished. The final elevation of the ground surface after development (see below). Also, the finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. 
(n)  Grade, natural. The elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations (see below). 

Natural Grade 
(o)  Home occupation. An occupation, profession, activity, or use that is clearly a customary, incidental, and secondary use of a residential dwelling unit and which does not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood. 
(p)  Housing for the elderly. A building or group of buildings containing dwellings intended for, and solely occupied by, elderly persons as defined by the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988. Housing for the elderly may include independent and/or assisted living arrangements but shall not include convalescent or nursing facilities regulated by the state. 
(q)  Junk yard. A place, structure, parcel or use of land where junk, waste, discard, salvage, or similar materials such as old iron or metal, wood, lumber, glass, paper, rags, cloth, leather, rubber, bagging, cordage, barrels, containers, etc., are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including auto wrecking yards, inoperative machines, used lumber yards, housing wrecking, and structural steel materials and equipment and including establishments for the sale, purchase, or storage of salvaged machinery and the processing of used, discarded, or salvaged materials, for any 30 consecutive days. 
(r)  Kennels and catteries, commercial. Any lot or premises wherein commercial activities relative to dogs and/or cats are engaged, i.e. boarding, grooming, breeding, or training, for profit, is considered the primary activity. 
(s)  Kennels and catteries, noncommercial (hobby). Any lot or premises of a person, at his/her residence, wherein multiple dogs and/or cats are kept, bred, trained, and/or conditioned for personal recreational use (exhibiting, trailing, racing, hunting, sledding); or any dogs or cats retired from such activities, and not for profit. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 2.05. - Definitions-L through O. 
(a)  Lake. A natural or artificial body of water, two acres or more in size, which retains water year-round. The shore of a lake shall be measured from the normal high-water mark rather than from the permanent pool in the event of any difference. 
(b)  Landscape elements. Living plant material such as, but not limited to, grass, ground covers, shrubs, vines, hedges or trees, and nonliving durable material commonly used in landscape development such as crushed rock, brick, wood chips, cobblestones, tile or decorative blocks whether as a vertical element such as a wall, or a horizontal element such as a bed, walk, or path. 
(c)  Landscape pond. An excavation, container, lining or other means of holding permanent water which is two feet or less in depth, has a water surface of 300 square feet or less and is intended for viewing purposes only. 
(d)  Landscaping. A collection of living evergreen and/or deciduous, woody-stemmed trees, shrubs, vines and ground cover required to be planted, preserved and maintained in conjunction with certain approval for use of property. The following additional definitions shall apply in the construction and application of this ordinance: 
(1)  Berm. A landscaped mound of earth which blends with the surrounding terrain. 
(2)  Buffer. A landscaped area composed of living material, wall, berm, or combination thereof, established and/or maintained to provide visual screening, noise reduction, and transition between conflicting types of land uses. 
(3)  Caliper. A measurement of the size of a tree equal to the diameter of its trunk, measured four and one-half feet above natural grade. 
(4)  Canopy tree. Tree species which grow to a mature height of 40 to 100 feet, allowing smaller trees and shrubs to grow beneath. 
(5)  Conflicting nonresidential land use. Any nonresidential use, such as office, commercial, industrial, research, parking or public road right-of-way land use which abuts a residential land use. 
(6)  Conflicting residential use. Any residential land use developed at a higher density which abuts a residential land use developed at a lower density. 
(7)  Dripline. The outer limit of a tree's branches, projected to the ground. The point where water dripping off the canopy will hit the ground. 
(8)  Greenbelt. A landscaped area, established at a depth of the minimum required front yard setback within a zoning district, which is intended to provide a transition between a public road right-of-way and an existing or proposed land use and/or between a conflicting land use and an existing or proposed land use. A strip of land containing specified landscape elements such as berms, fences, and plant material, which separates land uses, and minimizes conflicts between them. 
(9)  Hedgerow. Mature row of plant material lining the edge of a field or old field, consisting of 25 percent or more canopy trees having ten inch or greater caliper and covering more than 75 percent of the length of the border of the field. The dripline of the trees defines the land area of a hedgerow. 
(10)  Opacity. The state of being impervious to sight. 
(11)  Shrubs. Self-supporting, deciduous and/or evergreen woody species normally branched near the base, bushy, less than 15 feet in height, as normally grown in the county. 
(12)  Specimen (landmark) tree. Any large tree, native or planted, which equals 50 percent or more in size of the recorded county record for that species, which stands alone from or distinct within a group of trees or a woodland. The dripline of it defines the area it occupies. 
(13)  Trees. Self-supporting, woody, deciduous and/or evergreen plants with a well-defined central stem or species which normally grow to a height of 15 feet or more in the county. 
(14)  Vines. Plants which normally require physical support to reach mature form. 
(e)  Limited common elements. A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
(f)  Loading space. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, for temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and/or unloading merchandise or materials. 
(g)  Lodging facility. Any establishment in which individual units are rented to transients for periods of less than 30 days for the purpose of sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels and motels but shall not include bed and breakfast operations, multiple family dwellings or boarding houses. 
(h)  Lot. A parcel of land, excluding any portion in a street or other right-of-way, of at least sufficient size to meet minimum requirements for use, coverage, lot area, and to provide such yards and other open spaces as herein required. Such lot shall have frontage on a public street, or on an approved private street, and may consist of a single lot of record; a portion of a lot of record; any combination of complete and/or portions of lots of record; or a parcel of land described by metes and bounds. 
(1)  Lot, corner. A lot with frontage on two intersecting streets. (See illustration entitled "Corner, Interior and Double Frontage.") 
(2)  Lot, through or double frontage. A lot other than a corner lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, one street will be designated as the front street for all lots in the plat and in the request for a zoning compliance permit. If there are existing structures in the same block fronting one or both of the streets, the required front yard setback shall be observed on those streets where structures presently front. 
(3)  Lot, interior. An interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot with only one lot line fronting on a street. 
(4)  Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, but excluding that portion within a street right-of-way. 
(5)  Lot coverage. The percentage of the lot area covered by the building area. 
(6)  Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance from the front line to the rear lot line. 
(7)  Lot lines. Any line dividing one lot from another or from a public right-of-way, and thus constitutes the property lines bounding a lot. 
(8)  Lot of record. A lot of record is a lot, the dimensions of which are shown on a subdivision plat recorded in the office of the register of deeds for the county, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the accuracy of which is attested to by a professional engineer or registered surveyor, so designated by the state, and said description so recorded with the register of deeds. 
(9)  Lot width. The required horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the two points where the required front yard setback line intersects the side lot lines. For lots located on the turning circle of a cul-de-sac, the lot width may be reduced to 80 percent of the required lot width. 
(i)  Manufacturing. The use of land, buildings or structures for the purpose of manufacturing, assembly, making, preparing, inspecting, finishing, treating, altering, repairing, warehousing or storing or adapting for sale of any goods, substance, article, thing or service. 
(j)  Manufactured home. A factory built, single-family structure that is manufactured under the authority of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, is transportable in one or more sections, is built on a permanent chassis, and is used as a place of human habitation; but which are not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing transport of the unit other than for the purpose of delivery to a permanent site, and which does not have wheels or axles permanently attached to its body or frame. 
(k)  Master deed. The condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
(l)  Mezzanine. An intermediate floor in any story occupying but not to exceed more than one-third of the floor area of such story. 
(m)  Mobile home. A detached portable single-family dwelling prefabricated on its own chassis and intended for long-term occupancy. The unit contains sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a wash basin, a tub or shower, eating and living quarters. It is designed to be transported on its own wheels or flatbed arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a complete dwelling without permanent foundation and connected to existing utilities. 
(n)  Mobile home park. Any parcel of land intended and designed to accommodate more than one mobile home for living use which is offered to the public for that purpose; and any structure, facility, area, or equipment used or intended for use incidental to that living use. 
(o)  Muck soils. Organic solid dominated by organic matter, as defined by the "Soil Survey of Washtenaw County," Michigan, including Adrian, Edwards, Edwards Shallow, Variant, Houghton and Palms soils. 
(p)  Myotherapy establishment. Shall mean any building, Turkish bath parlor, steam bath, sauna bath, room premises, place, institution or establishment, where body massage is regularly practiced on the human body, to club members or to the general public for a charge or consideration, but the term "myotherapy establishment" shall not include licensed hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, offices of licensed physicians, surgeons, osteopaths or chiropractors. Massage shall mean an alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, common massage, magnetic massage procedure, manual manipulation of the body or any method treating external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, adjusting, or tapping with the hand, elbow, fingers, or any instrument, electric, magnetic or otherwise, with or without supplementary aids. 
(q)  Natural features. Elements occurring naturally on a lot which have physical, biotic, cultural, or aesthetic importance to natural systems, the overall landscape or the character of the city. 
(r)  Nonconforming building. A nonconforming building is a building or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and which does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the zoning district in which it is located. 
(s)  Nonconforming use. A nonconforming use is a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
(t)  Off-street parking area. A land surface or facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than two automobiles. 
(u)  Off-street parking lot. An area holding more than four vehicles. 
(v)  Open space. Any parcel or area of land or water essentially unimproved and set aside, dedicated, designated, or reserved for preservation purposes, and/or public or private use or enjoyment, as well as: 
(1)  Stormwater detention or retention ponds and facilities meeting the low impact design criteria of the Washtenaw County Water Resources Commission. In addition, to be considered open space all stormwater detention or retention ponds and facilities must be constructed in a naturalized fashion. 
(2)  Active recreational facilities such as golf courses, community swimming pools, playgrounds, ball fields, court games, and picnic areas. 
(3)  All required setbacks and buffer areas. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 2.06. - Definitions-P through R. 
(a)  Parking space. One unit of a parking area provided for the parking of one vehicle, and shall be exclusive of driveways, aisles, or entrances giving access thereto and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
(b)  Parking lot, accessory. A tract of land other than a street, designed and used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles, for the use of occupants, employees and patrons of the building or premises to which it is accessory. 
(c)  Parking lot, public. A tract of land, other than an accessory parking lot or a street, used for the parking or storage of motor vehicles for general public use, either free or for remuneration. 
(d)  Pond. A natural or artificial body of water less than two acres in size, which retains water year-round. Artificial ponds may be created by dams or may result from excavation. The shore of a pond shall be measured from the normal high-water mark rather than from the permanent pool in the event of any difference. 
(e)  Principal building or structure. The main building or structure in which the primary use is conducted. 
(f)  Professional. A person who is engaged in a vocation, calling, occupation, or employment involving labor, skill, education, special knowledge and compensation or profit, but the labor and skill is predominantly mental or intellectual, rather than physical or manual. 
(g)  Public utility. Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal agency authorized under federal, state, county or municipal regulations to furnish electricity, gas, communications, transportation, water, or sewer services. 
(h)  Required parking. Parking areas devoted to customer, visitor, and employee parking. 
(i)  Residential use. Any building on a property, regardless of its incorporation into a zoning district, shall be deemed residential use if the ground floor is occupied, lived in or slept in by human occupants as permitted in a residential district. 
(j)  Restaurant. A restaurant is any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined below. 
(k)  Restaurant, carry-out. A carry-out restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises. 
(l)  Restaurant, drive-in. A drive-in restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building. 
(m)  Restaurant, drive-through. A drive-through restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves the delivery of the prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off of the premises. 
(n)  Restaurant, fast-food. A fast-food restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside or outside of the structure, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site. 
(o)  Restaurant, standard. A standard restaurant is a restaurant whose method of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building, or the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building. 
(p)  Bar/lounge. A bar or lounge is a type of restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated. 
(q)  Right-of-way. A legal right of passage over real property typically associated with roads and railroads. 
(r)  Recreational vehicle. A recreational vehicle is defined as a vehicle primarily designed and used for recreational, camping or travel purposes including a vehicle having its own motor power or vehicle mounted on or drawn by a motor vehicle. For purpose of this ordinance, recreational vehicle shall also include the following terms: 
(1)  Camper trailer (pop-up). A structure designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by a motor vehicle, not to exceed 24 feet in length and five feet six inches in height in a collapsed position. 
(2)  Motor home. A portable dwelling designed or designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle not to exceed 40 feet in length and 12 feet in height. 
(3)  Off-street vehicle. A motorized vehicle typically designed for use off of public streets. Off-street vehicles include snowmobiles, dune buggies, and three- and four-wheeled all terrain vehicles. 
(4)  Pickup camper. A structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational or vacation use. 
(5)  Travel trailer. A structure designed to provide temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use, constructed with integral wheels to make it mobile and/or towable by a motor vehicle, not to exceed eight feet in width and a body length not exceeding 35 feet. 
(6)  Watercraft. Any unit that is used for water travel or pleasure, 35 feet or less in length but not to exceed 12 feet in height, either mounted on a boat trailer or unmounted, also any boat trailer without a boat mounted. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 2.07. - Definitions-S through W. 
(a)  School. Any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. This includes business schools, trade schools, schools of dance and the martial arts, as well as academic institutions. The following additional definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Elementary. Any school licensed by the state and that meets the state requirements for elementary education. 
(2)  Parochial. A school supported and controlled by a church or religious organization. See "private." 
(3)  Private. Any building or group of buildings the use of which meets state requirements for elementary, secondary, or higher education and which does not secure the major part of its funding from any governmental agency. 
(4)  Secondary. Any school licensed by the state and that is authorized to award diplomas for secondary education. 
(5)  College/university. An educational institution authorized by the state to award baccalaureate or higher degrees. 
(6)  Vocational. A secondary or higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade and meeting state requirements as a vocational facility. 
(b)  Screen. A structure providing enclosure, such as a fence, and/or visual barrier between the area enclosed and the adjacent property. A screen may also consist of living materials such as trees and shrubs. 
(c)  Setback. The minimum required horizontal distance between the building or structure and the front, side, and rear lot lines and natural features. 
(d)  Self storage facility. A structure containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on individual leases for varying periods of time. 
(e)  Shopping center. More than one commercial establishment, planned, developed, owned, and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property. 
(f)  Sign. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to communicate information of any kind to the public. House numbers, addresses, and name plates not exceeding two square feet shall not be considered signs. 
For the purpose of this ordinance, sign shall also include the following terms: 
(1)  Abandoned sign: A sign which no longer directs or exhorts any person, or advertises a bona fide business, lesser, owner, product or activity conducted or product available on the premises where such sign is displayed. 
(2)  Animated sign: A sign employing actual motion or the illusion of motion. Animated signs include the following types: 
(A)  Electrically activated. Animated signs producing the illusion of movement by means of electronic, electrical or electro-mechanical input and/or illumination capable of simulating movement through employment of the characteristics of one or both of the classifications noted below: 
(i)  Flashing. Animated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by a repetitive cycle of illumination and non-illumination. 
(ii)  Patterned illusionary movement. Ani-mated signs or animated portions of signs whose illumination is characterized by simulated movement through alternate or sequential activation of various illuminated elements for the purpose of producing repetitive light patterns designed to appear in some form of constant motion. 
(B)  Environmentally activated. Animated signs or devices motivated by wind, thermal changes or other natural environmental input. Includes spinners, pinwheels, pennant strings, and/or other devices or displays that respond to naturally occurring external motivation. 
(C)  Mechanically activated. Animated signs characterized by repetitive motion and/or rotation activated by a mechanical system powered by electric motors or other mechanically induced means. 
(3)  Balloon: A bag made of thin rubber, mylar or other lightweight material inflated with air or with some lighter-than-air gas, used as a decoration, or for advertisement with a logo or printed words. 
(4)  Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole or a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banners. 
(5)  Beacon: Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zoning lot as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move. 
(6)  Billboard: An off-premises sign with an area in excess of 200 square feet. 
(7)  Building marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into masonry surface or made of other permanent material. 
(8)  Building sign: Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a ground sign. Building signs shall include the following types of signs as defined in this section: canopy, projecting, wall, permanent window, and channel letter signs. 
(9)  Business center sign: A sign which identifies a group of two or more stores, offices, research facilities, or manufacturing facilities which collectively have a name different than the name of the individual establishments and which have common parking facilities, or which is a platted business subdivision. 
(10)  Canopy sign: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance window, or outdoor service area. 
(11)  Casual sales sign: A temporary sign used for special sales, not scheduled with any regularity, and includes home garage sales, attic sales, flea market sales and other occasional casual sales. 
(12)  Changeable copy sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. Changeable copy signs may include both electronic and non-electronic message areas. A sign on which the message changes more than one time per day shall be considered an animated sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. A sign on which the only copy that changes is an electronic or mechanical indication of time or temperature shall be considered a "time and temperature" portion of a sign and not a changeable copy sign for purposes of this ordinance. 
(13)  Channel letter sign: Any sign installed as a cabinet or as individual letters, with self-contained illumination. Some channel letters may be mounted on a raceway (wireway) while others may be mounted flat against the building wall. 
(14)  Commercial activity signs: A temporary sign which includes signs advertising the opening of a new business, sales, change in hours of operation, or the conduct of commercial activities during other than regular business hours. Temporary banners are included in this definition. A commercial activity sign must be located on the same lot as the commercial activity taking place. 
(15)  Commercial message: Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity. 
(16)  Electronic message board sign: An electrically activated changeable sign whose variable message capability can be electronically programmed. 
(17)  Flag: Any fabric or banner containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. 
(18)  Fuel pump/dispensing sign: Any advertising placed on, attached to, or integral to a fuel pump/dispensing unit. Electronic as well as non-electronic signage is included in this definition. 
(19)  Ground sign: Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that are independent from any building or other structure. 
(20)  Incidental sign: A sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of a zone lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," "handicap," "no hunting," "no trespassing" and other similar directives. A business name or business logo may be included as a part of an incidental sign. 
(21)  Incidental business sign: Signs associated with the drive-thru portion of a business, such as a menu-board sign. 
(22)  Institutional sign: Temporary signs announcing any annual or semiannual public, charitable, educational or religious event or function of a non-profit nature. 
(23)  Integral sign: Integral signs are names of buildings, dates of erection, monument citations, commemorative tablets and the like, when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the structure. 
(24)  Non-conforming sign: Any sign that does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
(25)  Off-site sign (off-premises sign): A sign other than an on-site sign. 
(26)  On-site sign (on-premises sign): A sign which advertises or identifies only goods, services, facilities, events or attractions on the premises where located. 
(27)  Outdoor advertising sign: A sign, including billboards, on which the written or pictorial information is intended to advertise a use, product, service, goods, event or facility located on other premises, and which is intended primarily for advertising purposes. 
(28)  Pennant: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind. 
(29)  Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames; menu and sandwich board signs outside the D-1 district; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers, parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless said vehicle is licensed, operable and used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business. 
(30)  Projecting sign: Any sign affixed perpendicular to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 
(31)  Residential development sign: A sign at the entrance of a residential development for the purposes of identifying a subdivision, site condominium, multiple family development, or mobile home park. 
(32)  Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof. 
(33)  Roof sign, integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches. 
(34)  Suspended sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. 
(35)  Temporary sign: A sign that is intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
(36)  Wall sign: Any sign attached parallel to a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building, and which displays only one sign surface. 
(37)  Window sign: Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about a community activity, business, commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window. Political signs, or other non-commercial advertising, shall not be deemed to be window signs for the purpose of this ordinance and shall not be subject to the provisions regulating window signs in this ordinance. 
(g)  Site condominium. A development containing five or more detached single-family or two-family dwellings under the condominium form of ownership in which the building site is the condominium unit. For purposes of this zoning ordinance, the term site condominium does not include residential planned unit developments approved pursuant to article 10. 
(h)  Site plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility services; structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers and screening devices; surrounding development; and any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority. 
(i)  Slope. The inclination of the land's surface from the horizontal expressed in percentages or degrees. 
(j)  Special land use. A use which is subject to special approval by the city council. A special use may be granted only when there is a specific provision for it in the various articles of this ordinance. A special use is not considered to be a nonconforming use. 
(k)  Specified anatomical areas. Specified anatomical areas means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
(l)  Specified sexual activities. Specified sexual activities means and includes any one or more of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; 
(2)  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including but not limited to intercourse, oral copulation, and sodomy; 
(3)  Human masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  Human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described above; and 
(5)  Physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or simulated, as part of or as related to, any of the activities described above. 
(m)  Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling above it and including those basements used for the principal use. 
(n)  Story, one-half. A space under a sloping roof that has the line of intersection of the roof and wall face not more than three feet above the floor level and in which space the possible floor area with head room of five feet or less occupies at least 40 percent of the total floor area of the story directly beneath (see figure below). 

(o)  Street. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
(p)  Street line. The dividing line between the street right-of-way and the lot. When such right-of-way is not definable, a line shall be defined as 33 feet on either side of the center of the street. 
(q)  Structure. Anything constructed or erected above ground level or which is attached to something located on the ground. Structures typically include such things as buildings, amateur radio towers, sheds, and decks. 
(r)  Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders, or any substantial changes in the roof and exterior walls. 
(s)  Utility trailer. A trailer used for noncommercial purposes including the transportation of motor vehicles, off-street vehicles, watercraft, and miscellaneous landscape and household items. Utility trailers may be open top or closed top. 
(t)  Vehicle display parking. Parking areas devoted to the display of vehicles intended for sale associated with an on-site auto sales and service facility. 
(u)  Vehicle inventory storage/auto service and repair storage. Parking areas devoted to the storage of excess vehicle inventory associated with an on-site or off-site auto sales and service facility, and may also include vehicles stored for repair or service associated with an on-site auto sales and service facility. 
(v)  Vehicular use area. The total area traversed by any and all types of vehicle, whether such vehicles are moving, at rest, self-propelled or not, less the area defined as parking space, including, but not limited to, lot areas of drive-in activities such as filling stations, grocery and dairy stores, banks, restaurants and the like. Areas used for long or short-term off-street parking or paved areas serving single-family dwellings are not included in the definition. 
(w)  Wetland. Wetlands include all areas defined by the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act. 
(x)  Wireless communication facilities. All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices and exchanges, micro-wave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. Not included within this definition are: citizen band radio facilities; short wave facilities; ham, amateur radio facilities; satellite dishes; and, governmental facilities which are subject to state or federal law or regulations which pre-empt municipal regulatory authority. For purposes of this ordinance, the following additional terms are defined: 
(1)  Attached wireless communications facilities. Wireless communication facilities that are affixed to existing structures, such as existing buildings, towers, water tanks, utility poles, and the like. A wireless communication support structure proposed to be newly established shall not be included within this definition. 
(2)  Collocation. The location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, with the view toward reducing the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas within the community. 
(3)  Wireless communication support structures. Structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
(y)  Woodland. An area of plant material covering one acre or more and consisting of 30 percent or more canopy trees having an eight-inch or greater caliper, or any grove consisting of 12 or more trees having a ten-inch or greater caliper. The dripline of the trees defines the area of woods. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
Sec. 2.08. - Definitions-X through Z. 
(a)  Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure from 30 inches above the general ground level of the graded lot, except as otherwise provided herein; provided, however, that fences and walls may be permitted in any yard, subject to the height limitation as indicated herein and in the building code. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building or structure. 
(b)  Yard, front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the principal building and the front lot line, and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line. In all cases, the front lot line shall be considered to be that portion of the lot which abuts a public road right-of-way or private road easement. 
(c)  Yard, rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the principal building. 
(d)  Yard, side. A yard between any building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The width of the required side yard shall be measured horizontally from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building. 
(e)  Zone lot. A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations. 
(f)  Zoning official. The administrative officer designated to administer the zoning ordinance. 
(g)  Zoning or code inspector. The administrative official or designated personnel whose duties involve enforcement of the zoning code or other codes and regulations adopted by the city. 
( Ord. No. 802 , § 2, 4-16-18) 
ARTICLE 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 3.01. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the zoning official and/or the building inspector as appointed by the city council. The duty of enforcement thereof shall rest with the zoning official, building inspector or code enforcement officer as shall be authorized therein by law, and such persons shall for the purpose of this ordinance have the power of public officers. 
Section 3.02. - Duties. 
    The office of the city clerk shall: 
(1)  Receive all applications for site plan review which the planning commission is required to decide under this ordinance. 
(2)  Receive all applications for appeals, variances, or other matters which the zoning board of appeals is required to decide under this ordinance and refer such applications to the zoning board of appeals for determination. 
(3)  Receive all applications for special land uses and amendments to this ordinance and refer such applications to the planning commission and city council for determination. 
(4)  Implement the decisions of the planning commission and city council. 
Section 3.03. - Certificate of zoning ordinance compliance. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful to change the type of use of land, or to change the type of use or type of occupancy of any building, or to extend any use on any lot until the zoning or code inspector has issued a certificate of zoning ordinance compliance and/or a certificate of occupancy. This application shall be made in writing to the zoning or code inspector on forms provided for that purpose. A record of all such applications shall be kept on file by the city. 
(2)  The building and zoning department shall receive all applications for zoning compliance and occupancy permits and conduct inspections of buildings and premises necessary to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning official shall require that every application for a zoning ordinance compliance permit shall be accompanied by a written statement and plans or plats showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the zoning or code inspector to ascertain whether the proposed work or use is in conformance with this chapter: 
A.  The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot. 
B.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all buildings or structures to be erected, altered or moved and any other structures already on the lot. 
C.  Such other information which may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed including requirements for parking, refuse collection, storm water management, landscaping and property maintenance. 
Section 3.04. - Use of consultants. 
    From time to time, the city may employ planning, engineering, legal, traffic or other special consultants to assist in the review of special use permits, site plans, rezonings or other matters related to the planning and development of the city. 
Section 3.05. - Performance guarantee. 
    To ensure compliance with this zoning ordinance and any conditions imposed hereunder, the landowner may be required to deposit with the city clerk cash, a certified check, an irrevocable bank letter of credit, or a surety bond acceptable to the city, covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project for which zoning approval is sought to insure faithful completion of the improvements required hereunder. Such performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. The city shall establish procedures under which a rebate of any cash deposits in reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required improvements will be made as work progresses. Specific standards for performance guarantees for site plan review and approval are found in section 8.11 of this ordinance. 
Section 3.06. - Temporary certificates of occupancy. 
    Temporary certificates of occupancy may be issued for the use of lands, buildings or parts thereof, provided that the occupancy or use of the completed portion shall not interfere with or be endangered by the completion of the remainder of the building or any portion thereof, and that a satisfactory schedule of the completion and a financial guarantee for the remainder of the building or structure is submitted to assure that all buildings, access, parking, landscaping and accessory buildings can be reasonably completed within a specified time. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period of time as judged by the building inspector as necessary to complete the construction provided, that a cash bond, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit equivalent to the value of the amount of work to be completed is deposited with the city clerk. 
Section 3.07. - Violations and penalties. 
    Uses of land, buildings, or structures converted in violation of this article are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and shall be considered a municipal civil infraction and shall be subject to all processes thereof. 
ARTICLE 4. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Section 4.01. - District designations. 
    For the purpose of the ordinance, the city is hereby divided into the following districts: 
Designation Title of District R-1 Single-family residential R-1A Single-family residential R-1B Single-family residential R-1C Single-family residential R-2 Two-family residential R-3A Multiple-family residential R-3 Multiple-family residential RMH Mobile home park PB Professional business OS Office service C-1 Central area C-2 Central business C-3 General business I-1 Limited industrial I-2 General industrial I-4 Heavy industrial SPA-1 East Michigan development overlay  
Section 4.02. - Zoning district map. 
(1)  Identified. The zoning districts as provided in section 4.01 are bounded and defined as shown on the map entitled "Zoning District Map of the City of Saline." The zoning district map, along with all notations, references, and other explanatory information, shall accompany and be made a part of this ordinance. 
(2)  Authority. Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the zoning district map which may be published, a true and current copy of the zoning district map available for public inspection shall be located in and maintained by the zoning official's office. The clerk's copy shall be the final authority as to the current status of any land, parcel, lot, district, use, building, or structure in the city. 
(3)  Interpretation of district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts indicated on the zoning district map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  A boundary indicated as approximately following the centerline of a highway, alley, or easement shall be construed as following such centerline. 
B.  A boundary indicated approximately following a recorded lot line or the line bounding a parcel shall be construed as following such line. 
C.  A boundary indicated as approximately following a municipal boundary line shall be construed as following such line. 
D.  A boundary indicated as following a railroad line shall be construed as being located midway in the right-of-way. 
E.  A distance not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
F.  Where a district boundary divides a lot which was in a single ownership and of record at the time of enactment of this ordinance, the use authorized and the other district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot, shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, provided that the more restricted portion of such lot constitutes less than 25 percent of the total area of the lot. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming. 
G.  Where an existing physical feature is at variance with that shown on the official zoning map or any other circumstances not covered by A through F preceding, the zoning board of appeals shall interpret the location of the zoning district boundary. 
Section 4.03. - Application of district regulations. 
    The regulations herein established within each zoning district shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare and shall be uniform for each class of land, buildings, structure, or uses throughout each district. Except as hereinafter provided, district regulations shall be applied in the following manner. 
(1)  Uses in districts. 
A.  Permitted uses. Permitted uses shall be permitted by right only, if specifically listed in the various zoning districts. 
B.  Accessory uses and buildings. Accessory uses are permitted only if such uses are clearly incidental to the permitted principal uses. 
C.  Special land uses. Special land uses are permitted at the discretion of the city in accordance with article 9 only if specifically listed in the various zoning districts. 
D.  Illegal uses. Uses for enterprises or purposes that are contrary to federal, state or local laws or ordinances are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
(2)  Application of area, width and frontage regulations. 
A.  The area and width of a lot shall not be reduced below the minimum requirements herein established for the district in which such lot is located. 
B.  Every lot shall have frontage on and direct access to a public street which has been accepted for maintenance by the city, or a private street approved by the city. 
(3)  Application of setback regulations. 
A.  No part of a required setback for any building or use shall be included as a part of a required setback for another building or use. 
B.  All required front yard setback lines shall be the minimum perpendicular distance measured from the right-of-way of the road upon which a lot or parcel fronts to the nearest point of the principal structure. 
C.  All required side and rear yard setback lines shall be the minimum perpendicular distance between the nearest points on the side or rear of the structure and the side or rear lot line parallel thereto. 
D.  On all corner lots, the required front setbacks shall be provided along both street frontages, unless otherwise noted herein. 
E.  Exceptions. 
1.  Terraces, patios, and similar structures may project into a yard as required herein, provided that such structures be unroofed, without walls or other continuous enclosure, and be located a minimum of five feet from any adjacent property line. 
2.  Unenclosed, unscreened, roofed porches or decks may project into a required front or rear yard a distance not more than eight feet provided that such porch shall not exceed one story in height. Enclosed porches and other enclosed appurtenances shall be considered an integral part of the building to which they are attached and shall be subject to all yard requirements thereof. 
3.  Chimneys, flues, belt courses, leaders, sills, pilasters, cornices, eaves, gutters, and similar features may project into any required yard a maximum of 16 inches. 
4.  Flag poles are exempt from standard setback requirements; however, they must be setback a minimum of 15 feet from adjacent property lines. 
(4)  Application of height regulations. 
A.  No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered to exceed the height limit hereinafter established for the district in which the building is located. 
B.  Exceptions. Roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, and screens, flagpoles in nonresidential districts, chimneys, smokestacks, water tanks, or similar structures may be erected above the height limits herein prescribed. No such structure shall exceed by more than 15 feet the height limit of the district in which it is located, nor shall such structure have a total area greater than 25 percent of the roof area. 
C.  Communication towers shall be subject to the regulations set forth in section 6.11. 
D.  Hotels up to three stories in height with a total height not to exceed 55 feet may be granted by the city council after review and recommendation by the planning commission in accordance with the special land use provisions of article 9, Zoning. 
(5)  Location and number of buildings on lot of record. 
A.  Every building erected, altered, or moved shall be located on a lot of record as defined herein. 
B.  There shall be only one single-family dwelling permitted per lot. Where there is more than one single-family dwelling located on a lot of record at the time of adoption of this ordinance, said dwelling shall not be divided from the lot except in conformity with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 727, § 1, 6-7-10; Ord. No. 790 , § 1, 5-15-17) 
Section 4.04. - Purposes and uses within zoning districts. 
(1)  R-1, single-family residential district. This district is composed in those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be single-family dwellings on larger lots. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are a certain limited number of nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
3.  Home-based business, Tier 1, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.08. 
4.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.03. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Churches and other institutions for religious worship. 
2.  Police and fire stations, public safety buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations and gas regulator stations, but not including service or storage yards. 
3.  Bed and breakfasts, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.10. 
4.  Home-based business, Tier 2, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.15. 
(2)  R-1A, single-family residential district. This district is composed in those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be single-family dwellings. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings. 
2.  Public parks and playgrounds. 
3.  Cemeteries, public libraries. 
4.  Home-based business, Tier 1, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.08 
5.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.03. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in R-1 district. 
2.  Day care homes subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.03. 
3.  Adult foster care large group homes subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.04. 
4.  Hospitals. 
5.  Elderly housing, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.05. 
6.  Kennels and catteries, noncommercial (hobby), subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.14. 
(3)  R-1B, single-family residential district. This district is composed in those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be single-family dwellings. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
(4)  R-1C, single-family residential district. This district is composed in those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be single-family dwellings. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which may be compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
(5)  R-2, two-family residential district. This district is composed of those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be single- and two-family dwellings. The regulations of this district are designed to permit a lower density than is allowed in the R-3 district. Areas zoned R-2 shall be located in a compatible manner with areas zoned for single-family residential use. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which are compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
2.  Child day care centers subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.03. 
(6)  R-3A, multiple family residential district. This district is composed of those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be multiple family dwellings at a lower density than permitted in R-3. These areas would be located near major streets for good accessibility and be designed to be compatible with adjacent single-family areas. Various types and sizes of residential units, for ownership or rental, would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the community without creating an unreasonable burden to existing community facilities, utilities, or services. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which are compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the R-2 district. 
2.  Multiple-family dwellings subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.07. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-2 district. 
2.  Adult foster care congregate facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.04. 
3.  Convalescent centers or nursing homes subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.05. 
(7)  R-3, multiple-family residential district. This district is composed of those areas of the city where the principal use is intended to be multiple family dwellings at a higher density than R-3A. These areas would be located near major streets for good accessibility and be designed to be compatible with adjacent single-family areas. Various types and sizes of residential units, for ownership or rental, would thereby be provided to meet the needs of the different age and family groups in the community without creating an unreasonable burden to existing community facilities, utilities, or services. In addition to the dwellings permitted in this zoning district, there are certain nonresidential uses which are compatible with and supportive of a residential environment and may be permitted through the special approval of the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the R-3A district. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-3A district. 
(8)  RMH, mobile home park residential district. The intent of this district is to provide for mobile home residential development in areas where the natural conditions and features, public services, and infrastructure are capable of supporting such development. Areas zoned RMH shall be located in areas which are compatible with the character and density of adjacent uses. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Mobile home parks subject to the provisions set forth in section 5.06. 
2.  Parks and playgrounds. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All special uses allowed in the R-1A district. 
(9)  Professional business district. The PB, professional business district is intended to provide areas for the offices of professional services, as well as single-family residences. The district shall be characterized by low intensity uses which generally operate during normal business hours, produce a low volume of traffic, and serve as a compatible transition between commercial and residential areas and/or between thoroughfares and residential areas. It is further intended that professional office uses in this district are planned and designed to be compatible with neighboring residential areas. 
The PB district is also designed: To safeguard the unique historical heritage of the city, where applicable, by preserving historic structures and areas which reflect elements of the city's unique cultural, social, economic, political or architectural history; to maintain and improve property values and the economy within historic areas; to foster civic beauty and pride; and to promote the use of historic areas for the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
In PB districts, all architectural plans for the construction of new or conversion of existing buildings, other than those used exclusively as single-family dwelling, shall be presented to the planning commission and receive their approval prior to submitting plans to the building department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
It is intended that such professional office buildings, when located adjacent to a residential area, shall take on the appearance of residential buildings in order to preserve the general character of the residential neighborhood. 
All PB buildings shall conform to the regulations prescribed under "commercial buildings" as specified by the city. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All uses permitted in R-1C districts. 
2.  Office buildings occupied by the practice of any one or more of the following professions: physician, dentist, attorney, chiropractor, accountant, engineer, or architect. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  All uses permitted in R-2 districts. 
2.  Offices for one or more than one of the following professional or business services: Insurance, real estate, secretarial, manufacturers' representatives, sales representatives, or financial management and tax preparation. 
3.  Office buildings occupied by professionals which are similar to those set forth in section 4.04(9)A.2. 
4.  Child care centers as defined. 
(10)  OS, office service district. The intent of the office service district is to provide locations for uses which primarily include office and technical uses, and business and personal services uses which are dependent on and supportive of an office environment. The office service district is intended to provide for a compatible transitional use between commercial and residential areas and/or between thoroughfares and residential areas. 
The district shall be characterized by uses which: generally operate during normal business hours; produce a low volume of traffic; may require some service areas along with storage facilities; and, are located in buildings which are architecturally compatible with the surrounding area. 
The office service district is not intended to permit commercial retail uses that generate a large traffic volume. A limited range of business and service uses are permitted for the benefit of office personnel, tenants and visitors, provided that offices and technical uses remain the predominant use within the district. 
In OS districts, all architectural plans for buildings shall be presented to the planning commission and receive their approval prior to submitting plans to the building department for approval and issuance of a building permit. 
It is intended that such office service buildings, when located adjacent to a residential area, shall take on appearance of residential buildings in order to preserve the general character of the residential neighborhood. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Office buildings for the use of any of the following occupations: Executive; administrative; professional; accounting; writing; clerical; stenographic; drafting; and sales. 
2.  Medical and dental offices, including clinics and medical laboratories. 
3.  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations. 
4.  Publicly owned buildings, public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone exchanges, and public utility offices. 
5.  Retail sales of office supplies, computer and business machines, and personal communication equipment. 
6.  Business service establishments such as printing and photocopying services, mail and packaging services, and typing and secretarial services. 
7.  Studios for musical, dance or artistic instruction. 
8.  Private service clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
9.  Retail sale of drug and health care products, when occupying no more than 25 percent of the floor area included as part of a building containing medical and dental offices, clinics and medical laboratories. 
10.  Data processing and computer centers including the servicing and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
11.  Business and/or technical schools. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Standard restaurants. 
2.  Personal service establishments, such as photographic studios, barber and beauty shops, watch, clothing and shoe repair, locksmith and similar establishments. 
3.  Florist shops. 
4.  Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding, provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted. 
5.  Laundry and dry cleaning customer outlets, provided dry cleaning or laundry plants serving more than one customer outlet shall be prohibited. 
6.  Child care centers subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.03. 
7.  Public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone exchanges, and public utility offices. 
(11)  C-1, central area district. The district is designed primarily for the convenience of persons residing in the city by providing for a complementary variety of office, limited retail, and business service uses that require a central location. It is the purpose of these regulations to recognize that lots in the central area are too small and too tightly developed to provide setbacks, on-site parking and loading areas; and that cars are not brought to individual stores in a central area but are parked in common spaces, either on-street or in parking lots; to recognize the essential interdependence of activities in the central area; and that compactness of development and pedestrian convenience are vital to that interdependence; and to exclude from the central area those retail sales establishments which tend to interfere with or detract from a high intensity of shopping activity and pedestrian convenience. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted use allowed in the OS office service district. 
2.  Food and beverage sales including grocery, meat market, bakery, party store, delicatessen and fruit market. 
3.  Florist shops. 
4.  Retail sales of gifts, antiques and collectibles. 
5.  Standard and carryout restaurants. 
6.  Bars and lounges. 
7.  Retail sales of drug and health care products. 
8.  Retail sale clothing, shoes, jewelry and accessories. 
9.  Video rental and sales. 
10.  Laundromats and dry cleaning customer outlets. Does not include dry cleaning or laundry plants serving more than one customer outlet. 
11.  Funeral homes. 
12.  Personal service establishments, such as photographic studios, barber and beauty shops, watch, clothing and shoe repair, locksmith and similar establishments. 
13.  Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature or an electrician, plumber, decorator, carpenter or upholsterer. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding, provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted. 
2.  Automobile filling and service stations and automobile washes, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
3.  Multiple-family residential dwellings, provided that dwelling units shall be located on the second floor or higher floors of a building. 
4.  Drive-in or drive-up facilities such as drive-up windows for banks, drive-in cleaners and similar facilities, but not including drive-in restaurants. 
(12)  C-2, central business district. This district is designed to provide for a variety of office, business service, entertainment and retail uses which occupy the prime retail frontage, by serving the comparison, convenience, and service needs of the market area which includes the city and surrounding communities. The regulations of the CBD are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive-related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the OS and C-1 districts except drive-through facilities. 
2.  Retail sales of musical instruments, hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, floor covering, sporting goods, furniture, home accessories, and appliances. 
3.  Myotherapy establishments subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.12. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Multiple-family housing and/or apartment dwellings on the second floor and above. 
2.  Sidewalk cafe service or outdoor dining, operated by a restaurant or other food establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.09. 
(13)  C-3, general business district. This district is intended to accommodate office, business service, and retail uses that serve a larger market than C-1 district including the city and portions of the surrounding communities. It is the purpose of these regulations to permit development of the enumerated functions in a manner which is compatible with uses in the surrounding area. To these ends, certain uses are excluded which would function more effectively in other districts. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses allowed in the OS, C-1 and C-2 districts. 
2.  Shops of interior decorators, plumbers, electricians, exterminators and other similar services and trades. 
3.  Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding, provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Lodging facilities. 
2.  Automobile dealers with related repair service center subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
3.  Automobile repair subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
4.  Automobile filling and service stations and automobile washes subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
5.  Recreation and amusement services, including theaters, bowling alleys, roller and ice skating rinks, billiard halls and miniature golf. 
6.  Wholesale sales. 
7.  Public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone exchanges, and public utility offices. 
8.  Kennels and catteries, commercial. 
9.  Adult entertainment business subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.13. 
10.  Drive-in, drive through and fast food restaurants. 
(14)  I-1, limited industrial. The I-1 district is intended for limited assembly and manufacturing industrial operations and facilities. The district is designed to help insure compatibility with non-industrial neighboring lots. This district is intended to permit only those uses which emit a minimum of noise, vibration, smoke, dust and dirt, gases or offensive odors, glare, and radiation. The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specific uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, is not permitted. Outdoor storage is permitted if screened from public view. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  Manufacturing, processing, packaging or assembling of the following: 
a.  Communication, transmission and reception equipment such as coils, tubes, semi-conductors, navigation control equipment and systems guidance equipment. 
b.  Data processing equipment and systems. 
c.  Metering instruments. 
d.  Optical and photographic devices, equipment and systems. 
e.  Scientific and mechanical instruments such as calipers and transits. 
f.  Testing equipment. 
g.  Electrical machinery, equipment and supplies, electronic equipment, components and accessories. 
h.  Office, computing and accounting machines. 
2.  Research and design centers where said centers are intended for the development of pilot or experimental products, together with related office buildings for such research facilities where said offices are designed to accommodate executive, administrative, professional, accounting, engineering, architectural, and support personnel. 
3.  Data processing and computer centers including the servicing and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
4.  Office buildings occupied by attorneys, physicians, dentists, chiropractors, accountants, engineers, architects, or other similar profession. 
5.  Office buildings occupied by one or more than one of the following professional or business services: insurance, real estate, secretarial, manufacturer or sales representatives, or financial management and tax preparation. 
6.  Publicly owned buildings, public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone exchanges, and public utility offices. 
7.  Printing, publishing and related activities. 
8.  Office and warehouse of skilled trade contractors such as electrical, heating and plumbing contractors and service contractors such as cleaning services and home maintenance and repair, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.07. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Warehousing, refrigerated and general storage, but not including self-storage facilities. 
2.  Tool and die and machine shops. 
3.  All uses permitted and uses permitted after special approval, as regulated in the C-2 central business district, except residential uses, drive-up facilities, and restaurants. 
(15)  I-2, general industrial. The I-2 district is intended for manufacturing, assembly and material distribution facilities. The permitted uses in this district tend to have a more intensive use of products and chemicals than those permitted in the I-1 district. Manufacturing, processing, or assembling shall be permitted, provided that the materials, equipment, and processes utilized are clean, quiet, to a considerable extent, and free from objectionable or dangerous nuisance or hazard. Outdoor storage is permitted if screened from the public view. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses in the I-1 district. 
2.  Manufacturing, processing packaging or assembling of the following: 
a.  Pharmaceutical preparations, cosmetics and toiletries. 
b.  Plastic products such as laminate pipe, plumbing products, and miscellaneous molded or extruded products. 
c.  Stone, clay, glass and leather products. 
d.  Food products, bakery goods, candy and beverages. 
e.  Prefabricated buildings and structured members. 
f.  Appliances. 
g.  Paper and wood products such as office supplies, bags, books, cabinets, furniture and toys. 
3.  Tool and die shops, job shops, and machine shops. 
4.  Metal fabrication. 
5.  Warehousing, refrigerated and general storage, but not including self-storage facilities. 
6.  Packaging operation, but not including baling of discarded or junk materials, such as, but not limited to, paper, cloth, rags, lumber, metal or glass. 
7.  Manufacture and repair of signs, and heating and ventilating equipment. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Automobile repair facilities and collision shops, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
2.  Self-storage facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.06. 
3.  Offices and warehouses of general and heavy equipment contractors. 
4.  Bulk storage, dispensing and distribution of petroleum and chemical products, flammable liquids or gases. 
5.  Collection center for household waste materials to be recycled. 
6.  Solid waste processing and transfer facilities. 
7.  Retail sale of drug and health care products, when occupying no more than 15 percent of the floor area included as part of a building containing medical and dental offices, clinics, and medical laboratories. 
8.  Business service establishments such as printing and photocopying services, publishing, mail and packaging services, typing and secretarial services and related activities. 
9.  Studios for musical, dance or artistic instruction. 
10.  Private service clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
11.  Business and/or technical schools. 
12.  Retail sales of goods produced on the premises and occupying no more than 15 percent of the building floor area. 
13.  Laundromats and dry cleaning customer outlets, including dry cleaning and laundry plants serving more than one customer outlet. 
14.  Photographic studios. 
15.  Health club/gymnasiums. 
16.  Indoor sports facility. 
17.  The following uses may be considered as special land uses in the I-2 general industrial district if the property where the use is proposed has frontage on Michigan Avenue or Maple Road: 
a.  Medical and dental offices, including clinics and medical laboratories. 
b.  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations. 
c.  Funeral homes. 
d.  Retail sales of musical instruments, hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, floor covering, sporting goods, furniture, home accessories and appliances. 
(16)  I-4. The I-4 district is intended for manufacturing and nonmanufacturing industrial activities which are more intense and produce greater environment disturbances than those permitted in any other zoning district. Outdoor storage is permitted if screened from the public view. 
A.  Permitted uses. 
1.  All permitted uses in the I-1 and I-2 districts. 
2.  Office and warehouse of general and heavy equipment contractors. 
3.  Trucking and cartage facilities. 
B.  Special land uses. 
1.  Auto repair facilities and collision shops, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.08. 
2.  Bulk storage, dispensing and distribution of petroleum and chemical products, flammable liquids or gases. 
3.  Auto salvage yards. 
4.  Concrete and concrete products plants. 
5.  Asphalt and other bituminous plants. 
6.  Plating shops. 
(17)  SPA-1 East Michigan Avenue development zone district. Please see article 11 for specific development and use regulations. 
(Ord. No. 712, § 1, 2-4-08; Ord. No. 738, § 1, 10-1-12) 
Section 4.05. - Schedule of area, height, width and setback regulations. 
Minimum Lot Size Maximum Building Height Minimum Yard Setbacks Maximum Lot Area Space Coverage (% of area) Footnotes Zoning District Area 
(sq ft) Lot width 
(ft.) Stories Feet Front 
(ft.) Side (ft.) Rear 
(ft.) (Least) (Total) R-1, Single-family residential 20,000 100 2 35 35 10 25 50 30 A & B R-1A, single-family residential 11,700 90 2 35 30 10 25 35 30 A & B R-1B, Single-family residential 9,100 70 2 35 25 8 20 35 30 A & B R-1C, single-family residential 7,800 60 2 35 25 7 17 35 30 A & B R-2, two-family residential 9,800 60 2 35 25 10 20 50 30 A, B & C R-3A, low density multiple family residential 7,800 100 2 35 35 15 35 35 40 A, B, & C R-3, multiple family residential 7,800 100 2 35 25 20 50 50 40 A, B & C RMH, mobile home residential See section 5.06 PB, professional business 10,000 80 2 35 25 7 17 30 25 D & E OS, office service district 10,000 80 2 35 25 7 17 30 30 C-1, central area - - 3 45 - - - - - F C-2, central business - - 2 35 15 10 20 20 30 G C-3, general business 10,000 - 2 35 15 10 20 20 60 I-1, limited industrial 10,000 60 2 30 8 10 20 10 55 I-2, general industrial 20,000 100 2 40 50 20 40 20 30 I-4, heavy industrial 1 ac. 200 2 40 200 100 200 100 30 SPA-1 See article 11  
Section 4.06. - Footnotes to schedule of regulations. 
(A)  In cases where 50 percent or more of the frontage in any one block between two adjacent streets has been built upon, the minimum front yard shall be established by using the average depth of the front yards provided on the lots built upon. 
(B)  Corner lots shall have an additional lot width of 20 feet greater than the specified minimum. 
(C)  Required lot area, lot width and other regulations for single-family dwellings in an R-2 district shall be the same as required for the R-1C district. Required lot area, lot width and other regulations for single-family and two-family dwelling in R-3A and R-3 districts shall be the same as required for the R-2 district. 
(D)  In PB districts, the ratio of building floor area to lot area shall not exceed a factor of 0.5. 
(E)  In PB districts, every one-family dwelling shall comply with requirements established for the R-1C district. A one-family dwelling unit may occupy the same structure as any other permitted or special approval use. 
(F)  Buildings and structures in the C-1 district are not required to have setbacks for front walls. Side or rear walls of buildings or structures shall meet following setback requirements: 
A.  Nonwindow walls: No setbacks are required; however city building code must be followed. 
B.  Window walls: Where windows are provided or where windows are required in side or rear walls by city ordinance, the walls shall be set back not less than 15 feet from the lot line, beginning at the bottom of the second story, or at the bottom of the lowest residential story, if such residential story is above second story. Such setback shall be increased in width by two feet for each eight feet total building height above the second story. The maximum setback width determined by this formula shall apply to the entire wall from the bottom of the first residential story to top of said wall. 
(G)  In C-2 districts side yards are not required along an interior side lot line where all walls of buildings abutting such interior side lot line are wholly without windows, doors or other openings, but, if windows or openings are provided, a side yard of not less that ten feet shall be provided. The width of a side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than 15 feet when rear yards abut rear yards. However, in the case of a rear yard abutting a side yard of an adjacent residential lot, the side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than 25 feet. 
ARTICLE 4a. - DOWNTOWN FORM-BASED CODE DISTRICTS (DFBC) 

Section 4a.01. - Intent. 
    The zoning ordinance regulates the intensity and use of development, which is appropriate in most parts of the city. There are also areas within the city in which the master plan places greater emphasis on regulating form and character of development as well as use and intensity of use. The Downtown Form-Based Code (DFBC) districts use form-based provisions to accomplish this, with a special sensitivity to the contextual relevance of two unique downtown subdistricts within the overall DFBC. This unique zoning district allows the city to regulate land use in a more flexible format for this specific area to encourage a viable, dynamic mix of uses. 
    Physically, the DFBC is intended to promote a unified vision for supporting the historic commercial core of the City of Saline focused on increased and maintained land use intensity and improved public amenities that are oriented as much to the needs of the pedestrian as to those of the automobile. The flexibility in use regulation inherent in the overall DFBC regulations, paired with the prescriptive physical development regulations in the section will result in a compact, walkable environment that creates new opportunities for investment while protecting quality attributes of the existing area. 
    Specifically, the DFBC will do the following: 
A.  Ensure that development is of human scale, primarily pedestrian-oriented and designed to create attractive streetscapes and pedestrian spaces. 
B.  Promote mixed-use development in both a horizontal and vertical form. 
C.  Ensure reasonable transition between higher intensity development and adjacent neighborhoods. 
D.  Provide economic development opportunities by allowing a wider range of potential uses and creative redevelopment techniques that will expand the employment base and value of land. 
E.  Provide a simple, predictable, efficient way to allow complex, innovative development that would otherwise require special planning procedures. 
F.  Encourage the incubation of a residential element within the traditional downtown to foster a 24-hour community. 
G.  Establish a development pattern in which new buildings and building modifications enhance the character of the existing built environment. 
H.  Orient building entrances and storefronts to the street to add visual interest, put "eyes on the street" for enhanced crime surveillance, increase pedestrian traffic, and create memorable outdoor spaces. 
I.  Limit the impact of off-street parking areas which interrupt the flow and consistency of the "street wall." 
J.  Enhance a sense of place and contribute to the sustainability of the city. 
K.  Allow a pattern of development which will encourage transportation alternatives (walking, biking, and transit). 
L.  Visually distinguish the downtown from the rest of Saline by encouraging full use of property, consistency, and density while respecting adjacent residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Section 4a.02. - Applicability and organization. 
    Any new use, structure, or expansion of an existing use or structure, unless otherwise noted herein, shall comply with the requirements of this article and other applicable requirements of this ordinance. Uses, buildings and structures that are nonconforming to the requirements of this article are subject to the regulations of article 15, Non-conforming uses, structures, and lots. 
A.  The standards of subsection 4a.03.2, Landscape and streetscape elements, and section 4a.05, Design standards, shall not apply to: 
1.  Continuation of an existing permitted use within an existing structure provided the new use is permitted in the subdistrict of the DFBC where the site is located. 
2.  Reoccupation of an existing building with a permitted use provided the new use is permitted in the subdistrict of the DFBC where the site is located. 
3.  The expansion of an existing structure, whether conforming or legal nonconforming, by less than 500 square feet or five percent, whichever is less, when the building will be occupied or reoccupied by a permitted use, provided the new use is permitted in the subdistrict of the DFBC where the site is located. 
4.  Changes of use within existing structures provided the new use is permitted in the subdistrict of the DFBC where the site is located. 
5.  Normal repair and maintenance of existing structures that do not increase its size. 
6.  Continuation of a legal non-conforming use, building, and/or structure. 
B.  The DFBC is divided into two subdistricts. These two subdistricts are identified as the Downtown Core (D-1) and Downtown Edge (D-2). These subdistricts are identified on the zoning map as separate and distinct subdistricts within the overall DFBC zoning classification. 
C.  This article contains a set of regulations unique to the DFBC. Specifically, these include: 
1.  General standards that apply to all DFBC properties in both subdistricts. These include special provisions for parking and landscape and streetscape elements. 
2.  Permitted uses table that provides for a dynamic mix of uses throughout both subdistricts. 
3.  Design standards applicable to all DFBC properties. 
4.  Form-based dimensional requirements for the D-1 and D-2 subdistricts. These include special provisions not found in other zoning districts, including: 
a.  Minimum and maximum height. 
b.  Required building lines and setback lines. 
c.  Exemptions and modifications from form-based provisions for streetscape elements. 
d.  Parking location. 
e.  Lot coverage and open space. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Section 4a.03. - Standards applicable to D-1 and D-2 subdistricts. 
1.  Parking. 
A.  D-1 subdistrict parking. In recognition of available public parking, and to encourage re-development within the D-1 subdistrict, a change of use and/or new construction that is required by this ordinance to provide less than 25 parking spaces as determined through the site plan review process shall be exempt from providing any new parking. 
For uses that exceed the parking exemption set forth herein, the parking requirements shall be calculated by deducting 25 parking spaces from the parking calculation set forth in section 13.04 of this ordinance. 
A full exemption shall extend to any substitution of a similar use within an existing building regardless of the number of required spaces. 
B.  D-2 subdistrict parking. Parking shall be provided for D-2 subdistrict sites in accordance with the provisions of section 13.04. 
C.  Parking location. When provided on-site, whether required or not required, parking must comply with the following: 
1)  When parking is located in a side yard (behind the front building line) but fronts on a required building line, no more than 25 percent of the total site's linear feet along the required building line or 60 feet, whichever is greater, shall be occupied by parking. 
2)  For a corner lot or lot with multiple frontages, no more than 25 percent of the total site's linear feet along the required building line or 60 feet, whichever is greater, shall be occupied by parking on both frontages. 
D.  If due to lot size or building configuration, the provision of required parking in the D-1 sub-district is not feasible (pursuant to the above section), parking credits may be purchased from the city in an amount as determined by city council, subject to periodic change. 
Monies collected via parking credits would be paid into the general fund of the city to be utilized only for construction or future expansion of municipal parking facilities. The amount paid into the parking fund for spaces shall not apply against any present or future special assessment levied by the city for parking. Parking credits may be paid in lump sum or installments as approved by the city council. 
All parking credits shall exist in perpetuity and shall be transferred with the title of the property. 
2.  Landscape and streetscape elements shall be required in accordance with section 7.02 and the following. Whenever provisions of section 7.02 (or any other provisions of this ordinance) may conflict with provisions of article 4a, the provision of article 4a shall prevail: 
A.  Street furniture shall be provided at a ratio of one element for every 30 linear feet of frontage along a right-of-way. Street furniture may be located in the right-of-way or on private property, provided they are located between the front building line and the back-of-curb. Permitted street furniture features include: 
1)  A permanently mounted seating fixture constructed of decorative metal. 
2)  A permanently reserved planting bed with defined, durable edges. Such beds must be a minimum of 20 square feet in area and should be raised or protected from the surrounding paved areas by a durable curb, edge, or other designed feature. Planting beds must be planted with hardy plants and general areas within planting beds must be planted with groundcover to reduce soil loss. 
3)  Waste receptacle constricted of decorative metal. 
B.  Parking areas which front on a right-of-way shall be screened from the public right-of-way by a 36-inch decorative masonry wall. 
When a decorative masonry walls are used to help screen parking lots, the wall shall be constructed of brick or decorative masonry block and shall also include a concrete stone or masonry cap providing a minimum one-half inch reveal on both sides. In lieu of a wall, decorative metal ornamental picket fencing shall be permitted. The fencing shall contain maximum four inch spacing between pickets with posts and rails and masonry brick, capped pilasters spaced each 40 feet similar to the design elements found in figure shown below. The planning commission has the discretion to allow other similar options as proposed by the applicant. 
Such wall may be located directly along the front property line or may be recessed and buffered by a landscape bed three feet in depth. 

C.  Planning commission modification. Any of the landscape provisions noted above may be waived or modified through site plan approval, provided the planning commission first makes a finding: 
1.  That a physical site feature or characteristic create conditions that the strict application of the provisions of this section will result in less effective screening and landscaping than alternative landscape designs. 
2.  That the public benefit intended to be secured by the section will exist with less than the required landscaping or screening. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 751 , 11-18-13) 
Section 4a.04. - Uses permitted. 
    Authorized uses are identified in Table 4a.04.1. 
    If a use is not listed but is similar to other uses within a category, the zoning official may make the interpretation that the use is similar to other uses and is permitted to the same extent and under the same conditions as the similar use. 
Table 4a.04.1 Permitted Uses 
    Uses are permitted by right (P), as a use subject to special land use (S), not permitted (NP), OR permitted on upper floors only (UP). 
D-1 D-2 Single-family detached dwellings NP P Public parks and playgrounds P P Home occupations, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.08 P P Accessory uses, buildings, and structures, subject to the requirements set forth in section 5.03 P P Churches and other institutions for religious worship S S Police and fire stations, public safety buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electric transformer stations, and gas regulator stations, but not including service or storage yards P P Bed and breakfasts, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.10 S S Day care homes, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.03 P P Adult foster care large group homes, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.04 P P Hospitals S S Elderly housing, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.05 S S Two-family dwellings S or UP UP Child day care centers, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.03 P P Multiple-family dwellings S or UP P Adult foster care congregate facilities, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.04 P P Convalescent centers or nursing homes, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.05 P P Office buildings occupied by the practice of any one or more of the following professions: physician, dentist, attorney, chiropractor, accountant, engineer, or architect P P Offices for one or more than one of the following professional or business services: insurance, real estate, secretarial, manufacturers' representatives, sales representatives, or financial management and tax preparation, and advanced research and development centers where said centers are intended for the development of pilot or experimental products P P Office buildings occupied by professionals which are similar to those set forth above P P Office buildings for the use of any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, and sales P P Medical and dental offices, including clinics and medical laboratories P P Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations P P Publicly-owned buildings, public utility transformer stations and substations, telephone exchanges, and public utility offices P P Retail sales of office supplies, computer and business machines, and personal communication equipment P P Business service establishments such as printing and photocopying services, mail and packaging services, and typing and secretarial services P P Studios for musical, dance, or artistic instruction P P Private service clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls P P Data processing and computer centers, including the servicing and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment P P Business and/or technical schools P P Personal service establishments, such as photographic studios, barber and beauty shops, watch, clothing, and shoe repair, locksmith, and similar establishments P P Florist shops P P Veterinary offices and hospitals, including accessory boarding, provided no outdoor exercise runs or pens are permitted NP S Laundry and dry cleaning customer outlets, provided dry cleaning or laundry plants serving more than one customer outlet shall be prohibited NP S Food and beverage sales, including grocery, meat market, bakery, party store, delicatessen, and fruit market P P Retail sales of gifts, antiques, and collectibles P P Standard and carryout restaurants P P Bars and lounges P P Retail sales of drug and health care products P P Retail sale clothing, shoes, jewelry, and accessories P P Video rental and sales P P Funeral homes P P Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature, of an electrician, plumber, decorator, carpenter, or upholsterer P P Drive-in or drive-up facilities such as drive-up windows for banks, drive-in cleaners, and similar facilities. NP S Retail sales of musical instruments, hardware, paint and home decorating supplies, floor covering, sporting goods, furniture, home accessories, and appliances P P Myotherapy establishments, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.12 P P Sidewalk café service or outdoor dining, operated by a restaurant or other food establishment which sells food or drinks for immediate consumption, subject to the requirements set forth in section 6.09 P P Lodging facilities P P Recreation and amusement services, including theaters, bowling alleys, roller and ice skating rinks, billiard halls, and miniature golf S S Health clubs or gymnasiums P P Indoor sports facility S S  
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Section 4a.05. - Design standards. 
    In addition to standards set forth in this article, all proposed development in the DFBC shall comply with the standards set forth herein. 
1.  Building design and materials. 
A.  Overall design. It is the intent of this article to improve the appearance of and add visual interest to the DFBC. Emphasis shall be placed upon methods that focus attention on attractive buildings that front on the adjacent right-of-way. 
B.  Materials. Durable building materials, simple configurations, and solid craftsmanship are required. Fifty percent of walls visible from public streets, exclusive of wall areas devoted to meeting transparency and ground story activation requirements, shall be constructed of brick, glass, fiber cement siding, metal (beams, lintels, trim elements, and ornamentation only), wood lap, stucco, split-faced block, or stone. Exterior insulation finishing systems (E.I.F.S.) and vinyl or aluminum siding may not constitute more than ten percent of the surface area of any façade's overall surface area. 
2.  Modulation required. Modulation is required to ensure that the building is not monotonous in appearance. Modulation is defined as a change in the vertical plane of the building façade. Building façades shall be modulated at least every 30 feet horizontally and at least every 20 feet vertically. Modulations shall measure at least three inches perpendicular to the building face. 
3.  Ground story activation. 
A.  Transparency. 
1)  The first floors of all buildings shall be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale activity and crime prevention techniques. It is intended that this be accomplished principally by the use of windows and doors arranged so that active uses within the building are visible from or accessible to the street, and parking areas are visible to occupants of the building. The first floor of any front façade facing a right-of-way shall be no less than 50 percent windows and doors, and the minimum transparency for facades facing a side street, side yard, or parking area shall be no less than 30 percent of the façade. 
2)  Transparency requirements shall not apply to sides which abut an alley. 
3)  Windows for building sides shall be concentrated toward the front edge of the building, in locations most visible from an urban open space or public right-of-way. 
B.  Transparency alternatives. The following alternatives may be used singularly or in combination. They may count toward no more than 80 percent of the transparency requirement. 
1)  Wall design. Wall designs that provide visual interest and pedestrian scale may count as a transparency alternative if they provide a minimum of three of the following elements, occurring at intervals no greater than 25 feet horizontally and ten feet vertically: 
(a)  Expression of structural system and infill panels through change in plane not less than three inches. 
(b)  System of horizontal and vertical scaling elements such as: belt course, string courses, cornice, pilasters. 
(c)  System of horizontal and vertical reveals not less than one inch in width/depth. 
(d)  Variations in material module, pattern, and/or color. 
(e)  System of integrated architectural ornamentation. 
(f)  Green screen or planter walls. 
(g)  Translucent, fritted, patterned, or colored glazing. 
2)  Outdoor dining/seating. Outdoor dining/seating located between the building and the primary street zone lot line may count toward the transparency requirement. Such spaces must be permanently created by a wall or other permanent improvement defining the outdoor dining area. 
3)  Permanent art. Non-commercial art or graphic design of sufficient scale and orientation to be perceived from the public right-of-way and rendered in materials or media appropriate to an exterior, urban environment and permanently integrated into the building wall or immediately between the building wall and the right-of-way may count toward the transparency requirement. Public art alone shall not be an eligible feature to allow the relocation of the required building line identified in Table 4a.06.A.1, footnote 1, but may satisfy the ground story activation requirements of subsection 4a.05.3 when located in an otherwise permitted setback area. 
4.  Pedestrian access/entrance. 
A.  The primary entrance for a non-residential and/or mixed-use building shall be clearly identifiable and useable and located facing the right-of-way. 
B.  A pedestrian connection shall provide a clear, obvious, publicly-accessible connection between the primary street upon which the building fronts and the building. The pedestrian connection shall comply with the following: 
1.  Fully paved and maintained surface not less than five feet in width. 
2.  Unit pavers or concrete distinct from the surrounding parking and drive lane surface. 
3.  Located either within a raised median or between wheel stops to protect pedestrians from vehicle overhangs where parking is adjacent. 
C.  Additional entrances. If a parking area is located in the rear or side yard, it must also have a direct pedestrian entrance to the building that is of a level of materials quality and design emphasis at least equal to that of the primary entrance. 
D.  Direct vehicular access to a building within the DFBC from the right-of-way is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12) 
Section 4a.06. - Form-based regulations. 
A.  Downtown Core D-1 subdistrict: Downtown core buildings and sites will be developed in a manner which contributes to the character of the area by maximizing the value of the property and continues the traditional "street wall" of adjacent historic buildings. D-1 sites must comply with the following regulations. 
Table 4a.06.A.1 
height minimum stories 1 story feet 12 feet maximum stories 3 stories 1 feet 45 feet 1 ground floor minimum feet 12 feet placement front required building line 2 0 feet. 75% of the building façade must meet the required building line, while up to 25% of the façade can be setback to allow for architectural consideration 2 minimum setback n/a side minimum setback n/a rear minimum setback n/a lot required open space n/a lot coverage by all buildings n/a access and circulation Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way parking location Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard.  
1 Buildings may exceed three stories and/or 45 feet in height upon approval of the planning commission as a special land use, pursuant to article 9 of this ordinance. 
2 The planning commission may adjust the required building line to a maximum of 15 feet beyond the property line for projects incorporating a permanent space for an outdoor café, public space, or a cross access drive with an adjacent parcel. Outdoor cafes or public spaces must be developed as part of the primary building and must incorporate a permanent wall or landscaping area along the required building line. 
B.  Downtown Edge D-2 subdistrict: Downtown edge buildings and sites will be developed in a manner which contributes to the character of the downtown, as well as the adjacent residential areas. The D-2 area will provide a softer transition between the downtown and the rest of Saline with more transitional use, dimensional and height regulations. D-2 sites must comply with the following regulations. 
Table 4a.06.B.1 
height minimum stories 1 stories feet 12 feet maximum stories 2 stories 1 feet 35 feet 1 ground floor minimum feet 12 feet placement front maximum setback 15 feet. minimum setback n/a side minimum setback n/a rear minimum setback n/a lot required open space 30 percent lot coverage by all buildings n/a access and circulation Driveways may access the site from any side, pedestrian pathways must be provided from the right-of-way parking location Parking shall be located in a side or rear yard.  
1 Buildings may exceed two stories and/or 35 feet in height upon approval of the planning commission as a special land use, pursuant to article 9 of this ordinance. 
C.  Single-family residential dwellings are exempt from these regulations. All existing and proposed single- and two-family residential uses must meet the area, height, width and setback regulations for the R-1C, single-family residential district, pursuant to section 4.05 of this ordinance. 

(Ord. No. 736, § 1, 12-17-12; Ord. No. 751 , 11-18-13) 
ARTICLE 5. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 5.01. - Intent. 
    The intent of this article is to provide for those regulations which generally apply regardless of the particular zoning district. 
Section 5.02. - Size of dwellings. 
(1)  Except where noted in this ordinance, the minimum size of residential dwellings shall be in compliance with this section. 
Minimum Floor Area Requirements for Dwellings (in sq. ft.) 
1-Story 11/2-Story 1st Floor Area Finished 2nd Floor Area Total 2-Story 1st Floor Area Finished 2nd Floor Area Total R-1 With basement 1,600 1,300 500 1,800 1,000 1,000 2,000 Without basement 1,800 1,500 500 2,000 1,100 1,100 2,200 R-1A With basement 1,500 1,260 500 1,760 900 900 1,800 Without basement 1,620 1,380 500 1,880 1,000 1,000 2,000 R-1B With basement 1,200 940 400 1,340 750 750 1,500 Without basement 1,320 1,060 400 1,460 850 850 1,700 R-1C With basement (3 bedrooms) 1,080** 800 400 1,200 650 650 1,300 With basement (2 Bedrooms) 880*** 800 400 1,200 650 650 1,300 Without basement (3 bedrooms) 1,200** 900 400 1,300 750 750 1,500 Without basement (2 bedrooms) 1,000** 900 400 1,300 750 750 1,500 R-2 With basement* 800 per unit 720 300 1,020 600 600 1,200 Without basement* 920 per unit 840 300 1,140 700 700 1,400  
*  Minimum square foot area requirements per unit. 
**  Three-bedroom dwelling or two-bedroom dwelling with a den or other spare room that may be converted to a third bedroom. 
***  Two-bedroom dwelling. 
(2)  In the event of the construction of a single-family home upon a lot of record of 40 feet or less of frontage, the minimum size of a one-family dwelling may be 720 s.f. of first floor area. R-2 single-family upper and lower units shall use one-story requirements for each unit. 
(3)  R-3A and R-3. All dwellings with one or more bedrooms shall have 650 s.f. per unit with a basement and 770 s.f. per unit without a basement. Efficiencies shall have 550 s.f. per unit with basement and 650 s.f. per unit without basement. 
Section 5.03. - Accessory buildings and structures. 
(1)  Requirements applicable to all accessory buildings within residential districts. 
A.  No accessory building or structure shall be built upon a lot or parcel unless and until a principal structure is erected. 
B.  Private garages shall be considered an accessory building. 
C.  Accessory buildings and structures shall be included in lot coverage limitations. 
D.  In no instance shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated easement or right-of-way. 
(2)  Attached accessory buildings (residential). Where the private garage is structurally attached to a main building, it shall conform to all setback and height regulations of this ordinance and building code applicable to main building. 
(3)  Detached accessory buildings (residential). 
A.  All detached garages and accessory buildings located in side and rear yards and within ten feet of the rear wall of any principal building shall comply with all yard requirements applicable to the principal structure in the district. In no event shall such garages locate closer than five feet from any side lot lines. 
B.  Detached garages and accessory buildings shall not exceed one story, or 14-foot building height for garages and ten-foot building height for accessory buildings. Detached garages and accessory buildings that are more than ten feet from the rear wall of the principal structure shall not be nearer than three feet from the side or rear lot lines. Garages and accessory buildings shall be separated from other existing garages and accessory buildings on the same or adjacent lot by at least six feet. 
C.  Garages on corner lots which face a side street shall not be constructed closer than the required front yard setback from the side street lot line; garages which face the front street and are attached to and become a part of the principal building shall not be constructed closer than the required front yard setback from the side street lot line or closer to the side lot line than the location of the principal building thereon, whichever is greater. 
D.  Garages and accessory buildings or uses customarily incident to any residential permitted use, shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure, and shall not be used for any business, profession, trade or occupation. One private garage shall be allowed for each residential lot, and shall house not more than three vehicles, not more than one of which may be a commercial vehicle, which shall be considered a legal accessory use, provided, however, any such commercial vehicle shall not exceed one ton capacity, and shall be kept housed within a garage when not in use; and provided, further, that no moving vans shall be housed in private garages. Only one accessory building shall be allowed on a lot/parcel. All garages and/or accessory buildings shall contain not more than the square footage of floor area set forth: 
Lot Size Garage Accessory 
Building Under 8,000 square feet 720 120 8,000 to 12,000 square feet 770 150 Over 12,000 square feet 840 200  
E.  Carports, permanent shelters or structures for housing vehicles, shall have open sides facing the side and front lot lines; provided, however, that such sides may be partially enclosed to a maximum height of 48 inches, leaving the remaining space entirely open. Such structures may project onto all required side yards up to within three feet of the side lot line; provided, however, that no such structure shall be erected or maintained closer than ten feet from any building on the adjoining lot. Carports cannot exceed 500 square feet in area. Any enclosed storage area at the rear of the carport shall not exceed 200 square feet. 
(4)  Private swimming pools shall be subject to the following: 
A.  No portion of the swimming pool or associated structures shall be permitted to encroach upon any easement or right-of-way which has been granted for public utility use. 
B.  Front yard and side yard setbacks shall comply with required setbacks specified for the zoning district wherein the pool is located. Rear yard setbacks shall be a minimum of 15 feet. 
C.  All swimming pools shall be enclosed in accordance with applicable building codes. 
D.  A swimming pool shall not be less than four feet between the pool wall and any building on the lot. 
(5)  Landscape ponds shall be subject to the following: (See also definition) 
A.  A landscape pond may be constructed as an element ancillary to a residential use only. A landscape pond may not be developed on a lot which does not contain a single-family use. 
B.  The water source for the landscape pond may be an open source of water (water fall, simulated creek, etc.) provided it is ten feet or less from the landscape pond, six to eight inches in depth and is three feet or less in width (water surface). 
C.  The landscape pond shall meet the setback requirements as specified for swimming pools in section 5.03(4). 
(Ord. No. 675, §§ 1-4, 12-15-03) 
Section 5.04. - Temporary buildings. 
(1)  Emergency temporary dwellings. Emergency temporary dwellings may be permitted upon a finding by the city that the principal residential structure has been destroyed in whole or forth herein have been met. 
A.  An application for a permit for the emergency temporary use and installation of a mobile home, modular, or prefabricated dwelling unit shall be made to the zoning or code inspector. The application shall be accompanied by a plot plan showing the location of the proposed structure. 
B.  The application shall be reviewed by a committee composed of the zoning or code inspector and two elected city council members, other than the zoning or code inspector. Approval of the application may be granted by a majority vote of the committee upon a finding that all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The principal residential structure has been destroyed in whole or in part by fire, explosion, or natural disaster and therefore is uninhabitable. 
2.  The temporary dwelling unit shall be connected to public sewer and water. 
3.  The temporary dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable zoning district requirements including setback, area, bulk, and other requirements, except minimum house size requirements. 
C.  The granting of a permit for an emergency temporary dwelling unit shall be for a period of up to one year from the date of approval by the committee. Any conditions of approval shall be specified in writing on the permit. 
D.  To guarantee compliance with the provisions of the ordinance and removal of the emergency temporary dwelling upon expiration of the permit, the city council may require a cash bond to be posted prior to the issuance of a permit. 
(2)  Construction trailers. Temporary construction trailers shall be permitted only when the intended use is by a contractor or builder in conjunction with a construction project, and only after review and approval by the zoning or code inspector. Such temporary structures shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project and prior to a request for a final certificate of occupancy for the project. 
(3)  Portable tent structures. Portable tent structures shall not be permitted as an accessory building or for permanent storage of automobiles or other materials within the city. Portable tent structures shall be permitted on a temporary basis only, not to exceed 72 hours of use at any one time. 
Section 5.05. - Single-family dwellings, mobile homes, prefabricated housing. 
    No single-family dwelling (site built), mobile home, modular housing, or prefabricated housing located outside a mobile home park or mobile home subdivision shall be permitted unless said dwelling unit conforms to the following standards: 
(1)  Square footage. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum square footage requirements of this ordinance for the zone in which it is located. 
(2)  Dimensions. Each such dwelling unit shall have a minimum width across any front, side, or rear elevation of 20 feet and shall comply in all respects with the building code, including minimum heights for habitable rooms. Where a dwelling is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction and where such standards or regulations for construction are different than those imposed by the state construction code commission, then and in that event such federal or state standard or regulation shall apply. 
(3)  Foundation. Each such dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the building code and shall have a wall of such dimensions to adequately support the dwelling. All dwellings shall be securely anchored to the foundation in order to prevent displacement during windstorms. 
(4)  Undercarriage. Dwelling units shall not be installed with attached wheels. Additionally, no dwelling shall have any exposed towing mechanism, undercarriage, or chassis. 
(5)  Sewage disposal or water supply. Each such dwelling unit shall be connected to public sewer and water. 
(6)  Storage area. Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage capability area either in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, or in a separate or attached structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, which ever shall be less. 
(7)  Architecture and compatibility. The compatibility of design and appearance shall be determined in the first instance by the zoning official. The zoning official may also refer any determination of compatibility to the planning commission. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located outside of mobile home parks within 500 feet of the subject dwelling. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. 
All homes shall have a roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling. The dwellings shall not have less than two exterior doors with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling. Steps shall also be required for exterior door areas or to porches connected to said door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
(8)  Additions. Each such dwelling unit shall contain no addition or room or other area which is not constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required herein. 
(9)  Code compliance. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus, and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as from time to time such standards may be amended or superseded. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
(10)  Building permit. All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the applicable building code provisions and requirements. 
(11)  Exceptions. The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in this ordinance and pertaining to such parks. Mobile homes which do not conform to the standards of this section shall not be used for dwelling purposes within the city unless located within a mobile home park or a mobile home subdivision district for such uses, or unless used as a temporary residence as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
Section 5.06. - Mobile home park requirements. 
    The mobile home code, as established by the mobile home commission and the state department of public health rules under the authority of 1987 PA 96, as amended, regulates development of mobile home parks. All mobile home parks must be constructed according to the standards of the code. In addition to the rules and standards of the state, the city imposes the following conditions: 
(1)  Mobile home parks shall be constructed, licensed, operated, and managed in accordance with the provisions of the Mobile Home Commission Act, Act 96 of 1987, as amended and subsequently adopted rules and regulations governing mobile home parks. 
(2)  Mobile home parks shall not be permitted on parcels less than ten acres in size. 
(3)  Individual mobile home sites within a mobile home park shall have a minimum lot size of 5,500 s.f. per mobile home being served. This 5,500 s.f. minimum may be reduced by 20 percent, provided that the individual site shall be equal to at least 4,400 s.f. For each square foot of land gained through this reduction of the site below 5,500 s.f., an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space. In no case shall the open space requirements be less than that required under R125.1946, Rule 946 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(4)  The on-site storage of boat trailers, boats, camping units, horse trailers and similar recreational equipment shall be prohibited on mobile home sites and in designated open space areas. The mobile home park may provide, within the confines of the park, a common outdoor storage area for the storage of the above mentioned equipment. 
(5)  The minimum setback for mobile home parks shall be 50 feet from a public right-of-way. Mobile home parks shall be landscaped as follows: 
A.  If the mobile home park abuts an existing residential development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the park boundary abutting the residential development. 
B.  If the park abuts a nonresidential development, the park need not provide screening. 
C.  In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening along the park boundary abutting a public right-of-way. 
(6)  The landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs of minimum three feet in height which are spaced so they provide a continuous screen at maturity. Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they conceal the mobile home park as effectively as the required landscaping described above. 
(7)  Mobile home parks shall be subject to preliminary plan review requirements in accordance with the Mobile Home Commission Act 96 of 1987 as amended. 
(8)  A permit shall not be required for the construction or erection of canopies or awnings which are open on three sides. A building permit shall be required, however, before the construction of erection of any screened, glassed-in, or otherwise enclosed awning or canopy. 
Section 5.07. - Multiple family dwellings. 
(1)  Multiple family dwellings located within the R-3A district shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Lot area and density. 
1.  Every lot in the R-3A district on which a principal permitted use is erected shall provide a minimum lot area of 7,800 s.f. for the first living unit, and not less than 2,250 s.f. of lot area for each additional dwelling unit with one bedroom, and not less than 3,000 s.f. of lot area for each additional two-bedroom unit, and not less than 3,750 s.f. for each additional three or four bedroom unit. Every such lot shall have a minimum total area of one-half acre, and a minimum width of 100 feet; excepting, however, lots of record at the time this provision becomes effective which do not meet these minimum requirements. 
2.  The maximum density of dwelling units per acre in R-3A districts shall be as follows: 
(a)  One-bedroom units: 12 per acre. 
(b)  Two-bedroom units: ten per acre. 
(c)  Three- and four-bedroom units: nine per acre. 
B.  Yard requirements. 
1.  Front, side and rear yards shall comply with section 4.05. 
2.  If more than one building shall be constructed on the same site, the following minimum distance between buildings shall be: 
(a)  Seventy feet when front to rear, front to front, and/or rear to rear. 
(b)  Twenty-five feet end to end. 
(c)  Fifty feet end to front and/or end to rear. 
3.  No required yard space or minimum distance between buildings shall be used for required parking, drives or aisles, except that a maximum of 15 percent of these required distances between buildings and required yards may be used for parking, after the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
C.  Maximum units per floor. No more than eight dwelling units per floor may be built in a rectangular building and no more than 12 dwelling units per floor in a T or L shaped building. The intersecting building projection that forms the T or L shall be at least 20 feet long from the inside corner to the end wall. 
D.  Modulation required. Modulation is defined as a change in the vertical plane of the building facade. Building facades shall be modulated at least every 30 foot horizontally and at least every 20 feet vertically. Modulations shall measure at least three inches perpendicular to the building face. 
E.  Undifferentiated facades prohibited. Differentiation is defined as a visual relief or change in the surface of a building. Undifferentiated facades shall not exceed 20 feet horizontally or 15 feet vertically. Walls can be differentiated by: 
1.  Changes in siding texture; 
2.  Changes in surface texture; 
3.  Details such as trim and brackets; 
4.  Building projections such as bay windows, dormers, balustrades; 
5.  Change in color. 
F.  Blank facades prohibited. Blank facades shall not be visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent single-family properties. Blank facades can be alleviated through use of windows, architectural detail, modulation, or differentiation. 
G.  Architectural compatibility. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. 
H.  Floor area. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 5.02(3). 
(2)  Multiple family dwelling located within the R-3 district shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Lot area and density. 
1.  Every lot in an R-3 district on which a multiple-family dwelling is to be erected shall provide a minimum lot area of 7,800 s.f. for the first living unit, and not less than 2,000 s.f. of lot area for each additional efficiency unit or dwelling unit with one bedroom and not less than 2,750 s.f. of lot area for each two-bedroom unit, and not less than 3,500 s.f. for each additional three-bedroom unit. 
2.  The maximum density of dwelling units per acre in R-3 districts shall be as follows: 
(a)  One-bedroom units: 18 per acre. 
(b)  Two-bedroom units: 14 per acre. 
(c)  Three- and four-bedroom units: 11 per acre. 
B.  Yard requirements. 
1.  Front, side and rear yards shall comply with section 4.05. 
2.  If more than one building shall be constructed on the same site, the following minimum distance between buildings shall be: 
(a)  Seventy feet when front to rear, front to front, and/or rear to rear. 
(b)  Twenty-five feet end to end. 
(c)  Fifty feet end to front and/or end to rear. 
3.  No required yard space or minimum distance between buildings shall be used for required parking, drives or aisles, except that a maximum of 15 percent of these required distances between buildings and required yards may be used for parking, after the off-street parking requirements of this ordinance have been met. 
C.  Maximum units per floor. No more than eight dwelling units per floor may be built in a rectangular building and no more than 12 dwelling units per floor in a T or L shaped building. The intersecting building projection that forms the T or L shall be at least 20 feet long from the inside corner to the end wall. 
D.  Modulation required. Modulation is defined as a change in the vertical plane of the building facade. Building facades shall be modulated at least every 30 foot horizontally and at least every 20 feet vertically. Modulations shall measure at least three inches perpendicular to the building face. 
E.  Undifferentiated facades prohibited. Differentiation is defined as a visual relief or change in the surface of a building. Undifferentiated facades shall not exceed 20 feet horizontally or 15 feet vertically. Walls can be differentiated by: 
1.  Changes in siding texture; 
2.  Changes in surface texture; 
3.  Details such as trim and brackets; 
4.  Building projections such as bay windows, dormers, balustrades; 
5.  Change in color. 
F.  Blank facades prohibited. Blank facades shall not be visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent single-family properties. Blank facades can be alleviated through use of windows, architectural detail, modulation, or differentiation. 
G.  Architectural compatibility. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. 
H.  Floor area. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 5.02(3). 
(3)  Multiple family dwellings located within the R-2 district shall be subject to the following: 
A.  Modulation required. Modulation is defined as a change in the vertical plane of the building facade. Building facades shall be modulated at least every 30 foot horizontally and at least every 20 feet vertically. Modulations shall measure at least three inches perpendicular to the building face. 
B.  Undifferentiated facades prohibited. Differentiation is defined as a visual relief or change in the surface of a building. Undifferentiated facades shall not exceed 20 feet horizontally or 15 feet vertically. 
Walls can be differentiated by: 
1.  Changes in siding texture; 
2.  Changes in surface texture; 
3.  Details such as trim and brackets; 
4.  Building projections such as bay windows, dormers, balustrades; 
5.  Change in color. 
C.  Blank facades prohibited. Blank facades shall not be visible from public rights-of-way or adjacent single-family properties. Blank facades can be alleviated through use of windows, architectural detail, modulation, or differentiation. 
D.  Architectural compatibility. All dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. 
E.  Floor area. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the requirements set forth in section 5.02(1). 
(Ord. No. 675, §§ 5, 6, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 693, §§ 1-3, 7-10-06) 
Section 5.08. - Home-based business, Tier 1. 
    All home-based businesses, Tier 1, shall be in single-family residences subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall be registered with the building inspector using a form developed by the city. 
(2)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use of the dwelling unit for dwelling purposes. No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling shall be devoted to a home occupation. 
(3)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall not change the character of the building in which it is conducted. 
(4)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall not create a nuisance or endanger the health, safety, welfare, or enjoyment of any other person in the area, by reason of noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, unsanitary or unsightly conditions, fire hazards, or the like, involved in or resulting from such home occupation. 
(5)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall not generate sewage or water use in excess of what is normally generated from a single-family dwelling in a residential area. 
(6)  No employees shall be permitted other than members of the immediate family of the resident in the dwelling unit. 
(7)  All activities shall be carried on within an enclosed structure. There shall be no outside display or other external or visible evidence of the conduct of a home-based business, Tier 1. 
(8)  No more than two customers, clients, students, or patients shall be permitted on the premises at any given time. 
(9)  No signs advertising the home-based business shall be allowed on the premises. 
(10)  A home-based business, Tier 1, shall be subject to inspection by the city building inspector and fire code official, as relevant to the nature of the business conducted, to ensure compliance with city ordinances and codes, and with applicable state laws. The city building inspector and fire code official may enter the premises for the purpose of inspecting during normal business hours. 
(11)  A registered primary caregiver, as defined by and in compliance with the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, Mich. Admin. Code, R 333.101 through R 333.133 (the General Rules), the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act MCL 333.26421 et seq. (the Act), and the requirements of this section, shall be allowed as a home-based business, Tier 1. 
a.  For purposes of this section, the terms "marihuana" and "medical use of marihuana" shall have the same meanings as given in Section 3 of the Act, MCL 333.26423. 
b.  Since federal law is not affected by the Act or the General Rules, nothing in this section, or in any companion regulatory section adopted in any other provision of this ordinance, shall be construed as granting immunity from criminal prosecution under federal law. The Act does not protect users, caregivers or the owners of properties on which medical use of marihuana is occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their property seized by federal authorities under the Federal Controlled Substances Act. 
c.  The following requirements for a registered primary caregiver shall apply: 
1.  The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act (MCL 333.26421 et seq.) and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Community Health, as they may be amended from time to time. 
2.  A registered primary caregiver must be located outside of a 1,000-foot radius from any school or library, as defined by Section 7410 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7410), to ensure community compliance with federal drug-free school zone requirements. 
3.  Not more than one primary caregiver shall be permitted to service qualifying patients per dwelling unit. 
4.  Not more than five qualifying patients shall be assisted with the medical use of marihuana within any given calendar week. 
5.  All medical marihuana shall be contained within the primary residential structure in an enclosed, locked facility inaccessible on all sides and equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the registered primary caregiver or qualifying patient, as reviewed and approved by the city's building inspector. 
6.  All necessary building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained for any portion of the residential structure in which electrical wiring, lighting or watering devices that support the cultivation, growing or harvesting of marihuana are located. 
7.  If a room with windows is utilized as a growing location, any lighting methods that exceed the usual residential periods between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., local time, shall employ shielding methods, without alteration to the exterior of the residence, to prevent ambient light spillage that may create a distraction for adjacent residential properties. 
8.  That portion of the residential structure where energy usage and heat exceeds typical residential use, such as a grow room, or where the storage of any chemicals such as herbicides, pesticides and fertilizers occurs, shall be subject to inspection and approval by the fire department to ensure compliance with applicable provisions of the fire code. 
(12)  Any violation of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of up to $250.00. 
(Ord. No. 738, § 1, 10-1-12; Ord. No. 756 , § 1, 9-8-14) 
Section 5.09. - Essential services. 
    Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the city. The construction of buildings associated with essential services shall be subject to the provisions of article 8, site plan review. Otherwise, the construction, maintenance, and alteration of essential services shall be exempt from the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 5.10. - Buildings to be moved. 
(1)  No permit shall be granted for the moving of buildings or structures from without or within the limits of the city to be placed on property within said limits unless the zoning or code inspector shall have made an inspection of the building to be moved and has found that it is structurally safe, will not adversely affect the character of existing buildings in the neighborhood of the new location, and will fully comply with the building code and other codes regulating public health, safety, and general welfare. A performance bond as established by the city council of sufficient amount to insure the cost of completing the building for occupancy within a period of not less than six months from date of permit shall be furnished before permit is issued. 
(2)  Any building moved within a district and placed upon a foundation or any building moved into a district shall be subject to all the limitations and requirements herein set forth relating to uses, construction, permits, certificates, and site plan review per the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 5.11. - Outdoor displays of products or materials intended for retail sale or rental. 
(1)  General standards. 
A.  An outdoor display shall be considered as an accessory to and conducted by the principal business use conducted on the premises. 
B.  The exterior of the premises shall be kept clean, orderly and maintained. 
C.  The city shall not be held liable or responsible for any type of damage, theft or personal injury which may occur as a result of an outdoor display. 
D.  In the administration of these provisions, the zoning or code inspector shall be permitted to refer a request to the planning commission for review and approval where site conditions may create difficulty in adherence to the standards contained herein. 
(2)  Standards within C-2, D-1 and D-2 districts. 
A.  An outdoor display may be located in front of or adjacent to the establishment. An outdoor display that extends beyond the property lines of the applicant shall require the permission of the affected property owners. 
B.  If an outdoor display is located on a public sidewalk, a minimum of five feet of unobstructed, pedestrian access along the sidewalk shall be maintained. Sufficient room shall also be provided to allow car doors to open along the curbside. An outdoor display on a public sidewalk shall be confined to normal business hours. 
(3)  Standards within C-3 districts. 
A.  An outdoor display may not be located within the required front yard and shall not be located within any public road right of way. 
B.  An outdoor display shall not occupy or obstruct the use of any fire lane; pedestrian path required off-street parking or landscaped area required to meet the requirements of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 736-1, § 2, 12-17-12) 
Section 5.12. - Transient and seasonal sales. 
    The sale of perishable, seasonal items, examples of which are Christmas trees, flowers and plants, pumpkins, and fruit and beverages, by persons other than the owner or occupant of the premises, shall be permitted in the C-2, C-3, D-1 and D-2 districts. Farmers market on public property as approved by city council, within nonresidential districts. Such uses will be subject to the following standards and conditions: 
(1)  Transient or seasonal sales may be located within any required yard, but shall not be located within any public road right-of-way or sidewalk. 
(2)  Transient or seasonal sales shall not occupy or obstruct the use of any fire lane, required off-street or landscape area required to meet requirements of this zoning code, or create a traffic or safety hazard. 
(3)  Transient or seasonal sales shall be conducted in a manner so as not to create a public nuisance to neighboring properties. Adequate on site parking together with proper ingress and egress to the site shall be provided. 
(4)  Transient and seasonal sales shall be allowed only upon a zoning compliance permit issued by the building department. To secure a permit, an application for a permit shall be submitted which shall include the following: 
A.  Name, address and phone number of the merchant who will conduct the transient and/or seasonal sale; 
B.  Written approval for such sales by the legal owner of the property affected; 
C.  A plot plan depicting the layout of the area where sales will be conducted, as necessary to determine compliance with this section. 
D.  Health department approval, where applicable. 
E.  A permit fee as established by the city council. 
F.  Permit may be revoked by the city if becomes a nuisance or fails to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(5)  Signage for transient or seasonal sales shall be limited to one portable free standing sign with a maximum size of nine s.f. per side and a height limitation of four feet six inches. 
(6)  The permit issued under this section for transient and/or seasonal sales shall be valid for a maximum period of 120 days from the date of issuance. At the end of the permit period, any and all temporary structures shall be removed. 
(Ord. No. 736-1, § 3, 12-17-12) 
Section 5.13. - Pet ownership in residential districts. 
(1)  Pet ownership of certain animals expressly owned by any residents shall be permitted in residential districts and shall include: 
A.  Small animals (legal, nonprotected species) confined solely within the dwelling proper (e.g. rodents, birds and reptiles); 
B.  Marine (fish) species except those prohibited by protective law; 
C.  Domesticated dogs and household cats as single pets providing they are in compliance with chapter 14 of the City Code; 
(2)  Keeping, possession, or harboring of live hogs, cows, sheep, goats, or any species of equines (except as exempted in City Code, section 14-4) is prohibited. 
(3)  Keeping, possession, or harboring of protected species, except as federally approved, is prohibited. Keeping, possession, or harboring undomesticated animals of a wild or feral nature, or larger than a house cat, is prohibited. 
(4)  Any resident who keeps more than three (3) dogs and/or cats shall be required to first obtain a special use permit from the city council after a public hearing held in the manner required for special use permits under the provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city. 
Any resident who keeps more than three dogs and/or cats shall annually, on or before the first day of January, apply for and obtain from the city zoning official a zoning compliance permit, which application shall certify under oath that the applicant is in full compliance with all the provisions of this ordinance and all other ordinances pertaining to the keeping of dogs and cats in the city. The fee for such permit shall be as established by resolution of the city council. 
Section 5.14. - Yard use. 
    The front yard area, and side yard along a street for corner lots, shall be used for ornamental purposes only, and nothing shall be placed thereon except trees, shrubs, flowers, or common landscape items of similar nature. Parking or storage of vehicles shall be restricted to driveways and shall be prohibited on lawn and landscape areas. One paved driveway, not exceeding 27 feet in width, and two house walks, not exceeding four feet wide shall be allowed in the front yard area, and shall be designed to install the least amount of paved area. No play equipment, play pads, or other items shall be constructed in the front yard area; provided, however, that this restriction shall not apply to public play-fields, parking lots, parks, school grounds, recreation areas or public alleys. 
    A rear yard may be used for any detached garage or accessory building other than a garage, in accordance with zoning district regulations. This rear yard may be penetrated by driveways servicing a detached or attached garage. Parking or storage of vehicles in the rear yard shall be restricted to driveways and shall be prohibited on lawn and landscape areas. 
Section 5.15. - Reconstruction of damaged buildings and structures. 
    Reconstruction or demolition of buildings or structures damaged by any means shall be commenced within two months of the date of partial destruction and shall be diligently carried on to completion within a period of one year after said partial destruction. When pending insurance claims require an extension of time or the city fire chief or state fire marshall determines additional time is necessary, a time extension may be granted provided that the property owner submits a certification from the insurance company, fire chief or state fire marshall attesting to the delay. Until such time as debris from the damage is fully removed, the premises shall be adequately secured by the owner to guarantee the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
Section 5.16. - Storage, dumping of waste, junk, garbage and other similar materials. 
    The use of land for the storage, collection or accumulation of new or used building materials, new or used household items, auto parts, and other used materials, or for the dumping or disposal of broken concrete, scrap iron, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse or for ashes, slag or other industrial waste or by-products shall be strictly prohibited in all districts. 
Section 5.17. - Site condominium projects. 
(1)  Site plan approval required. Preliminary and final site plan approval in accordance with Article 8 shall be required as a condition to the right to construct, expand or convert a site condominium project, provided, however, that preliminary and final site plans shall not be combined for site condominiums. In addition to the site plan, the applicant shall submit condominium documents for review and approval by the city attorney before final site plan approval. 
(2)  General requirements. 
A.  Each condominium lot shall be located with a zoning district that permits the proposed use. 
B.  Each condominium lot shall front on and have direct access to a public street or a private street approved by city council. Such approval for a private street shall be obtained before final site plan approval. 
C.  For the purposes of this ordinance, each condominium lot shall be considered equivalent to a single lot and shall comply with all regulations of the zoning district in which located. 
(3)  Site condominium agreement required; contents. The city shall, prior to approval of the final site plan, require the developer to enter into an agreement with the city, which agreement shall define the respective responsibilities of the city and the developer in regard to the conditions of approval and the physical development of the site condominium. Such agreement shall include but may not be limited to: 
A.  Any exception or modification of any requirements of this section. Provided, however, that such exceptions or modifications shall not authorize the violation of the then-effective zoning ordinances of the city. 
B.  A progress schedule of the order and time of the installation of improvements in the site condominium. 
C.  A provision that the developer shall construct the following improvements in accordance with said order and time schedule, and in accordance with city design standards, at no expense to the city. 
1.  Streets, traffic control devices and pavement markings. 
2.  Street lighting and security lighting. 
3.  Curbs and gutters. 
4.  Sidewalks, crosswalks and non-motorized pathways. 
5.  Water mains, valves, gatewells, hydrants and laterals. 
6.  Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
7.  Storm sewer mains, laterals and manholes. 
8.  Stormwater detention system. 
9.  Grading which will prevent surface storm water from causing damage to lots within the site condominium or to land adjacent to the site condominium. 
10.  All improvements necessary to comply with the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city. 
11.  All street name signs and posts. 
12.  All trees on lawn extensions in accordance with FHA and city specifications and ordinances. 
13.  Monuments set at all boundary corners and deflection points and all road right-of-way intersections, corners and deflections points. 
14.  Lot irons set at all condominium lot corners and deflections points of condominium lot lines. 
15.  Water shutoff valves, catch basins and yard drains at the locations shown on the constructions plans approved by the city. 
16.  Acceleration and deceleration lanes on streets abutting the tract of land being developed which are used for access to said tract, if needed for the traffic safety of persons entering and leaving said site condominium. 
17.  Recreational facilities shown on the site plan. 
18.  Buildings and other improvements conforming as near as is reasonably possible to the design concepts set forth in the approved site plan. 
19.  All improvements necessary to comply with the City of Saline Phase II Storm Water Management Program. 
D.  A provision that the owner shall make arrangements for all local distribution lines within a site condominium (excepting such facilities as are required by the Michigan public service commission to be above ground) for telephone and all other communications systems and electric service to be placed underground entirely throughout a site condominium area, and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways. 
E.  A provision that the developer shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs incurred by the city in connection with the review or approval of the plans and specifications for required subdivision improvements, and in connection with the inspection and testing of said improvements by city approved inspectors and testers during, and upon completion of, the construction thereof. Said reimbursement shall be made by the owner to the city at the time billed by the city and no building permits shall be issued while any amounts so billed are in default. The city shall advise the owner of all such costs incurred on a monthly basis. 
F.  A provision that the developer shall pay a proportionate share of the cost of all improvements required to be constructed outside of the site condominium to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public as a result of the development of the site condominium; together with a description of said required improvements, the estimated cost thereof, the share of said estimated cost to be paid by the developer, and the proposed date of completion of said required improvements. 
G.  A provision that all improvements required to be constructed inside and outside the site condominium shall be constructed in accordance with all statutes, ordinances, regulations and rules in effect at the time of construction. 
H.  A provision that all internal site condominium streets, and all streets providing direct access to the subdivision, shall be designed and constructed so that they shall be not more than six inches below the established 100-year floodplain. 
I.  A provision that the storm drainage system for the site condominium shall be designed and constructed to adequately convey any and all storm waters underground in the event of at least a ten-year storm of a 30- minute duration. 
J.  A provision that all provisions of the soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance of the city shall be complied with during construction of the site condominium. 
K.  Where public streets are planned, a provision that all street rights-of-way to be dedicated within the site condominium, or lying outside the site condominium but on land owned by the developer and planned for future development related to the site condominium, shall meet the requirements of the city master plan and/or the intercounty highway plan. 
L.  A provision that all sidewalks adjacent to land owned by the developer and necessary to serve the site condominium, whether lying inside or outside the boundaries of the site condominium, shall be constructed by the developer prior to the time they are needed for use by the residents of the site condominium, or as soon thereafter as feasible, together with a description of said sidewalks and the proposed date of completion thereof. 
M.  A provision that all buildings constructed with a "floodplain area" as shown on the site condominium shall be constructed to the standards provided in the latest edition of the "Flood Proofing Regulations" from the office of the chief of engineers, U.S. Army, Washington, D.C. 
N.  A provision that the developer shall install street lighting conforming to city standards as shown on the final site plan at the owner's expense. The owner shall coordinate the installation of all street lighting with the public utility providing the electrical service and with the city superintendent with the understanding that no occupancy permits shall be issued by the city for any house not adequately served by streetlights. 
O.  A provision that all required storm water retention areas shall be designed and constructed to adequately store the volume of water projected to accumulate during a 100-year storm, and a description of the manner in which the cost of maintaining said areas will be borne in the future. A maintenance schedule shall be included in the master deed. 
P.  A provision that all plans and specifications for the site condominium improvements shall be provided by the site condominium in sufficient number for review by the council, the planning commission, the staff and the city engineers; and that all cost incurred by the city in connection with the review, approval, or inspection of said plans, specifications and improvements shall be charged to and paid for by the developer. 
(4)  Information required prior to occupancy. Prior to the issuance of occupancy permits for any condominium units, the developer shall submit the following to the city: 
A.  A copy of the recorded master deed (including exhibits). 
B.  A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants. 
C.  A copy of the site plan on laminated photostatic copy or mylar sheet. 
D.  Two copies of an "as-built survey." 
E.  CAD or GIS electronic submittals of the site plan and "as-built survey." 
(5)  Revision of condominium subdivision plan. If the condominium subdivision plan is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for review and approval or denial by the planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. 
(6)  Amendment of master deed or bylaws. Any amendment to a master deed or bylaws that affects the approved preliminary or final site plan, or any conditions of approval of a preliminary or final site plan, shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney and planning commission before any building permit may be issued, where such permit is required. The planning commission may require its review of an amended site plan if, in its opinion, such changes in the master deed or bylaws require corresponding changes in the approved site plan. 
(Ord. No. 679, § 1, 11-22-04) 
Sec. 5.18. - Mobile food vending units. 
(1)  For purposes of this section, "mobile food vending unit" means any vehicle operating in accordance with article IV, chapter 22 of the City of Saline Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  One or more food vending units shall be allowed to operate on any parcel in the I-1, I-2, I-4, PB, OS, C-1, C-2, C-3, D-1, or D-2 zoning districts, as a primary or accessory use, with permission of the owner of the parcel. 
( Ord. No. 801 , § 1, 5-7-18) 
ARTICLE 6. - LAND USE PROVISIONS 

Section 6.01. - Intent. 
    The intent of this Article is to provide for specific regulations which apply to special land uses. The regulation set forth in the article are in addition to the standards and procedures set forth in article 9. 
Section 6.02. - Open space preservation provisions. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of the open space preservation provision is to permit the development of single-family dwellings in an attached or detached residential pattern which, through design innovation, will: 
A.  Allow greater flexibility; 
B.  Encourage a more creative approach to the development of single-family residential areas; 
C.  Encourage a more efficient, aesthetic, and desirable use of the land; 
D.  Provide a more desirable living environment through the preservation and conservation of natural features such as topography, wetlands, woodlands, bodies of water, and other natural assets; 
E.  Encourage the provision of open space so that benefits may accrue directly to the residents of the development; 
F.  Provide for optimum setbacks from major thoroughfares and/or freeways; 
G.  Provide for the sound physical development and handling of site situations where a conventional subdivision approach would be unnecessarily restrictive. 
H.  The open space preservation provisions of this section shall not be applied if the subject development is dependant upon the extension of a public sewer or public water supply system, unless development of the land without the exercise of the option provided by this article would also depend upon such an extension. 
(2)  Special approval and site plan review required. Open space preservation developments may be permitted in the R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-2 districts under such conditions as the planning commission, after hearings, finds the proposed use not being injurious to the district and surrounding area and not contrary to the spirit and purpose of this ordinance, subject further to the reviews by the city council and approval thereof. 
(3)  Qualification of parcels. In order for the cluster housing option designation to be applied for a parcel of land zoned for either R-1, R-1A, R-1B, R-1C and R-2 the parcel must meet one (1) or more of the following characteristics: 
A.  The parcel contains natural assets which would be preserved through the use of open space preservation developments. Such assets may include natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for wildlife, wetlands, bodies of water (i.e., streams, rivers, and lakes), unusual topographic features, or other natural assets which should be preserved. Requests for qualification under these conditions must be supported by documented evidence. 
B.  The parcel contains major topographic conditions which make development under the normal subdivision approach impractical. In considering qualification under this subsection, the city shall determine that one or more of the following conditions exist, where applicable: 
1.  The natural land forms are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of 15 percent between these elevations. These elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the predominant feature of the site rather than the exceptional or infrequent feature of the site. 
2.  Mass grading of the site would be necessary if developed without the cluster housing option. 
3.  The use of one-family clusters will allow for a greater preservation of a desirable natural setting. 
C.  The parcel contains substantial portions of floodplain and wetlands. A floodplain and wetlands map, certified by the appropriate federal, state, or county agency, indicating the extent of the wetlands and floodplain area, shall be submitted to the city in order to support the proposal for the parcel's qualification for open space preservation developments. 
D.  The parcel is either too small or unusually shaped to be reasonably platted as a conventional subdivision or site condominium development. 
(4)  Site design requirements. All open space preservation developments submitted shall conform to the following site design requirements: 
A.  A minimum of 20 percent of the total site area shall be designated and preserved as common open space. The computation of designated open space shall not include: rights-of-way or easements designated for road purposes, or any area within 30 feet of a dwelling unit. No more than 50 percent of wetlands regulated by the DNR, may be included in the open space calculations. Land which is under water (lakes, streams, watercourses, and other similar bodies of water), or an area to be improved into a lake or pond may not be included in the calculation of the designated open space. 
Area devoted to open space may be devoted to active or passive recreation or remain in its natural state. However, it is not the intent of these provisions to allow only land which is otherwise unusually or unbuildable to be devoted to common open space. Area set aside as open space shall remain perpetually in an undeveloped state by means of a conservation easement, plat dedication, restrictive covenant, or other legal means that runs with the land acceptable to the city pursuant to section 7.15 of this ordinance. 
B.  The number of dwelling units permitted shall not exceed the number of dwelling units in the zoning district in which the proposed development is located. In order to calculate density, the applicant shall submit a concept site plan of the property which illustrates achievable development as a subdivision or site condominium without application of the open space preservation option and with all applicable ordinances and laws observed. 
In general the plan shall be drawn with sufficient detail to permit the planning commission to determine the density which would be achieved by conventional development. Specifically, the plan shall contain the following information: 
1.  Evidence of ownership; location and description of site; dimensions and areas. 
2.  Topography soils information to the detail found in the soil survey for the county and the location of woodlands, wetlands, floodplains and surface waters. 
3.  Scale, north arrow, date of plan. 
4.  Existing zoning of site; existing land use and zoning of, adjacent parcels; location of existing buildings, drives and streets on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
5.  Lot and street layout. 
6.  Location, size, and uses of open space. 
7.  General description of proposed water, sewage disposal, and storm drainage systems. 
C.  In the case of single-family detached units, the following yard requirements shall be applied. 
Minimum Setbacks per Unit 
District Front Side Rear R-1 30 10 30 R-1A 30 10 30 R-1B 25 5 25 R-1C 25 5 25 R-2 25 5 25  
D.  In the R-1 district, dwelling units shall not be attached. In the R-1A, R-1B and R-1C districts, up to 75 percent of the total number of dwelling units may be attached, provided that individual buildings shall not include more than four attached dwelling units. In the R-2 district, up to 100 percent of the total number of dwelling units may be attached provided that individual buildings shall not include more than four attached dwelling units. In the case of single-family attached units, the following yard requirements shall be applied: 
Minimum Setbacks 
District From Internal Street Rights-of-Way or Easements for Ingress or Egress From Perimeter Property Boundaries R-1A 30 50 R-1B 25 50 R-1C 25 50 R-2 25 50  
Minimum Distance Between Buildings Based on Building Orientation 
District Side/Side Side/Front 
Side/Rear Front/Front 
Rear/Rear R-1A 30 45 60 R-1B 20 35 50 R-1C 20 35 50 R-2 20 35 50  
E.  No building shall be located closer than 50 feet from the ordinary high-water mark of a body of water. 
F.  All open space and common areas shall have a demonstrated means of maintenance. 
G.  It is the intent of the city that open space developments shall not appear to be more intense than conventional development as viewed from off-site. In addition to any required minimum setback specified in section 6.02(4)C. and D., a greenbelt having the minimum width of 50 feet shall be required along any adjacent public road, measured from the right-of-way line. The city at its discretion, may permit either reductions or variations in width of the greenbelt taking into consideration topographic and/or other natural resource conditions, density of existing vegetation to be preserved, and size and shape of the development site. 
H.  In order to provide an orderly transition of density when a open space preservation development abuts a single-family residential district of equal or lower density, the city, at its discretion, shall require designation of open space along the common boundaries; screening in accordance with the requirements of section 7.02; and/or an area or row of lots of commensurate size as neighboring residential lots. 
I.  In the R-1 district, the minimum lot size in an open space preservation development shall be no less than 16,000 s.f. in area. 
Section 6.03. - Child care facilities. 
(1)  Child care center. 
A.  Child care centers may be permitted in all zoning districts, except single-family residential and industrial districts, subject to the following minimum standards: 
1.  Operator must be licensed by the state department of consumer and industry services. 
2.  A compliance permit must be obtained from the clerk's office before operation commences and compliance must be continuous, and the compliance permit must be renewed annually. 
3.  Site plan approval by the planning commission must be obtained. 
4.  Outdoor play areas shall be fenced, and such play areas shall be made and kept safe by the caregivers. 
5.  Maintenance of the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
6.  A child care center shall comply with all fire and traffic standards set by the state department of consumer and industry services and the city as determine by the chief of police and fire chief. Child care facilities will be inspected annually by the fire department to meet city requirements. 
7.  Caregivers shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding neighborhood. 
8.  All child care centers shall be registered with the 911 dispatch center on forms provided by said center. 
9.  No person other than the licensee or his/her immediate family may reside on the licensed property. No one need reside on the premises. 
10.  License holder and all employees shall be subject to, and provide, a background check by a method recommended and approved by the Saline Chief of Police before commencement of employment. 
This will be done at the time of hire of a new employee and annually the facility will provide a list of all employees. 
B.  The fees to be charged in connection with applications for child care center permits and renewals thereof shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  The said child care center compliance permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Written renewal request must be made 30 days prior to expiration. After the first year, a follow-up 300-foot notice will be sent if there has been a substantiated written complaint. No subsequent annual notices will be sent, unless deemed necessary by the building official. After request, and there no substantiated complaints on file, the clerk's office can renew the permit at that time. Permits are valid from January 1, to December 31, of each year. 
D.  No compliance permit for a child care center shall be issued or renewed if the applicant has failed to file an annual personal property statement with the city assessor covering the property used in connection with said child care center, as required by law, or has failed to pay the personal property tax assessed on said personal property. 
E.  The city permit to operate may be revoked at any time that conditions at the child care center become such that allowing continued operation could prove to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the children. Appeals to this section will be before the zoning board of appeals as provided for in the code. 
(2)  Group day care home. 
A.  Group day care homes may be permitted in single-family residential districts subject to the following minimum standards: 
1.  A compliance permit must be obtained from the clerk's office before operation commences and compliance must be continuous, and the compliance permit must be renewed annually. 
2.  A group day care home shall not be located closer than 500 feet to any of the following: 
(a)  Another licensed group day care home. 
(b)  An adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the Adult Foster Care Facility Licensing Act, Act No. 218 of the Public Acts of 1979, being sections 400.701 to 400.737 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
3.  Outdoor play areas shall be in rear yards only and such rear yards shall be made and kept safe by the care-givers. 
4.  Maintenance of the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
5.  Signage shall not be allowed. 
6.  A group day care home shall comply with all the fire and traffic safety standards set by the Michigan Department of Consumer Industry Services and the City of Saline as determined by the Saline Chief of Police and Fire Chief. Parking shall be in accordance with section 13.04.2.H in addition to residential parking requirement of two spaces. Group day care homes will be inspected annually by the fire department to meet city requirements. 
7.  Caregivers shall maintain control of noise to protect the surrounding neighborhood. 
8.  All group care homes shall be registered with the 911 dispatch center on forms provided by said center. 
9.  License holder shall be the owner of the premises and shall reside thereon. 
10.  License holder and employees shall be subject to, and provide, a background check by a method recommended and approved by the Saline Chief of Police before commencement of employment. 
B.  The fees to be charged in connection with applications for group day care home permits and renewals thereof shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
C.  No compliance permit for a group day care home shall be issued or renewed if the applicant has failed to file an annual personal property statement with the city assessor covering the property used in connection with said group day care home, as required by law, or has failed to pay the personal property tax assessed on said personal property. 
D.  The group day care compliance permit shall be issued for a period of one year. Written renewal request must be made 30 days prior to expiration. After the first year, a follow-up 300-foot notice will be sent if there has been a substantiated written complain. No subsequent annual notices will be sent, unless deemed necessary by the building official. After request, and there are no substantiated complaints on file, the clerk's office can renew the permit at that time. Permits are valid from January 1, to December 31, of each year. 
(Ord. No. 725, § 1, 12-21-09) 
Section 6.04. - Adult foster care facilities. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to establish standards for adult foster care facilities which will insure compatibility with adjacent land uses and maintain the character of the neighborhood. 
(2)  Application of regulations. 
A.  A state licensed adult foster care small family serving six persons or less shall be considered a residential use of property and a permitted use in all residential districts. 
B.  The city may, by issuance of a special land use permit, authorize the establishment of adult foster care group homes serving more than six persons in the following zoning districts: R-1A, R-1B, R-1C, R-2, R-3A, R-3, and RMH. Such facilities shall be prohibited in all other districts. 
C.  The city may, by issuance of a special use permit, authorize the establishment of an adult foster care congregate facility in the following zoning districts: R-3 and R-3A. Such facilities shall be prohibited in all other districts. 
(3)  Standards for adult foster care group homes. Such homes shall be considered as special land use subject to the requirements and standards of article 9 and the following additional standards: 
A.  A site plan, prepared in accordance with article 8 shall be required to be submitted. 
B.  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum width and set back area, requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of 1,500 s.f. per adult, excluding employees and/or care givers. 
C.  The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the character of the neighborhood. 
D.  One off-street parking space per employee and/or caregiver shall be provided. 
E.  In its sole discretion, the city may determine that landscape screening in accordance with section 7.02(4) is required. 
F.  Appropriate licenses with the state shall be maintained. 
G.  Be so constructed, arranged, and maintained as to provide adequately for the health and safety and welfare of all occupants. 
H.  The atmosphere and routine shall be that a resident may spend the majority of his nonsleeping hours outside his bedroom. 
I.  A toilet, lavatory and bathing or showering facility shall be provided for each six persons. At least one toilet and lavatory shall be provided on each floor having resident bedrooms. 
J.  Provide distinct living and sleeping areas. All areas shall be well lighted, heated and ventilated. 
K.  Provide a living or day room area which affords privacy for use by a resident and his visitors. 
L.  The living and sleeping areas for each resident shall not be in noncontiguous wings, units or buildings. 
M.  A living room, dining room or other room not designed nor ordinarily used for sleeping shall not be used for sleeping purposes. 
N.  A room shall not be used as a bedroom where more than one-half of the room height is below grade except where the ceiling of such portion of a building is located five feet or more above grade for more than 25 percent of the perimeter measurement of the room. 
O.  Bedrooms shall have at least one window with a minimum sash area of eight square feet. 
P.  A single-occupancy bedroom shall have at least 80 square feet of usable floor area. 
Q.  A multiple-occupancy bedroom shall have at least 70 square feet of usable floor area per person with a maximum of four beds and persons per bedroom. 
R.  A group foster care home shall be inspected and approved for fire safety prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit and shall be inspected at least annually. 
S.  Signage shall not be allowed. 
(4)  Standards for adult foster care congregate facilities. Such facilities shall be considered as a special land use subject to the requirements and standards of article 9 and the following standards: 
A.  A site plan, prepared in accordance with article 8 shall be required to be submitted. 
B.  The subject parcel shall meet the minimum lot area requirements for the zoning district in which it is located, provided there is a minimum site area of 1,500 s.f. per adult, excluding employees and/or caregivers. 
C.  Parking requirements as required for convalescent homes and similar facilities, set forth in article 13 shall be met. 
D.  All landscape requirements set forth in section 7.02(4) shall be met. 
E.  Appropriate licenses with the state shall be maintained. 
Section 6.05. - Housing for the elderly. 
    Housing for the elderly shall be permitted after special land use approval upon a finding that the following minimum standards are met: 
(1)  General standards. 
A.  The proposed use will not produce adverse effects on the use or development of the surrounding area because of noise, traffic, type of physical activity, or any other reason. 
B.  Adequate accessibility is provided to transportation, medical services, shopping areas, recreational and other community services frequently desired by elderly persons. 
C.  The site is reasonably well protected from excessive noise, air pollution, and other harmful physical influences and provides for a safe and secure environment for residents of the proposed development. 
(2)  Building height. No building hereafter erected or altered in R-1A districts shall exceed 35 feet in height or two stories, except as provided in section 4.03(4) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Yard requirements. 
A.  Front yard: 35 feet. 
B.  Rear yard: 35 feet. 
C.  Side yard: 35 feet total, 15 feet minimum one side. 
D.  If more than one (1) building shall be constructed on the same site, the following minimum distance between buildings shall be: 
1.  Seventy feet when front to rear, front to front and/or rear to rear. 
2.  Twenty-five feet end to end. 
3.  Fifty feet end to front and/or end to rear. 
(4)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit shall comply with the following minimum floor area requirements, excluding basements: 
A.  Efficiency unit: 450 s.f. 
B.  One bedroom unit: 600 s.f. 
C.  Two-bedroom units: 750 s.f. 
D.  Each additional bedroom: 150 s.f. 
(5)  Maximum density. The maximum permitted density of dwelling units per acre shall be as follows: 
A.  Efficiency units and one-bedroom units: 12 units per acre. 
B.  Two-bedroom units: Ten units per acre. 
C.  Three- and four-bedroom units: Nine units per acre. 
(6)  Parking. Parking requirements shall be as follows: 
A.  A minimum of one parking space per dwelling unit and one space per employee during the peak shift shall be provided. 
B.  Additional parking may be required by the planning commission when ancillary meeting and activity facilities are provided which generates a demand for parking beyond that which is normally required under subparagraph A. contained herein. 
(7)  Ancillary facilities. Elderly housing development may also include meeting and activity facilities, central dining facilities, laundry rooms, and other convenience facilities for occupants and their guest. 
Section 6.06. - Self-storage facilities. 
    Self-storage facilities shall be subject to the following requirements and conditions: 
(1)  No activity other than rental of storage units and the rental of outside storage space for recreational vehicles shall be allowed. No commercial, wholesale, retail, industrial or other business use on, or operated from, the facility shall be allowed, except that the sale of packaging materials and other related incidental sales may be permitted from the central self-storage facility office. 
(2)  The storage of any toxic, explosive, corrosive, flammable or hazardous materials is prohibited. Fuel tanks on any motor vehicle, boat, lawn mower or similar property will be drained or removed prior to storage. Batteries shall be removed from vehicles before storage. 
(3)  Other than the storage of recreational vehicles, all storage shall be contained within a building. All recreational vehicle storage shall be screened from the view of neighboring properties and public roads in accordance with section 7.02(4). 
(4)  Exterior walls of the ends of all storage units shall be of masonry or face-brick construction. 
(5)  All storage units must be accessible by paved circular drives clearly marked to distinguish traffic flow. A minimum 26-foot drive shall be provided between buildings. Site circulation shall be designed to accommodate fire trucks, as well as trucks that will customarily access the site. 
(6)  Site lighting shall meet the standards contained in section 7.09 of this ordinance. 
Section 6.07. - General, building, service, skilled trade and landscape contractor's offices and yards. 
(1)  A contractor's office building shall be of permanent construction. Temporary construction trailers shall not be permitted to be occupied as the office of the contractor. Outdoor storage shall be strictly and clearly accessory to the contractor's principal office use of the property. Only products, materials and equipment owned and operated by the principal use shall be permitted for storage. 
(2)  Storage shall not be located within the required front yard. Such storage shall not be located in any required parking or loading space. 
(3)  Storage shall be screened from the view of public street, and adjacent properties zoned either residential, commercial, or office. Screening measures shall meet the requirements of section 7.02(4). 
(4)  The location and size of areas for storage, nature of items to be stored therein, and details of the enclosure, including description of materials, height, and typical elevation of the enclosure shall be provided as part of the information submitted under article 8, site plan review. 
Section 6.08. - Automobile related uses. 
(1)  Automobile repair, service stations and washes, shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  Separation shall be made between the pedestrian sidewalk and vehicular parking and maneuvering areas with the use of curbs, wheel stops, greenbelts or traffic islands. 
B.  All activities related to vehicle washing, service and repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building with the exception of outdoor drying and vacuuming. 
C.  Driveways shall be designed to accommodate the type and volume of vehicular traffic using the site and located in a manner which is compatible with uses located adjacent to and across from the site. 
D.  In the case of automobile repair and/or service stations, inoperative or unlicensed vehicles shall not be stored outside for more than seven days. Such storage shall not occur in front of the front face of the building. 
E.  Vehicle sales shall not be permitted on the premises. 
F.  Canopies covering pump island area shall be architecturally integrated with the principal building in terms of design, appearance, roof lines and building materials. Canopies shall be considered structures for the purpose of determining required setbacks. 
(2)  Automobile dealers shall be subject to the following standards: 
A.  All outdoor lighting shall be shielded from projecting onto or into an adjoining residential district and shall not interfere with driver visibility on a public right-of-way. All lighting shall conform to section 7.09 of this ordinance. 
B.  There shall be no strings of flags, pennants or bare light bulbs permitted. 
C.  No vehicles or merchandise for sale shall be displayed within any required front yard setback. 
D.  There shall be no broadcast of continuous music or announcements over any loudspeaker or public address system. 
Section 6.09. - Sidewalk cafe service. 
    A sidewalk café service operated by a restaurant or other food establishment which sells food for immediate consumption may be permitted in the D-1 downtown core district, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  An application depicting the location and layout of the cafe facility shall be submitted to the zoning official. Site plan approval shall be required. An approved site plan shall remain in effect, unless there is a change in ownership or the operation of the cafe fails to meet the standards contained herein. 
(2)  A sidewalk cafe may be located in front of or adjacent to the establishment. A sidewalk cafe that extends beyond the property lines of the applicant shall require the permission of the affected property owners. 
(3)  If a sidewalk cafe is located on a public sidewalk, a minimum of five feet of unobstructed, pedestrian access along the sidewalk shall be maintained. 
(4)  A sidewalk cafe shall be allowed only during normal operating hours of the establishment. 
(5)  The exterior of the premises shall be kept clean, orderly and maintained or the permit may be revoked. All food preparation shall be inside of the premises. 
(6)  The city shall not be held liable or responsible for any type of damage, theft or personal injury which may occur as a result of a sidewalk cafe operation. Applicant shall submit a certificate of insurance to meet requirements of the city attorney. 
(7)  All sidewalk cafes shall comply with applicable regulations of the county health department and the state. 
(Ord. No. 736-1, § 4, 12-17-12) 
Section 6.10. - Bed and breakfast accommodations. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to permit the operation of bed and breakfast facilities as a vehicle for preserving historical resources within the city. Historical preservation is recognized as a public purpose by statute and local ordinance as a means to safeguard local heritage, preserve cultural, social, economic, political and architectural history, to stabilize and improve property values, to foster civic beauty, to strengthen local economies and to promote the education, pleasure and welfare of the citizenry. The purpose of this section is to advance those goals by enhancing the viability of historical preservation. 
(2)  Standards. Bed and breakfast operations may be permitted in any zoning district, except industrial zones, when approved by the city council, after approval by the planning commission upon a finding that the following minimum standards are met: 
A.  The bed and breakfast site shall be located on a parcel fronting onto collector or arterial road as defined in the thoroughfare plan of the master plan for the city, provided that no such site shall be located within a single-family residential subdivision. 
B.  Such operations shall be run by persons who own and occupy the premises for residential purposes. 
C.  Not more than eight bedrooms in the bed and breakfast operation shall be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. Use of a garage for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms is prohibited. Accessory buildings may be used for bed and breakfast sleeping rooms if they were originally constructed to accommodate housing use. 
D.  If more than two such rooms are for rent, each room shall have access to two separate means of egress. Access shall not be through another bedroom. 
E.  Signs identifying the bed and breakfast operation shall comply with the requirements of article 12, signs, except that in a residential district identification signs shall be no larger than three square feet. 
F.  Such facilities shall comply with all applicable local, county, state and federal ordinances, laws, rules, regulations and codes. 
G.  Guest occupancy shall be no longer than 14 consecutive days. 
H.  No more than four occupants per room shall be allowed. 
I.  There shall be no cooking facilities for use by the occupants of the bed and breakfast sleeping rooms. 
J.  Lavatory and bathing facilities shall be available for all persons utilizing the bed and breakfast. 
K.  A fire escape plan shall be developed and graphically displayed in each guest room. A smoke detector in proper working order shall be placed in every sleeping room and a fire extinguisher in proper working order shall be placed on every floor. The site shall be reviewed by the zoning or code inspector as to the necessity for fire lanes. 
L.  One off-street parking space shall be provided in the rear or side yard, behind the front building setback line, for each guest room. For parcels abutting an exterior side street, parking shall not be closer to the street than the principal structure. 
M.  All bed and breakfast operations shall submit to annual inspections by the building department. Renewal of a business registration shall be contingent upon compliance with applicable codes, as verified by such inspections. 
Section 6.11. - Wireless communication facilities. 
(1)  Intent. It is the general purpose and intent of the city to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the city to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempt has been made to balance these potentially competing interests. 
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further purpose and intent of this section to: 
A.  Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities and ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings. 
B.  Establish predetermined districts or zones of the number, shape, and the location, considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions. 
C.  Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts or zones. 
D.  Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
E.  Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community land marks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. 
(2)  Authorization. Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in section, wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances, and in the following districts: 
A.  Circumstances creating permitted use treatment. In all zoning districts, a proposal to establish a new wireless communication facility shall be deemed a permitted use in the following circumstances: 
1.  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility within a nonresidential zoning district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the zoning or code inspector, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed in appearance. 
2.  A proposed collocation upon an attached wireless communication facility which had been pre-approved for such collocation as part of an earlier approval by the city. 
3.  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the zoning or code inspector, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interests. 
B.  Permitted use districts. Wireless communication facilities shall be a permitted use in the I-1, I-2, and I-4 industrial districts. 
C.  If it is demonstrated by an applicant that a wireless communication facility is required to be established outside of a district identified in subsection B., above, in order to operate, such wireless communication facilities may be permitted elsewhere in the community as a special land use, subject to the requirements and standards of article 9 and the following: 
1.  At the time of the submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within the areas identified in subsections A.1., and 2. above cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. 
2.  Locations outside of the districts identified in subsections A.1., and 2. above, shall be permitted on the following sites, subject to application of all other standards contained in this section: 
(a)  Municipally owned site. 
(b)  Other governmentally owned site. 
(c)  Religious or other institutional site. 
(d)  Public park and other large permanent open space areas when compatible. 
(e)  Public or private school site. 
(f)  Other locations if none of the above is available. 
D.  All other criteria and standards set forth in section 6.11(3) are met. 
(3)  General regulations. 
A.  Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities. All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the city in its discretion: 
1.  Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 
2.  Facilities shall be located and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas. 
3.  Facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions. 
4.  The following additional standards shall be met: 
(a)  The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant and by other entities to collocate on the structure. Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. 
(b)  The accessory building contemplated to enclose switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district. 
(c)  The setback of the support structure from any residential district shall be no less than the height of the structure. The setback of the support structure from any existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly traveled roads shall be no less than the height of the structure. 
(d)  Where the proposed new or modified support structure abuts a parcel of land zoned for a use other than residential, the minimum setback of the structure, and accessory structures, shall be in accordance with the required setbacks for principal buildings as provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the support structure is located. 
(e)  There shall be an unobstructed paved access drive to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access drive shall be a minimum of 14 feet in width. 
(f)  The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met. 
(g)  Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building, any equipment enclosure shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform to all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks. 
(h)  The city shall, review and approve the color of the support structure and all accessory buildings, so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. 
(i)  The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the state. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements indicating the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted. 
(j)  A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard. 
B.  Standards and conditions applicable to special land use facilities. Applications for wireless communication facilities which may be approved as conditional land uses shall be reviewed, and if approved, constructed and maintained, in accordance with the standards and conditions in this subsection, general regulations, above, and in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors: 
(a)  Proximity to a major thoroughfare. 
(b)  Areas of population concentration. 
(c)  Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers. 
(d)  Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions. 
(e)  Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate. 
(f)  Other specifically identified reason creating facility need. 
2.  The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the collocation requirements of this section. 
(4)  Application requirements. 
A.  A site plan prepared in accordance with article 8, site plan review. 
B.  The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan illustrating screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities. 
C.  The application shall include a signed certification by a state licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities. 
D.  The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in subsection 6, removal, below. In this regard, the security shall, at the election of the applicant, be in the form of: (1) cash; (2) surety bond; (3) letter of credit; or, (4) an agreement in a form approved by the city attorney and recordable at the office of the register of deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to timely remove the facility as required under this section of the ordinance, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorneys fees incurred by the city in securing removal. 
E.  The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within the city, and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the city in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential collocation or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the community, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any proprietary information may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of governmental policy, in accordance with MCL 15.243(1)G. This ordinance shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention of the city. 
F.  The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises. 
(5)  Collocation. It is the policy of the city to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and encourage the use of existing structures. 
A.  Collocation shall be deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met: 
1.  The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for collocation will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for collocation. 
2.  The site on which collocation is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support. 
3.  The collocation being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the collocation will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like. 
4.  The height of the structure necessary for collocation will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into consideration the standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Requirements for collocation: 
1.  Approval for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible collocation is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. 
2.  All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate collocation. 
3.  If a party who owns or otherwise controls a facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible collocation, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a nonconforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect. 
(6)  Removal. 
A.  The city reserves the right to request evidence of ongoing operation at any time after the construction of an approved tower. 
B.  A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
1.  When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
2.  Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost as determined by the municipal legislative body, which permits the operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support structure. 
C.  The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in subsection 1 above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
D.  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, specified in subsection B above, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the zoning or code inspector. 
E.  If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days written notice, the city may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected from the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. 
Sec. 6.12. - Massage establishments. 
(1)  Massage Establishments Defined. For purposes of this section, "massage establishment " the term "massage establishment" shall mean a business establishment in which practice of massage therapy, as defined in the Michigan Public Health Code, 368 PA 1978, as amended, is one of the primary services provided. The following establishments shall not be considered massage establishments: 
A.  Hospitals, doctors' offices, nursing homes, and other facilities in which massages are performed incidental to the provision of healthcare services. 
B.  Establishments in which barbers or beauticians perform massages incidental to the provision of hairstyling or other similar services. 
(2)  Standards. Massage establishments may be permitted by the city council as special uses in the I-1, I-2, PB, OS, C-1, C-2, or C-3 zoning districts, after approval by the planning commission upon a finding that the following minimum standards are met: 
A.  At least one plumbed sink within the massage establishment. Additionally, each individual area in which massage is practiced shall be equipped with a hand-sanitizing facility equipped with: 
i.  Running water and soap; 
ii.  Antibacterial hand wipes; 
iii.  Waterless hand sanitizers; or 
iv.  Other commercially acceptable means of hand-washing. 
B.  Lavatories and shower stalls (if provided) shall be located as to ensure privacy between the massage establishment and any other business or use. 
C.  All the general special use criteria in section 9.05 of the Zoning Ordinance are satisfied. 
(3)  City license required. The operation of a massage establishment requires a license issued pursuant to chapter 22, article IV of the city code. 
(Ord.  No. 796 , § 1, 2-5-18) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 796 , § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2018, repealed the former § 6.12 and enacted a new § 6.12 as set out herein. The former § 6.12 pertained to myotherapy establishment and derived from Ord. No. 682, §§ 1, 2, adopted Feb. 14, 2005. 
Section 6.13. - Adult entertainment businesses. 
(1)  No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within a 400-foot radius of any residential zone. Measurement of the 400-foot radius shall be made from the outer most boundary of the lot or parcel upon which the proposed adult use will be situated to the outer most residential district boundary. 
(2)  No adult entertainment business shall be permitted within a 500-foot radius of a school, library, park, playground, or church. Measurement of the 500-foot radius shall be made from the outer most boundary of the lot or parcel upon which the proposed adult use will be situated to the school, library, park, playground, or church. 
(3)  The site plan shall include a diagram that shows all land use zoning districts and any school, library, park, playground, or church located within 500 feet of the proposed adult use. The diagram shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than one inch equals 20 feet. 
(4)  No adult entertainment business shall be located within 750 feet of any other adult entertainment business. 
(5)  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with article 13. 
(6)  Any individual viewing booths, entertainment rooms, or similar cubicles designed or used for one or two persons to view specified anatomical areas, to view specified sexual activities, or to receive adult personal services, shall not be completely enclosed from the common areas or hallways of the adult entertainment business. 
(7)  No employee or patron under 18 years of age shall be allowed on the premises of an adult entertainment business; violation of this section shall result in the suspension or revocation of permits and licenses. 
(8)  If employees or patrons of an adult entertainment business promote, offer, solicit, or engage in acts of prostitution on the premises, the special use permit may be suspended or revoked. No criminal charge need be brought for suspension or revocation of the special use permit to occur. The acts described in the subsection may be shown to have occurred by a preponderance of the evidence. 
(9)  No person shall operate an adult entertainment business without obtaining a valid zoning compliance permit. Such permits and licenses shall be issued and maintained by the zoning official upon written approval from the planning commission and city council after special land use approval. The zoning official or designee shall also perform required inspections and annual inspections. The fees for the permit/license shall be determined by the city council. 
Section 6.14. - Kennels and catteries, noncommercial (hobby). 
    Kennels and catteries, noncommercial (hobby) of domesticated dogs and house cats shall be considered as a special land use only in R-1A, R-1B, and R-1C, one-family residential districts, subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Privacy fencing bordering the rear and both side yards, erected to a minimum height of six feet at any residence where the animals are permitted out-of-doors; 
(2)  Fencing of suitable nature to be protective and restraining along all perimeters of any area wherein the animals are exercised; 
(3)  An auxiliary building as provided for in said zoning area, for the express purpose of housing such animals and assuring compliance with all other city ordinances relating to animals: Sections 14-35, noise; 14-5, smell; 14-34, running at large; for all animals which cannot be housed solely in the dwelling proper; 
(4)  There shall be compliance chapter 14, animals of the city Code. 
Section 6.15. - Home-based business, Tier 2. 
(1)  Intent. It is the intent of this section to permit the operation of home businesses as an opportunity for individuals to utilize their owner-occupied residential property for their offices and operations related to uses that would not be considered as a home-based business, Tier 1, pursuant to section 5.08 of the zoning code. 
(2)  Standards. Home based businesses, Tier 2 may be approved by the city council, after recommendations by the planning commission upon a finding that the following minimum standards are met: 
A.  A home-based business, Tier 2, must meet all of the applicable provisions of section 5.08, Home-based business, Tier 1, together with the following additions: 
1.  A home-based business, Tier 2, use may include up to 1,000 square feet of space in a garage or accessory structure when recommended for approval by the planning commission. 
2.  A home-based business, Tier 2, use may include up to 200 square feet of outside storage space when recommended for approval by the planning commission. Outside storage must be set back at least 15 feet from neighboring property lines, located in rear yards only, and enclosed with a six-foot high opaque fence. Outside storage cannot be located in easements, drainage swales or intermittent stormwater flow areas. 
3.  One employee may be permitted on the premises or permitted in the dwelling unit or accessory structure, other than members of the immediate family who legally reside on the premises. 
4.  Use and parking of one small commercial van may be allowed when recommended for approval by the planning commission. 
5.  Notice of planning commission hearing provided to the historic district commission. 
B.  Locational standards. One or more of the following must be found for a home-based business, Tier 2 to be permitted in the city. 
1.  The subject home must front on a collector or arterial road as defined in the thoroughfare plan of the master plan for the city, excepting Old Creek Drive and Willis Road. 
2.  The subject home may front on a minor street (containing non-residential uses) if recommended for approval by the planning commission, after a finding that a home based business, Tier 2 will be in character with the existing neighborhood. 
3.  The subject home has a location within the C-2, D-1, or D-2 zoning districts. 
C.  A home-based business, Tier 2, use shall not advertise by listing its street address in a telephone directory, yellow pages, or similar means, or instruct others to visit the site for any business-related services, other than delivery operations commonly occurring in residential areas except in conflict with state law. 
(3)  Effect of approval. Approval by the city planning commission of a home-based business, Tier 2, special land use allows the applicant to apply for a home-based business, Tier 2, license. The following shall apply to the issuance of the required license: 
A.  The fees to be charged, license application form, and annual renewals of the home business license shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The home business license shall be issued for a period of one year. Written renewal request must be made 30 days prior to expiration. If there are no substantiated complaints on file, the clerk's office can renew the permit at that time. Permits are valid from January 1 to December 31 of each year. 
C.  No home business license shall be issued or renewed if the property taxes of the subject parcel are delinquent. 
D.  The city home business license may be revoked at any time that any condition(s) at the home business violates city ordinances or becomes such that allowing continued operation could prove to be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the neighborhood. 
(4)  Appeals to this section may be made to the zoning board of appeals in accordance with article 16 of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 738, § 1, 10-1-12) 
ARTICLE 7. - ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AND DESIGN PROVISIONS 

Section 7.01. - Intent. 
    Environmental standards are established in order to preserve the short and long-term environmental health, safety, and quality of the city. No parcel, lot, building or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so as to create any dangerous, injurious, noxious or otherwise objectionable element or condition so as to adversely affect the surrounding area or adjoining premises. Any use permitted by this ordinance may be undertaken and maintained if acceptable measures and safeguards are employed to limit dangerous and objectionable elements to acceptable limits as established by the following performance standards. No use, otherwise allowed, shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation. These standards are established as minimum requirements to be maintained. 
    In the course of evaluating compliance with these standards the city may refer various environmental issues to the environmental commission for review and comment. 
Section 7.02. - Landscaping, greenbelts and buffers, and screening. 
(1)  Intent. The intent of this section is to: 
A.  Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the community. 
B.  Minimize noise, air, and visual pollution. 
C.  Improve the overall aesthetics and appearance, divide the expanse of pavement, and define parking areas and vehicular circulation within off-street parking lots and other vehicular use areas. 
D.  Require buffering of residential areas from more intense land uses and public road rights-of-way. 
E.  Prevent soil erosion and soil depletion and promote subsurface water retention. 
F.  Encourage an appropriate mixture of plant material, such as evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs, to protect against insect and disease infestation and produce a more aesthetic and cohesive design. 
G.  Encourage the integration of existing woodlands in landscape plans. 
H.  Encourage the use of desirable native species of plants for all landscaping and to maximize the use of native plant species in landscaping all areas of a site, including but not limited to, foundation plantings, lawn areas, screening and greenbelt areas, and surface stormwater conveyance features. 
Encouraging the use of native plants in this ordinance is based on the following: 
1.  Native plants are a necessary part of the proper functioning of natural ecosystems within the city and the county and perform tasks including, but not limited to, stormwater attenuation, uptake and purification, air purification, wildlife food and habitat, and community character and aesthetics; and 
2.  Landscaping with native plants encourages environmentally-sound maintenance practices by requiring little or no pesticide or fertilizer use, and minimal watering once plants are established, which, in turn, reduces the threat of environmental degradation. 
(2)  Application of requirements. These requirements shall apply to all uses for which site plan review is required under article 8, site plan review, of this ordinance and subdivision plat review as required under the subdivision control ordinance. No site plan, site condominium plan, or subdivision plat shall be approved unless a landscape plan is provided which meets the requirements set forth herein. 
(3)  Landscape plan requirements. A separate detailed landscape plan shall be required to be submitted to the city as part of the site plan review or tentative preliminary plat review. The landscape plan shall demonstrate that all requirements of this section are met and shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following items: 
A.  Location, spacing, size, root type and descriptions for each plant type. 
B.  Typical straight cross section including slope, height, and width of berms. 
C.  Typical construction details to resolve specific site conditions, such as landscape walls and tree wells used to preserve existing trees or maintain natural grades. 
D.  Details in either text or drawing form to ensure proper installation and establishment of proposed plant materials. 
E.  Identification of existing trees and vegetative cover to be preserved. 
F.  Identification of grass and other ground cover and method of planting. 
G.  Identification of landscape maintenance program including statement that all diseased, damaged, or dead materials shall be replaced in accordance with standards of this ordinance. 
(4)  Screening between land uses. 
A.  Upon any improvement for which a site plan is required, a landscape buffer shall be constructed to create a visual screen at least six feet in height along all adjoining boundaries between either a conflicting nonresidential or conflicting residential land use and residentially zoned or used property. A landscape buffer may consist of earthen berms and/or living materials so as to maintain a minimum opacity of at least 80 percent. Opacity shall be measured by observation of any two square yard area of landscape screen between one foot above the established grade of the area to be concealed and the top or the highest point of the required screen. The plantings must meet this standard based upon reasonably anticipated growth over a period of three years. 
B.  Where there is a need to provide a greater noise or dust barrier or to screen more intense development, a solid wall or fence shall be required by the city. Such wall or fence shall be a minimum of six feet in height as measured on the side of the proposed wall having the higher grade. 
A required wall shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this zoning ordinance requires conformity with front yard setback requirements. Upon review of the landscape plan, the city may approve an alternate location of a wall. The city shall approve the construction materials of the wall or fence which may include face brick, poured-in-place simulated face brick, precast brick face panels having simulated face brick, stone or wood. At the discretion of the planning commission, landscaping consisting of one tree and six shrubs per 20 linear feet may be required to break-up the blank expanse of the screening wall facing the adjacent land use. 
(5)  Parking lot landscaping. 
A.  Required landscaping within parking lots. Separate landscape areas shall be provided within parking lots in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  There shall be a minimum of one tree for every eight parking spaces, provided that a landscape island shall be provided for no more than 16 continuous spaces. 
2.  Landscaping shall be arranged in curbed islands within the parking lot which shall not be less than 50 s.f. in area. 
3.  A minimum distance of three feet from the backside of the curb and the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided. Where vehicles overhang a landscape island or strip, a minimum distance of five feet from the backside of the curb and the proposed landscape plantings shall be provided. 
4.  The city, at its discretion, may approve alternative landscape plantings at the perimeter of parking lots where landscaping within parking lots would be impractical due to the size of the parking lot or detrimental to safe and efficient traffic flow, or would create an unreasonable burden for maintenance and snowplowing. 
B.  Required landscaping at the perimeter of parking lots. Separate landscape areas shall be provided at the perimeter of parking lots in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Parking lots which are considered to be a conflicting land use as defined by this section shall meet the screening requirements set forth in section 7.02(4). 
2.  Parking lots shall be screened from view with a solid wall at least three feet in height along the perimeter of those sides which are visible from a public road. The city, at its discretion, may approve alternative landscape plantings in lieu of a wall. 
(6)  Greenbelts. A greenbelt shall be provided which is an area established at a depth of the required front yard setback within a zoning district and landscaped in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  The greenbelt shall be landscaped with a minimum of one tree for every 30 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage abutting a public road right-of-way. Non-ornamental deciduous trees within a greenbelt shall be a minimum caliper of 21/2 inches or greater. Evergreen trees within a greenbelt shall be a minimum height of six feet. 
B.  If ornamental deciduous trees are substituted for either non-ornamental deciduous trees or evergreen trees, they shall be provided at a minimum of one tree for every 20 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, of frontage abutting a public road right-of-way. Ornamental deciduous trees within a greenbelt shall be a minimum caliper of two inches or greater. 
C.  In addition to the required trees within the greenbelt, the remainder of the greenbelt shall be landscaped in grass, ground cover, shrubs and other natural landscape materials. 
D.  Access drives from public rights-of-way through required greenbelts shall be permitted, but such drives shall not be subtracted from the lineal dimension used to determine the minimum number of trees required. 
(7)  Site landscaping. In addition to any landscape greenbelt and/or parking lot landscaping required by this section, ten percent of the site area, excluding existing public rights-of-way, shall be landscaped. Such site area landscaping may include a combination of the preservation of existing tree cover, planting of new trees and plant material, landscape plazas and gardens and building foundation planting beds. Site area landscaping shall be provided to screen potentially objectionable site features such as, but not limited to, retention/detention ponds, transformer pads, air-conditioning units, and loading areas. 
(8)  Subdivision and site condominium landscaping. Landscaping for single-family residential, office park and industrial park subdivisions and site condominiums shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Street trees. The frontage of all internal public or private streets shall be landscaped with a minimum of one tree for every 50 lineal feet, or fraction thereof. Such street trees shall meet the minimum size requirements set forth in section 7.02(10)(G). 
B.  Screening between land uses. Where a subdivision or site condominium contains uses which are defined as conflicting land uses by this section, the screening requirements set forth in section 7.02(4). shall be met. 
C.  Screening from public roads. Where a subdivision or site condominium abuts a public road right-of-way located outside of the proposed subdivision or site condominium, the screening requirements set forth in section 7.02(4) shall be met. 
D.  Other site improvements. A landscape plan for a subdivision or site condominium development shall also include landscaping details of the entrance to the development, stormwater retention and/or detention areas, community buildings and other recreational areas, and any other site improvement which would be enhanced through the addition of landscaping. 
(9)  Screening of trash containers. 
A.  Outside trash disposal containers shall be screened on all sides with an opaque fence or wall, and gate at least as high as the container, but no less than six feet in height, and shall be constructed of material which is compatible with the architectural materials used in the site development. 
B.  Containers shall be consolidated to minimize the number of collection sites, and located so as to reasonably equalize the distance from the building they serve. 
C.  Containers and enclosures shall be located away from public view insofar as possible. 
D.  Containers and enclosures shall be situated so that they do not cause excessive nuisance or offense to occupants of nearby buildings. 
E.  Concrete pads of appropriate size and construction shall be provided for containers or groups of containers having a capacity of six 30-gallon cans or more. Aprons shall be provided for loading of bins with a capacity of 1.5 cubic yards or more. 
F.  For storage of recyclable materials, the enclosure area and pad size shall be increased to amply accommodate the extra materials and their containers. 
G.  Screening and gates shall be of a durable construction. 
(10)  Landscape elements. The following minimum standards shall apply: 
A.  Quality. Plant materials shall be of generally acceptable varieties and species, free from insects and diseases, hardy to the county, conform to the current minimum standard of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have proof of any required governmental regulations and / or inspections. 
B.  Composition. A mixture of plant material, such as evergreen deciduous trees and shrubs, is recommended as a protective measure against insect and disease infestation. A limited mixture of hardy species is recommended rather than a large quantity of different species to produce a more aesthetic, cohesive design and avoid a disorderly appearing arrangement. 
C.  Berms. Berms shall be constructed with slopes not to exceed a 1:3 gradient. Berm slopes shall be protected with sod, seed, or other form of natural ground cover. 
D.  Existing trees. The preservation and incorporation of existing trees is encouraged. Where existing trees are used to satisfy the requirements of this section, the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  Paving, or other site improvements, shall not encroach upon the dripline of the existing tree(s) to be preserved. 
2.  If existing plant material is labeled "To Remain" on site plans by the applicant or required by the city, protective techniques, such as, but not limited to, fencing or barriers placed at the dripline around the perimeter of the plant material shall be installed during construction. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any plant material intended to be saved. Other protective techniques may be used provided such techniques are approved by the city. 
3.  In the event that healthy trees which are used to meet the minimum requirements of this ordinance or those labeled to remain are cut down, destroyed, damaged, or excavated at the dripline, as determined by the city, the contractor shall replace them with trees which meet ordinance requirements. 
E.  Installation, maintenance, and completion. 
1.  All landscaping required by this ordinance shall be planted before obtaining a certificate of occupancy or the appropriate financial guarantee, as set forth in section 3.05, shall be placed in escrow in the amount of the cost of landscaping to be released only after landscaping is completed. 
2.  All landscaping and landscape elements shall be planted, and earth moving or grading performed, in a sound work man like manner, according to accepted planting and grading procedures. 
3.  The owner of property required to be landscaped by this ordinance shall maintain such landscaping in a strong and healthy condition, free from refuse, debris and insects. All materials used to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance which become unhealthy or dead shall be replaced within one year of damage or death or the next appropriate planting period, whichever comes first. All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable water supply. 
F.  Prohibited plant species. Installation of the following landscape material to satisfy landscape ordinance requirements shall be strictly prohibited. Installation and maintenance of the following landscape materials shall be prohibited in city rights of way. These plants are not native to the area, reproduce profusely and have potentially harmful effects on natural ecosystems. 
Common Name Scientific Name Trees: Norway Maple Acer platanoides Amur Maple Acer ginnala Tree of Heaven Ailanthus altissima European Alder Alnus glutinosa White Poplar Populus alba Black Locust* Robinia pseudocacia Siberian Elm Ulmus pumila  
*A native species, but tends to be invasive. 
Common Name Scientific Name Shrubs and vines: Porcelainberry Ampelopsis brevipendunculata Japanese Barberry Berberis thunbergii Common Barberry Berberis vulgaris Butterfly Bush Budlia davidii Oriential Bittersweet Celastrus orbiculatus Autumn Olive Eleagnus umbellata Russian Olive Eleagnus angustifolia Burningbush Euonymus alatus Wintercreeper Euonymus fortunei English Ivy Hedra helix Privet Ligustrum vulgare Japanese Honeysuckle Lonicera japonica Amur Honeysuckle Lonicera maackii Morrow Honeysuckle Lonicera morrowi Morrow Honeysuckle Lonicera tatarica Common Buckthorn Rhamnus cathartica Glossy Buckthorn Rhamnus frangula Multiflora Rose Rosa multiflora Japanese Spiraea Spiraea japonica Guelder Rose Viburnum opulus var. opulus Grasses and Grass-Like Plants: Chinese Silver Grass Miscanthus sinensis Giant Reed Phragmites communis Reed Canary Grass Phalaris arundinacea Flowers and Groundcovers: Garlic Mustard Alliaria officinalis Spotted Knapweed Centaurea maculosa Crown Vetch Coronilla varia Queen Ann's Lace Daucus carota Foxglove Digitalis purpurea Japanese Knotweed Fallopia japonica Dame's Rocket Hesperis matronalis Purple Loosestrife Lythrum salicaria Myrtle, or Periwinkle Vinca minor  
G.  Minimum size and spacing requirements. Where landscaping is required the following schedule sets forth minimum size requirements; 
Section 7.02(10)G. Size and Spacing Requirements 
The following shrubs are representative Minimum Size Allowable Height/Spread SHRUBS 6' 3'-4' 24?-36? 18?-24? Evergreen Shrubs: Pyramidal Yew ? Hicks Yew ? Brown and Wards Yew ? Alberta Spruce ? Chinensis Juniper Varieties ? Sabina Juniper ? Mugho Pine ? Horizontal Juniper Varieties ? Boxwood ? Euonymous varieties ? Deciduous Shrubs: Honeysuckle ? Lilac ? Sumac ? Pyracantha ? Weigela ? Flowering Quince ? Dogwood ? Viburnum varieties ? Spirea ? Fragrant Sumac ? Potentilla ?  
The following trees are representative Minimum Size Allowable Height Caliper TREES 6' 3'-4' 2.0? 2.5? Evergreen Trees: Fir ? Spruce ? Pine ? Hemlock ? Douglas Fir ? Narrow Evergreen Trees: Red Cedar ? Arborvitae ? Juniper (selected varieties) ? Large Deciduous Canopy Trees: Oak ? Maple ? Beech ? Linden ? Ash ? Ginko (male only) ? Honeylocust (seedless, thornless) ? Birch ? Sycamore ? Small Deciduous Ornamental Trees: Flowering Dogwood ? Flowering Cherry, Pear ? Hawthorn ? Redbud ? Magnolia ? Flowering Crabapple ? Serviceberry ? Hornbeam ?  
  
(Ord. No. 700, §§ 1, 2, 3-19-07) 
Section 7.03. - Fences, walls and screens. 
    Any person desiring to build or cause to be built a fence upon property within the city of Saline shall first apply to the zoning or code inspector for a permit. Application for such permit shall contain all information, which is required and necessary for the determination of whether the erection of such fence complies with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Except as otherwise required by this ordinance, the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Location, setbacks, and height limits. 
A.  Location of fences. 
1.  All fences shall be constructed entirely upon the property of the owner of the fence, unless the adjoining property owner(s) provide written consent otherwise. 
2.  Adjoining property owners may jointly apply for a permit to erect a fence upon a common property line. 
3.  Applicants for fence permits are advised to obtain a property survey to determine the location of lot lines along which a fence is to be erected. The city shall not be responsible for the location of the fence with respect to property lines. 
4.  Fences located along or within utility easements may be subject to approval by companies with existing utilities. 
B.  Residential districts. 
1.  Required rear and side yards: On all lots in a residential district, fences which are located in a required rear or side yard shall not exceed six feet in height, and shall not extend toward the front of the lot nearer than the front wall of the house or the required minimum front yard setback, whichever is greater. 
2.  Required front yards: On all lots in a residential district, fences which are located in the required front yard setback, or within a yard area between a street and the wall of the house facing the street, shall not exceed 36 inches in height. All front yard fences shall be ornamental in design and function and shall be setback a minimum of two feet from the adjacent property lines. Front yard fences must also meet the requirements for "clear vision" areas at intersections and driveways as identified in section 7.04 of this ordinance. 
3.  Exceptions for corner lots with a width of 90 feet or less: Fences for corner lots that have frontage on two public streets shall be allowed to encroach up to 40 percent into the required setback/frontage under the following conditions: 
(a)  The fence does not extend beyond the front line of the house. 
(b)  The fence does not negatively impact (obstruct) the view of adjoining properties. 
(c)  The fence does not violate section 7.04, clear vision requirements. 
(d)  The fence shall be ornamental in style and construction. 
(e)  The fence does not exceed five feet in height from the ground. 
C.  Nonresidential districts. 
1.  In all zoning districts other than residential districts and special planning area districts fences may be located within a required side or rear yard, subject to height and vision clearance regulations of this ordinance, and subject to other provisions of this ordinance, including site plan approval. 
2.  In all commercial districts and professional business districts, fences in rear and side yards shall not exceed six feet in height. 
3.  In all zoning districts other than residential, commercial or professional business districts, fences shall not exceed 12 feet in height. 
D.  Special planning area. The location, type, and height of fences within a special planning area shall be approved by the planning commission at the time of final site plan approval, or through site plan amendment if requested after the site is developed. 
E.  Gateway fences. Certain parcels of land adjoining "gateways" to the city. Front yard fencing or fence details may be required either by site plan approval or building permit review. "Gateway fences" shall meet the provisions of the "Gateway Strategic Plans" and as approved by the city. 
F.  Fences on public lands and enclosing public utilities. 
1.  Fences which enclose public parks, playgrounds, public lands, and public buildings shall be permitted in any required yard in any zoning district, but shall not exceed the maximum height limits for fences permitted in their zoning district. 
2.  Fences which enclose public utility installations shall not be permitted within a required side yard in any residential district, but may be permitted in any other zoning district, but shall not exceed the maximum height limits for fences permitted in their zoning districts unless otherwise permitted for safety and security reasons. 
G.  Height measurements. The height of a fence shall be measured from the ground level at the lowest grade within three feet, of any side of a fence post, except that the height of a retaining wall, or a fence located on top of a retaining wall, shall be measured from the ground level at the higher side of the wall. 
H.  Kennel fences. Kennel fences shall meet the requirements contained in section 6.14 of this ordinance. 
(2)  Safety. 
A.  In residential districts fences shall not have attached, fixed, or placed thereon, any spike, nail, barbed wire, or other pointed instrument or sharp protrusion. 
B.  Fences shall not contain any electrical charge. 
C.  Fence gates shall be designed, installed, and operated so they do not swing over or encroach upon any public R.O.W., public property, or adjoining private property. 
(3)  Temporary fences. 
A.  Temporary construction fences, and fences required for protection around excavations, shall comply with the local adopted codes. 
B.  Such fences shall not be retained in place for a period of more than one year unless approved by the planning commission and the city council, which shall set a date by which the temporary fence must be removed. 
C.  Temporary snow fences are permitted after approval has been granted by the city building and engineering department. There shall be no fee for this permit. 
(4)  Retaining walls. For the purpose of location, retaining wall shall be considered fences and shall be subject to the provisions of this section if the wall extends more than one foot above the adjacent ground level. Retaining walls shall meet the requirements of the local building code and be approved by the code official. 
(5)  Swimming pool fences. All swimming pools fences shall meet the requirements of the local building code and be approved by the code official. 
(6)  Maintenance of fences. 
A.  Fences which face a public road shall be kept in good condition, i.e. peeling paint, leaning posts, and broken parts must be maintained and/or replaced. 
B.  Fences shall be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which endangers life or property through lack of repair, type, or construction, or otherwise is hereby deemed a nuisance. 
C.  If unsafe condition exists in regard to fence, the zoning or code inspector or designee shall serve written notice to the owner, agent or person in control of property upon which fence is located. The notice shall describe the unsafe condition(s), shall specify the repairs or modifications required to make the fence safe, and/or shall require an unsafe fence or portions thereof to be removed. The notice shall provide a time limit for such repairs, modification, or removal. 
D.  Failure to make repairs or modifications or to remove the fence within the time limit specified in the notice shall constitute a violation of this ordinance and shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of article 3, administration and enforcement. 
(7)  Permits and fees. 
A.  All persons requesting to construct a fence within any zoning district shall apply to the city zoning or code inspector for a permit for such construction. 
B.  Fees shall be established by city council. 
Section 7.04. - Clear vision requirements. 
(1)  No fence, wall, screen, hedge, sign, or other structure or planting shall obstruct visibility between the heights of 30 inches and ten feet above the sidewalk grade within 25 feet of the intersection of two or more streets as measured from the R.O.W. line. 
(2)  On any interior lot, no fence, wall, screen, hedge, sign, or other structure or planting shall obstruct the visibility of a driveway, either on a parcel or on an adjacent parcel, between the height of 30 inches and ten feet measured a distance of 20 feet back from the point where the driveway intersects the street R.O.W. line. 
Section 7.05. - Airborne emissions. 
(1)  Smoke and air contaminants. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke or air contaminant in violation of air quality standards adopted by federal and/or state regulatory authorities. 
(2)  Odors. Any condition or operation which results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public or which interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public shall be removed, stopped, or so modified as to remove the odor. The provisions of this section are not intended to apply to farming activities. 
(3)  Gases. The escape or emission of any gas which is injurious or destructive, harmful to person or property, or explosive shall be unlawful and shall be abated. 
Section 7.06. - Noise and vibration. 
(1)  Noise which is objectionable as determined by the city due to volume, frequency, or beat shall be muffled, attenuated, or otherwise controlled, subject to the following schedule of maximum noise levels permitted: 
Maximum Permitted Sound Level in Decibels Octave Band in Cycles Per Second Along Residential District Boundaries Along All Nonresidential District Boundaries 0 to 150 70 70 150 to 300 60 66 300 to 600 52 60 600 to 1200 46 53 1200 to 2400 40 47 Above 2400 34 41  
(2)  In addition, objectionable sounds of an intermittent nature, or sounds characterized by high frequencies, even if falling below the decibel readings above, shall be so controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses. Sirens and related apparatus used solely for public purposes are exempt from this requirement. Noise resulting from temporary construction activity and normal traffic activity on a public or private road shall also be exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  No use shall generate any ground transmitted vibration in excess of the limits set forth below. Vibration shall be measured at the nearest adjacent lot line. The vibration maximums set forth below are stated in terms of particle velocity, which may be measured directly with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency. When computed, the following standards shall apply: 
Vibration Displacement in Inches Frequency in Cycles per Second Steady State Impact Less than 1 0.008 0.010 1 to 9.9 0.0008 0.0015 10 to 19.9 0.00044 0.00065 20 to 29.9 0.00033 0.0005 30 to 39.9 0.0002 0.0003 40 to 100 0.0001 0.00015 Greater than 100 Peak acceleration less than -1g  
(4)  Vibrations resulting from temporary construction activity and normal activity on a public or private road shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
Section 7.07. - Use, storage and handling of hazardous substance; storage and disposal of solid, liquid, and sanitary wastes. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity to pollute, impair or destroy the air, water, soils or other natural resources within the city through the use, storage and handling of hazardous substances and/or wastes or the storage and disposal of solid, liquid, gaseous and/or sanitary wastes. 
(2)  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates hazardous substances shall obtain the necessary permits or approval from the appropriate federal, state or local authority having jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any person, firm, corporation or other legal entity operating a business or conducting an activity which uses, stores or generates hazardous substances shall complete and file a chemical survey on a form supplied by the city in conjunction with the following: 
A.  Upon submission of a site plan. 
B.  Upon any change of use or occupancy of a structure or premise. 
C.  Upon any change of the manner in which such substances are handled, and/or in the event of a change in the type of substances to be handled. 
(4)  All business and facilities which use, store, or generate hazardous substances in quantities greater than 100 kilograms per month (equal to or greater than 25 gallons or 220 pounds) shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Above-ground storage and use areas for hazardous substances. 
1.  Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product-tight. 
2.  Secondary containment of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be provided. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to contain the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. 
3.  Outdoor storage of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers which are protected from weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. 
4.  Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance, and allowing for the expected accumulation of precipitation. 
5.  At a minimum, state and federal agency requirements for storage, leak detection, record keeping, spill prevention, emergency response, transport and disposal shall be met. 
6.  Areas and facilities for loading/unloading of hazardous substances and polluting materials, as well as areas where such materials are handled and used shall be designed and constructed to prevent discharge or runoff. 
B.  Underground storage tanks. 
1.  Existing and new underground storage tanks shall be registered with the state department of environmental quality in accordance with federal and state requirements. 
2.  Installation, operation and maintenance of underground tanks shall be in accordance with requirements of MDEQ. 
3.  Out-of-service abandoned underground tanks shall be emptied and removed from the ground in accordance with the requirements of the city fire department, the state fire marshal division and the MDEQ. 
4.  At a minimum, state and federal agency requirements for storage and leak detection, record keeping, spill prevention, emergency response, transport and disposal shall be met. 
(5)  Loading and unloading areas. Areas used for the loading and unloading of hazardous substances shall be designed and constructed to prevent the harmful release to the environment of hazardous materials which may be spilled or leaked. 
(6)  All site plans for business or facilities which use, store or generate hazardous substances shall be reviewed by the fire department, city engineer, environmental officer and any other appropriate experts determined necessary by the planning commission prior to approval by the planning commission. 
Section 7.08. - Electrical disturbance, electromagnetic, or radio frequency interference. 
    No use shall create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance, or cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including television and radio broadcasting transmission) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected. 
Section 7.09. - Glare and exterior lighting. 
(1)  Light and glare from indirect sources. 
A.  Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not to be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. 
B.  The design and/or screening of the development shall insure that glare from automobile and commercial or industrial vehicle headlights shall not be directed into any adjacent property, particularly residential property. 
C.  Exterior doors shall be located, operated, and maintained so as to prevent any glare and light from creating a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians, and neighboring land uses. 
(2)  Exterior lighting from direct sources. 
A.  Subject to the provisions set forth herein, all parking areas, walkways, driveways, building entryways, off-street parking and loading areas, and building complexes with common areas shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using such public or common areas. 
B.  Exterior lighting shall be located and maintained to prevent the reflection and glare of light in a manner which created a nuisance or safety hazard to operators of motor vehicles, pedestrians and neighboring land uses. This provision is not intended to apply to public street lighting. 
C.  The following additional standards shall apply: 
1.  Only white, nonglare lighting such as metal halide, color-corrected high pressure sodium, or other types of lighting which achieve the same effect shall be permitted. Lighting shall be placed and shielded so as to direct the light onto the site and away from adjoining properties. Lighting shall be shielded so that it does not cause glare for motorists. 
2.  Lighting for uses adjacent to residentially zoned or used property shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 0.5 foot-candles at ground level along property lines. Lighting for uses adjacent to nonresidential properties shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed one foot-candles at ground level along property lines. Maximum light levels shall not exceed 20 foot-candles in any given area measured at ground level. 
3.  Except as noted below, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 25 feet. In portions of a site adjacent to residential areas, lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 20 feet. 
4.  When site plan review is required a "photo-metric" plan shall be provided which includes all lighting, including ornamental lighting, in sufficient detail to allow determination of the effects of such lighting upon adjacent properties, and traffic safety. Temporary holiday lighting and decoration are exempt from the aforementioned provision. 
Section 7.10. - Fire hazard. 
    Any activity involving the use or storage of flammable or explosive materials shall be protected by adequate fire-fighting and fire suppression equipment and such safety devices as are normally used in the handling of any such material according to local code. Such hazards shall be kept removed from adjacent activities to a distance which is compatible with the potential danger involved. 
Section 7.11. - Safety. 
    Existing hazards or potential hazards and nuisances, such as construction sites, junk yards, land fills, sanitary land fills, demolition sites, unused basements, abandoned wells or cisterns, and sand, gravel, and stone pits or piles are to be enclosed by suitable fencing or barriers so as not to endanger public health, safety and welfare. Wells or cisterns shall be closed in accordance with section 38-200 of the City Code. 
Section 7.12. - Stormwater management. 
    All developments and earth changes subject to review under the requirements of this ordinance shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding and protect water quality. The particular facilities and measures required on-site shall reflect the natural features, wetlands, and watercourses on the site; the potential for on-site and off-site flooding, water pollution, and erosion; and the size of the site. Lots and parcels with existing improvements must meet these requirements to the greatest extent possible, but due to size of lot or other existing factors, these regulations may be altered by the city planning commission upon showing of good cause. 
    Stormwater management shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  The design of storm sewers, detention facilities, and other stormwater management facilities shall comply with the standards of the county drain commissioner. 
B.  Stormwater management conveyance, storage and infiltration measures and facilities shall be designed to prevent flood hazards and water pollution related to stormwater runoff and soil erosion from the proposed development. 
C.  The use of swales and vegetated buffer strips is encouraged in cases where the planning commission deems to be safe and otherwise appropriate as a method of stormwater conveyance so as to decrease runoff velocity, allow for natural infiltration, allow suspended sediment particles to settle, and to remove pollutants. 
D.  Alterations to natural drainage patterns shall not create flooding or water pollution for adjacent or downstream property owners. 
E.  Discharge of runoff from any site which may contain oil, grease, toxic chemicals, or other polluting materials is prohibited. If a property owner desires to propose measures to reduce and trap pollutants, the owner must meet the requirements of the state department of environmental quality and the county drain commissioner, based upon professionally accepted principles; such a proposal shall be submitted and reviewed by the city engineer, with consultation of appropriate experts. 
F.  Drainage systems shall be designed to protect public health and safety and to be visually attractive, taking into consideration viable alternatives. 
Section 7.13. - Regulation of floodplain areas. 
(1)  Intent. The floodplains of the city are subject to periodic inundation of floodwaters which result in loss of property, health, and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental service, and impairment of tax base. 
It is the purpose of this section to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accordance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 41, No. 207, October 26, 1976, and redesignated at 44FR 31177, May 31, 1979. 
The provisions of this section are intended to: 
A.  Help protect human life, prevent or minimize material losses, and reduce the cost to the public for rescue and relief efforts; 
B.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, or property in times of flooding or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
C.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including public facilities which serve such uses, shall be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
D.  Protect individuals from buying lands which are designated to be unsuited for intended purposes because of flooding; 
E.  Permit reasonable economic use of property located within a designated floodplain area. 
(2)  Delineation of floodplain areas. 
A.  The boundaries of the floodplain areas are identified in the report entitled, the Flood Insurance Study, City of Saline, prepared by FEMA with an effective date of July 18, 1983, as may be revised from time to time. The study and accompanying maps are adopted by reference, are on file at the building engineering department and declared to be part of this ordinance. 
(3)  Application of regulations. 
A.  In addition to other requirements of this ordinance applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this section shall be necessary for all development occurring within designated floodplain areas. Conflicts between the requirements of this section and other requirements of this ordinance or any other ordinance shall be resolved in favor of this section, except where the conflicting requirement is more stringent and would further the objectives of this section. In such cases, the more stringent requirement shall be applied. 
B.  Upon application for land use permits, the zoning or code inspector shall determine whether said use is located within a designated floodplain area utilizing the documents cited in section 7.13(2). The issuance of a land use permit within the floodplain area shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  The requirements of this section shall be met; 
2.  The requirement of the underlying districts and all other applicable provisions of this ordinance shall be met; and 
3.  All necessary development permits shall have been issued by appropriate local, state, and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of authority from the Michigan Department of Natural Resources under authority of Act 245, Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167, Public Acts of 1968. Where a development permit cannot be issued prior to the issuance of a certificate of zoning compliance, a letter from the issuing agency indicating intent to issue contingent only upon proof of zoning compliance shall be acceptable. 
C.  Floodplain management administrative duties. 
1.  With regard to the national flood insurance program, and the regulation of development within the flood hazard area zone as prescribed in section 7.13(4), the duties of the zoning or code inspector shall include, but are not limited to: 
(a)  Notification to adjacent communities and the department of natural resources of the proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, and the submission of such notifications to the Federal Insurance Administration; 
(b)  Verification and recording of the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the flood hazard area, and in the case of floodproofed structures, the elevation to which the structure was floodproofed; and 
(c)  Recording of all certificates of floodproofing, and written notification to all applicants to whom variances are granted in flood hazard area zone indicating the terms of the variance. A record of all variance notifications and variance actions shall be maintained together with the justification for each variance. 
2.  All records and maps pertaining to the national flood insurance program shall be maintained in the building and engineering department and shall be open for public inspection. 
3.  It shall be the responsibility of the zoning or code inspector to obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering the Ordinance in the absence of data from FEMA. 
(4)  Floodplain standard and requirements. 
A.  The following general standards and requirements shall be applied to all uses proposed to be located within the floodplain area: 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements within a floodplain, including the placement of prefabricated buildings and mobile homes, shall: 
(a)  Be designed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
(b)  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(c)  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
2.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
3.  All new and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from systems into flood waters. 
4.  All public utilities and facilities shall be designed, constructed, and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
5.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
6.  The code official shall review development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this section. 
7.  Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
8.  The flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not subject to state and federal regulations designed to insure flood carrying capacity shall be maintained. 
9.  Available flood hazard data from federal, state, or other sources, shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished by FEMA shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
B.  The following specific standards shall be applied to all uses proposed to be located within the floodplain area but not within the floodway portion of the floodplain area. 
1.  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall have either: 
(a)  The lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood level; 
(b)  Be constructed such that below base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subparagraph are satisfied, and that the floodproofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with base flood in the location of the structure. 
C.  Mobile home standards: The following general standards and requirements shall be applied to mobile homes located within flood plain areas: 
1.  Anchoring must meet HUD specifications, per rule 605. 
2.  An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with the county sheriff department for mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions. 
3.  Mobile homes within zones A1-30 on the flood insurance rate map shall be located in accord with the following standards: 
(a)  All mobile homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the base flood level. 
(b)  Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a mobile home hauler shall be provided. 
(c)  In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and reinforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
(d)  In mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions which exist at the time this subsection is adopted, where repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities, and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities, and pads before the repair, the standards in the subparagraphs above shall be complied with. 
D.  The following standards shall be applied to all uses proposed to be located within the floodway portion of the floodplain area. 
1.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited. Exception to this prohibition shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the Department of Natural Resources that the development proposed will not result in any increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and compliance with Act 245, Public Acts of 1929, as amended by Act 167, Public Acts of 1968. 
2.  The placement of mobile homes shall be prohibited. 
3.  The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway, except upon compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(5)  Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
A.  The degree of flood protection required by provisions of this section is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. 
B.  These provisions do not imply that areas outside the floodplain or land uses permitted within such districts will be free from flooding or flood damages nor shall the city or any officer or employee thereof be liable for any flood damages that result from reliance on the provisions of this section or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Section 7.14. - Building/lot grades and drainage. 
    Any building requiring yard space shall be located at such an elevation that a sloping grade shall be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. A building grade line (sometimes referred to as the finish line) shall mean the elevation of the ground adjoining the building on all four sides. A first floor elevation shall mean the height which the first floor extends above the building grade. A sloping earth grade shall be maintained and established from the center of the front lot line to the finish grade line at the building front and from the rear wall of the building to the rear lot line. Lots and parcels with existing improvements must meet these requirements to the greatest extent possible, but due to the size of lot or other existing factors, these regulations may be altered by the city planning commission upon showing of good cause. 
    When a new building is being constructed on a vacant lot between two existing buildings or adjacent to an existing building, the existing established grade shall be referred to in determining the grade around the new building and the yard around the new building shall be graded in such manner as to prevent runoff of surface water flowing onto the adjacent properties. Grades shall be approved by the zoning or code inspector. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall alter an established surface drainage grade to the extent that normal surface drainage is materially obstructed or retarded. 
    No building permit shall be issued for any principal building (excepting additions thereto) proposed in any zoning district until the building department has received and permanently filed a sworn statement from a registered engineer or architect licensed to do business in the state certifying that the building grade shown on the plans submitted, and set forth in said certificate, has been established in a manner which will assure compliance with all of the provisions of this section. 
Section 7.15. - Open space preservation. 
(1)  Whenever the preservation of open space is required by this ordinance, the applicant shall provide a demonstrated means that all open space portions of the development will be maintained in the manner approved. Documents shall be presented that bind all successors and future owners in fee title to commitments made as part of the proposal. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control; provided notice of such transfer is provided to the city and the land use continue as approved in the open space community plan. 
The dedicated open space shall be set aside by the applicant through an irrevocable conveyance that is found acceptable to the city attorney, such as: 
A.  Recorded deed restrictions. 
B.  Covenants that run perpetually with the land. 
C.  Conservation easements. 
(2)  Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall: 
A.  Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space. 
B.  Demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that dedicated open space shall be maintained. 
C.  Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space. 
D.  Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the city in the event that the dedicated open space is inadequately maintained, or is determined by the city to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of costs upon property owners within the proposed development. 
Sec. 7.16. - Industrial building appearance standards. 
(1)  Application of standards. The requirements of this section shall apply in the I-1 and I-2 districts to the following: 
A.  All new construction of principal buildings, additions to existing principal buildings, and new accessory buildings exceeding 1,000 square feet, subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
B.  Reconstruction of existing buildings. The requirements of this section shall apply to the entire existing building if the reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the original footprint. 
C.  The requirements of this section shall apply to existing buildings if an addition to an existing building exceeds 50 percent of the original footprint. 
(2)  Blank facades prohibited. Building facades facing streets, public or private, shall either: 
A.  Contain windows, or elements simulating windows, that occupy at least 20 percent of the wall area; or 
B.  Incorporate perpendicular building projections every 30 feet of building frontage. Such projections must be at least eight inches deep and 12 inches wide and extend the full height of the building. Grouping of projections for architectural effect may be considered so long as the intent of breaking up the mass of the building is achieved and the total number of projections equals or exceeds one per 30 feet of building frontage. 
C.  Utilizing both windows, or elements simulating windows, and building projections is encouraged. If both windows, or elements simulating windows, and projections are utilized, a reduction in the required area of windows and the number of projections may be considered so long as the intent of breaking up the mass of the building is achieved. 
(3)  Entrances defined. The primary entrance to the building shall be well defined by a combination of architectural elements such as projecting roofs, porticos, windows, tile work, pavement, or hardscape. Multiple tenant buildings require entrance definition for each unit. 
(4)  Flat roofs screened . Roofs with a pitch less than two vertical on 12 horizontal shall be screened by a parapet or other architectural means on frontages facing streets. Parapets, or other screening methods, shall extend 15 feet along the side walls of the building. Parapets shall be tall enough to conceal the roof peak on roofs where the gable end faces the street. Otherwise parapets shall be a minimum of three feet tall. 
(5)  Mechanical units screened. 
A.  Rooftop mechanical units and similar roof protrusions on lower secondary roofs shall be screened on all sides. Screening shall be of the same materials as the building. Units shall be grouped and the screening incorporated into the architecture of the building wherever possible. Screening shall be the same height as the equipment being screened. Mechanical units on the highest roof level do not require screening. 
B.  Ground mounted mechanical units, utility meters, and transformers are prohibited adjacent to the front building facade. Ground mounted mechanical units, utility meters, and transformers located in side yards shall be screened from view from the front and side. Units shall be grouped and the screening incorporated into the architecture of the building wherever possible. Screening shall be the same height as the equipment being screened. 
(6)  Exterior wall materials. 
A.  All buildings shall be constructed with finished wall materials selected from table 1. The maximum permitted area of exterior wall materials shall be regulated by table 1. Each wall may be finished in a material up to its maximum permitted area. 
B.  Materials not listed in table 1 and their maximum permissible area may be considered during site plan review. 
C.  EIFS, plaster, stucco, and metal shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur. 
D.  For the purposes of this subsection and table 1, the front side of a building is that side which is most parallel to the adjacent right-of-way. A building on a corner lot has two front sides. A building on an irregularly shaped lot shall have the side most visible from the right of way designated on the site plan as the front side. 
(7)  Final site plan requirements. Final site plans for buildings subject to the requirements of this section shall include elevation drawings of each building face, a color rendering of the front facade, calculations of wall material area, and a narrative description of how requirements (2) through (6) are satisfied. 
Table 1   
Material Maximum permitted area per side (%) Front Sides Rear Brick, clay 100 100 100 Brick, concrete (C-Brick) 90 90 100 Ceramic or glazed block 60 80 100 Split face block* 80 100 100 Natural stone 100 100 100 Manmade stone 75 100 100 Precast concrete 25 40 50 Cast in place concrete 10 20 20 EIFS, plaster, stucco 50 75 75 Tinted or reflective glass 75 75 75 Glass block 50 50 50 Metal, ribbed or seamed 25 70 80 Metal, flat 15 25 25 Wood, natural or simulated 25 25 25 Burnished block 10 20 30 Flat block 0 10 30  
  *All concrete masonry units with a textured face shall be counted in this category. Textured faces include split, scored, fluted, castle, ribbed, stone, or rock etc. 
(Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-2-08) 
ARTICLE 8. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Section 8.01. - Intent. 
    This section is intended to require site plan approval for certain buildings, structures, and uses to meet the standards specified herein. It is further the purpose of this section to delegate site plan review authority to the city planning commission. Site plan review is required in order to achieve the general objectives of the land use plan and the objectives and standards of this ordinance, and to secure proper relationship between parking areas, access drives, public streets, landscaping, building site and adjacent properties. Prior to the issuance of building permits or commencement of construction for new structures and for additions that expand floor area, site plan review and approval is required in accordance with the procedures contained in this article. 
Section 8.02. - Where required and administrative review. 
(1)  Where site plan review is required. 
A.  Site plan review is required for all proposed uses and structures and certain existing uses and structures within the city where an alteration, addition, expansion, change or conversion constitutes an increase or reduction to the existing structure or use. 
B.  Site plan review shall not be required for proposed single-family dwellings, or residential accessory buildings. 
C.  A use of land permitted in any commercial or industrial zoning district, which does not involve a building, such as but not limited to, storage of wrecked vehicles, tent sales, outdoor sales, and outdoor displays. 
D.  Parking lot in any district containing five or more parking spaces. 
E.  All special land uses which require approval by the city planning commission and/or the city council. Site plan approval of all special land uses in residential districts shall be obtained prior to the approval of such special land uses. 
F.  The zoning or code inspector shall not issue a building permit for construction of, or addition to, any of the above-listed buildings or structures until a final site plan thereof has been approved by the city planning commission and is in effect. No use not involving a building or structure, as above listed, shall be commenced or expanded, nor shall the zoning or code inspector issue an occupancy permit for such use, until a final site plan has been approved by the city planning commission and is in effect. 
G.  No grading, removal of trees or other vegetation, earthwork or construction of improvements shall commence for any development which requires site plan approval until a final site plan is approved and is in effect, except as otherwise provided in this article. 
H.  Exceptions to site plan review may be permitted in accordance with subsection 8.02(2), Administrative review. 
(2)  Administrative review. The zoning official may review a site plan without submission to the planning commission, subject to all of the criteria, requirements, and standards set forth in the zoning code, this article, and the following standards. Even if the proposed project meets the standards for administrative review the zoning official may make a determination based on the complexity of the proposed development that it be reviewed and approved by the city planning commission under normal site plan review procedures: 
A.  The zoning official may review and consider approval, conditional approval, or denial of site plans without submission to the planning commission in the following cases: 
1.  Expansion or reduction to an existing conforming structure or use of 1,000 square feet or less, or five percent of the floor area of the structure, whichever total floor area is less. For example, a building of less than 20,000 square feet is limited to a five percent expansion of structure or use for administrative review. A building of 20,000 square feet or more is limited to a 1,000 square foot expansion of structure or use for administrative review. 
2.  Accessory buildings or structures which are 500 square feet or less. 
3.  Provision for additional parking, loading/unloading spaces, and landscape improvements as required by ordinance. 
4.  Installation of landscaping such as trees, berms, fences, boulders, decorative lighting, or other materials. 
5.  Installation of patios, pools, fountains, kiosks, benches, or similar fixtures. 
6.  Building façade improvements that adhere to appearance standards for the zoning district. 
7.  Maintenance or improvements to storm water management systems, after review and approval by the city storm water operator. 
B.  Administrative review shall be in accordance with section 3.03, Certificate of zoning ordinance compliance, and require all information noted therein. 
C.  The zoning official shall consider the criteria set forth in section 8.05 in the review of the site plans submitted under this section. 
(Ord. No. 745, § 1, 10-1-12) 
Section 8.03. - Preliminary site plan. 
(1)  Application. Any person may file a request for preliminary site plan approval by filing with the city clerk the completed preliminary site plan application, and supportive information as set forth in the land use application packet. Payment of fees shall be required along with the submission of a preliminary plan. Upon receipt, the application shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the land use application packet. 
(2)  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall study the plan, and within a reasonable time following the date of the public hearing, shall approve with conditions, postpone, or disapprove the preliminary site plan. The planning commission shall set forth the reason for its action in the record of the meeting at which action is taken, where a plan is approved with conditions, postponed, or disapproved. 
(3)  Effect of approval. Approval of a preliminary site plan by the planning commission shall indicate its acceptance of the proposed layout of buildings, streets or drives, parking areas, and other facilities, and of the general character of the proposed development. The planning commission may, at its discretion, and with appropriate conditions attached, authorize issuance of permits after review and approval by the building and zoning or code inspector for grading and foundation work on the basis of the approved preliminary site plan. Approval of a preliminary site plan shall be valid for a period of 180 days from the approval date and shall expire and be of no effect unless an application for final site plan approval is filed with the city clerk or an extension of preliminary approval is requested and granted within that time period. 
Section 8.04. - Final site plan. 
(1)  Application. Following approval of the preliminary site plan, the applicant shall submit the proposed final site plan as well as the other data, exhibits and information hereinafter required, review fee, and completed application forms as set forth in the land use application packet. Upon receipt of the application, the final site plan drawing(s) shall be processed in accordance with the procedure set forth in the land use application packet. 
(2)  Planning commission action. The planning commission shall study the plan and shall, within a reasonable time following the public hearing, approve or disapprove the final site plan. 
(3)  Effect of approval. Approval of a final site plan authorizes owner or applicant to apply for a building permit or, in the case of uses without buildings, issuance of an occupancy permit. Approval shall be valid for a period of 365 days from the date of approval by the planning commission and shall expire and be of no effect unless a building permit is applied for and granted within that time period. Approval shall also expire and be of no effect 365 days after issuance of a building permit based on the approved final site plan unless construction has commenced and has been diligently pursued within that time period. 
Section 8.05. - Standards for site plan review. 
    The planning commission shall review the preliminary and final site plan and approve with conditions, or deny the application based on the purposes, objectives and requirements of the city ordinances, and standard specifications, and specifically, the following considerations, when applicable: 
(1)  The uses proposed will not harm the public health, safety, or welfare. All elements of the site plan shall be designed to take into account the site's topography, and size and type of plot, the character of adjoining property and the type and size of buildings. The site shall be developed so as not to impede the normal and orderly development or improvement of surrounding property for uses permitted in the City Code. 
(2)  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well-defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site shall be provided. Drives, streets; and other elements shall be designed to promote safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. A traffic impact study shall be performed by the applicant, when required as determined by city staff. In addition, the requirements of article 14, access management, must be provided for lands with frontage along US-12 and along the adjacent streets within 100 feet of the US-12 right-of-way. 
(3)  The arrangement of public or common ways for vehicular and pedestrian circulation and their connection to existing or planned streets in the area shall be planned to operate in the safest and most efficient means possible, and in accordance with the City Code, chapter 74, and the most recent revision of the city standard specifications for construction. 
(4)  The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state, insofar as practical, by removing only those areas of vegetation or making those alterations to the topography which are reasonably necessary to develop the site in accordance with the zoning ordinance together with any special provisions established by the city. 
(5)  Appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure that the proposed drainage plan will not adversely affect any neighboring properties or nearby bodies of water. Provisions shall be made to accommodate stormwater, prevent soil erosion, and control the formation of dust. A stormwater detention/retention plan shall be designed in accordance with the "Washtenaw County Drain Commissioner - Rules for Subdivision Drainage," together with any special provisions established by the city. 
(6)  All buildings or groups of buildings shall be designed in accordance with building codes adopted by the city, and arranged so as to permit necessary emergency vehicle access as required by the public safety director. Security lighting and devices shall be provided in accordance with City Code sections 18-40 and 18-41. 
(7)  All loading and unloading areas, and outside storage areas, if allowed, including refuse storage containers, shall be screened in accordance with the city zoning ordinance, section 13.06 and shall be screened from view of the street and adjoining properties. 
(8)  Exterior lighting shall be designed and arranged so that it does not glare onto adjacent residential properties or adjacent streets in accordance with section 7.09 of the zoning ordinance. 
(9)  Off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided in accordance with zoning ordinance, article 13, with particular attention to noise, glare, and odor effects of each use in the plan on adjoining properties and properties in the proposed development. 
(10)  All developments shall adhere to the general purposes and spirit of the City Codes and ordinances. 
(11)  Historically significant properties as identified in the land use application packet adopted by the planning commission shall be reviewed by the city historic district commission. The planning commission shall consider the findings and recommendations of the historic district commission during their deliberations. 
Section 8.06. - Combining preliminary and final site plans. 
    An applicant may, at his discretion and risk, combine a preliminary and final site plan in application for approval. In such a situation, the portion of the review process concerning preliminary site plan application and review may be waived by the planning commission. The planning commission shall have the authority to require submittal of a preliminary site plan separate from a final site plan where, in its opinion, the complexities and/or scale of the site or the proposed development so warrant. The fees for separate preliminary and final site plan shall then be required. 
Section 8.07. - Changes to site plans. 
    All improvements shall conform to the approved final site plan. If the applicant decides to make any changes in the development in relation to the approved final site plan, he shall do so at his own risk, without any assurance that the city will approve the change(s). It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to notify the zoning or code inspector and the city planning commission of any such changes. The zoning or code inspector or planning commission may require the applicant to correct the changes so as to conform to the approved final site plan. Any changes which result in a material alteration of the site plan approved by the planning commission shall require resubmittal to the planning commission. A material change shall be any change which is considered to alter the function and use of any of the site elements or have an affect on the standards for review as were intended for the development. If it is determined that a site plan amendment is required all work on site shall stop until the site plan amendment is reviewed and approved by the planning commission. 
Section 8.08. - Amendment of approved site plan. 
    A site plan may be amended by the planning commission upon application and in accordance with the procedure provided for a preliminary site plan, and for a final site plan. Minor changes in a preliminary site plan may be incorporated in the final site plan(s) without formal amendment to the approved preliminary site plan, at the discretion of the planning commission. The planning commission shall have the authority to determine if a proposed change in a site plan requires an amendment to the approved site plan. 
Section 8.09. - Fees. 
    Fees for the review of site plans and inspections, as required in this section, shall be established, and may be amended by resolution of the city council. 
Section 8.10. - Phasing of development. 
    The applicant may, at his discretion, divide the proposed development into two or more phases. In such case, the preliminary site plan shall cover the entire property involved and shall clearly indicate the location, size, and character of each phase. A final site plan for each phase shall be submitted for approval. All phases as shown on the approved preliminary site plan shall be valid for a period of 365 days unless the applicant has worked toward completion of the entire project. 
Section 8.11. - Performance guarantees. 
    The applicant shall deposit a cash bond, irrevocable letter of credit, or other surety as approved by the city, with the city treasurer after a building permit has been issued but prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for any site improvements contained in the approved final site plan, such as, but not limited to, streets or drives, parking lots, grading, landscaping, or screens, but which are not installed or provided at the time an occupancy permit is requested. The amount of such security shall be determined by the zoning or code inspector based upon his estimate of the cost of the work to be completed plus a contingency fee to cover administrative and unexpected expenses. Such security may be released in proportion to work completed and approved upon inspection as complying with the approved final site plan. In the event that the applicant shall fail to provide improvements according to the approved final site plan, the city council shall have the authority to have such work completed, and shall reimburse itself for the costs of such work by appropriating funds from the bond. Any unused portion of the bond remaining after final inspection of the site and its approval by the zoning or code inspector in relation to the approved final site plan shall be refunded to the applicant by the city treasurer. In addition to the above security or in place therefore, the zoning or code inspector may refuse to issue an occupancy permit in order to achieve compliance with the approved final site plan. In such case, the occupancy permit shall be issued upon compliance with the approved final site plan or when adequate security is provided to guarantee compliance following occupancy. 
Section 8.12. - Inspection. 
    The city zoning or code inspector or other designated inspector shall be responsible for inspecting all improvements for conformance to the approved final site plan. All subgrade improvements, such as utilities, subbase and base installations for drives and parking lots, and similar improvements shall be inspected and approved prior to covering. The applicant shall be responsible for requesting the necessary inspections. The zoning or code inspector shall notify the city council and city planning commission, in writing, of any development for which a final site plan was approved which compliance cannot be obtained by administrative action by the zoning or code inspector, and shall advise the city council and planning commission of steps taken to achieve compliance pursuant to section 8.13 below. In such case, the zoning or code inspector shall periodically notify the city council and planning commission of progress towards compliance with the approved final site plan, and when compliance is achieved. 
Section 8.13. - Violations. 
    The approved final site plan shall regulate development of the premises. Any violation of this section, including any improvement not in conformance with an approved final site plan, shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance as provided in article 3 herein, and shall be subject to the penalties therein. 
Section 8.14. - Community unit plan. 
    In the case of a community unit plan, as provided in article 10, herein, the planning commission shall review the preliminary site plan of the proposed community unit plan and shall recommend to the city council, in a written report, action on same. The planning commission's report shall contain findings as required in this section and in article 10, herein. Following city council approval of the community unit plan and the preliminary site plan upon which it is based, review and approval of a final site plan for all, or any portion, of the site included in the community unit plan shall be the responsibility of the planning commission, and shall be reviewed by the planning commission as provided in this section. 
ARTICLE 9. - SPECIAL LAND USES 

Section 9.01. - Intent. 
    It is the intent of this section to set forth procedures and standards for special land uses that are required by this ordinance including those listed in section 4.04 of this ordinance. 
Section 9.02. - Application. 
    Applications for special land use permits authorized by this ordinance shall be submitted to the zoning or code inspector on a form provided by the city. In addition to a complete application form, the applicant is required to submit a preliminary site plan prepared in accordance with section 9.03. Incomplete submittals shall not be accepted by the city clerk. 
Section 9.03. - Preliminary site plan. 
    Preliminary site plan review shall be required in conjunction with all applications for special land uses. An applicant shall submit a request for preliminary site plan review by filing with the city clerk completed forms, payment of the review fee, and the minimum of copies of the preliminary site plan drawing(s) as set forth in the land use application packet. 
    Approval of a preliminary site plan by the city shall only be valid if approved in conjunction with approval of a special land use and shall indicate general acceptance of the proposed layout of buildings, streets and drives, parking areas, other facilities and overall character of the proposed development. Following approval of a special land use and preliminary site plan, the applicant shall be required to submit a final site plan in accordance with article 8. 
Section 9.04. - Procedures. 
(1)  Special land use permits may be granted by the city council, upon a recommendation from the planning commission, at its discretion. 
(2)  The zoning or code inspector or his/her designee shall review the proposed application and preliminary site plan to determine if all required information has been supplied, and forward the completed application, preliminary site plan, and supporting data to the planning commission for a recommendation. 
(3)  At the next available meeting, the planning commission shall review the special land use application and make a recommendation to either approve, approve with conditions, postpone or deny the proposed special land use. 
(4)  Upon receipt of a recommendation by the planning commission, a public hearing shall be scheduled for city council. Prior to the public hearing, one notice that such a request has been received shall be published in at least one newspaper of general circulation within the city. In addition, a certified notice shall be sent or personally delivered to the owners of the property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. 
The notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing. The notice shall: 
(a)  Describe the nature of the special land use request; 
(b)  Indicate the property which is the subject of the special land use request; 
(c)  State when and where the special land use request will be considered; 
(d)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request; 
(e)  Indicate that a public hearing on the special land use has been scheduled at the initiative of city council. 
(5)  After notice, and after a public hearing is held, the city council may approve, approve with conditions, or deny a request for a special land use. The decision of the city council shall be incorporated in a statement of conclusions relative to the special land use under consideration. Any decision which denies a request or imposes conditions upon its approval shall specify the basis for the denial or the conditions imposed. 
The city council may impose such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for insuring that the purposes of this ordinance and the general spirit and purpose of the district in which the special use is proposed will be observed. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 1, 5-4-09) 
Section 9.05. - Basis of determinations. 
    The city council and planning commission shall review the proposed special use in terms of any specific standards stated within this ordinance and shall establish that such use and the proposed location: 
(1)  Will be harmonious and in accordance with the general objectives or any specific objectives of the master plan. 
(2)  Will be designed, constructed, operated, and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity and will not change the essential character of the area. 
(3)  Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing abutting and nearby uses or uses reasonably anticipated in the future. 
(4)  Will be an improvement in relation to property in the immediate vicinity and to the city as a whole. 
(5)  Will be served adequately by essential public services and facilities or that the persons responsible for the establishment of the proposed use will provide adequately any such service or facility. 
(6)  Will not create excessive additional public costs and will not be detrimental to the economic welfare of the city. 
(7)  Will be consistent with the intent and purposes of this ordinance, and comply with all specific standards which are established for said use by this ordinance. 
Section 9.06. - Duration, voiding and extensions of permit. 
    Unless otherwise specified by the city council, any special land use permit granted under this section shall be null and void unless the development proposed shall have its first building inspection within one year from the date of the granting of the permit. The zoning or code inspector or his/her designee shall give notice by certified mail to the holder of a permit before voidance is actually declared. Said notice shall be mailed to the permit holder at the address indicated on said permit. Within 30 days of receipt of notice of voiding of the permit, the applicant shall have the right to request an extension of the permit from the city council. The city council may grant an extension thereof for good cause for a period not to exceed one year. 
    The zoning or code inspector may suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance whenever the permit is issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect information supplied by the applicant or his agent and is in violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or of any other ordinances or regulations of the city. 
Section 9.07. - Reapplication. 
    No application for a special use permit which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted until the expiration of one year or more from the date of such denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or change of conditions found to be sufficient to justify reconsideration by the city council. 
ARTICLE 10. - PUD-PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 785 , adopted July 10, 2016, repealed the former Art. 10, §§ 10.01-10.08, and enacted a new Art. 10 as set out herein. The former Art. 10 pertained to CUP-Community unit development and derived from Ord. No. 661, adopted June 16, 2003. 

Section 10.01. - Intent. 
    The PUD district is intended to permit flexibility in the regulation of land development, encourage innovation in land use and variety in design, layout and type of structures constructed, achieve economy and efficiency in the use of land, natural resources, energy and the provision of public services and utilities, encourage useful open space, and provide better housing, employment and shopping opportunities particularly suited to the needs of residents. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.02. - General provisions. 
(a)  Where permitted. A PUD which includes only residential and accessory recreational uses may be applied for in any zoning district. A PUD which is either exclusively nonresidential or includes a mix of residential and nonresidential uses may be applied for in any zoning district which has access to the city sewer service area. 
(b)  Uses permitted. Any land use authorized in this chapter may be included in a PUD, subject to the limitations of nonresidential and mixed use developments to the city sewer service area and the adequate protection of public health, safety, and welfare to protect and ensure the compatibility of varied land uses both within and outside the development. 
(c)  Qualifications of subject parcel. The applicant for a PUD must demonstrate through the submission of both written documentation and site development plans that all of the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The intent of section 10.01 is met. 
(2)  The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the need for or burden upon public services, facilities, roads, and utilities. 
(3)  The proposed development shall be consistent with the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
(4)  The proposed development shall minimize any negative environmental impact of the subject site or surrounding land in comparison to a conventional development in conformance with current city standards. 
(5)  The proposed development shall minimize any negative impact upon surrounding properties in comparison to a conventional development in conformance with current city standards. 
(6)  The proposed development shall be consistent with the goals and policies of the city master plan. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.03. - Design considerations. 
    A proposed PUD shall take into account the following specific design considerations, as they are necessary to ensure compliance with all applicable regulations and to ensure the compatibility of the project with adjoining properties and the general area in which the property is located. 
(1)  Perimeter setbacks. 
(2)  Street drainage and utility design with respect to location, availability, ownership and compatibility. 
(3)  Underground installation of utilities. 
(4)  Installation of separate pedestrian ways apart from vehicular streets and ways. 
(5)  Achievement of integrated and harmonious development with respect to signs, lighting, landscaping and construction materials. 
(6)  Noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms from adjoining residential uses. 
(7)  Ingress and egress to the property with respect to automotive and pedestrian safety and convenience, traffic flow and control, street capacity, and emergency access. 
(8)  Off-street parking, loading, refuse and other service areas with respect to ingress and egress and the potential effects of noise, glare, vibration and odor emanating from such facilities on adjoining properties or uses. 
(9)  Screening and buffering with the respect to dimensions and character. 
(10)  Yard areas and other open space. 
(11)  Density and intensity of development expressed in terms of percent of gross and net land area coverage and/or gross and net housing units per acre and the height of buildings and other structures. 
The preservation of natural resources and natural features. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.04. - Project densities. 
(a)  Residential density. 
(1)  The total number of dwelling units in a PUD project shall not exceed the number of dwelling units permitted in the underlying zoning district or master plan future land use designation. However, a variable density bonus of up to 25 percent may be allowed at the discretion of the city council, upon recommendation of the planning commission. Projects qualifying for a density bonus shall include no less than two of the following elements: 
a.  A high level of clustered development, where at least 40 percent of the PUD is common usable open space or remains in an undeveloped state. 
b.  Providing perimeter transition areas or greenbelts around all sides of the development that are at least 100 feet in depth. 
c.  The proposed plan is designed to enhance surface water quality and ground water quality by addressing at least two stormwater best management practices (BMPs) as outlined by the Washtenaw County Water Resource Commission. 
d.  Provisions and design that preserve natural features. 
e.  Donation or contribution of land or amenities. 
(2)  To establish bonus density, the application shall be required to submit a conventional zoning layout using the underlying zoning classification and demonstrating a practical project for the subject parcel applying to all city regulations. 
(3)  In the case where the applicant proceeds in phases and develops only a portion of the total proposed development at one time, each phase shall consist of land use(s) planned and developed in such a way so that the average density of all completed phases shall not exceed on a cumulative basis, the maximum average density allowed for the entire development. This may be accomplished through the utilization of conservation easements, or other lawful means, which would allow denser development in an earlier phase, while ensuring appropriate overall density. 
(b)  Mixed-use project density. For projects which contain a residential component, density shall be based upon the current city master plan, existing and planned residential densities in the surrounding area, the availability of utilities and the natural features and resource of the subject parcel. 
(c)  Nonresidential component. A PUD may incorporate a nonresidential component into an exclusively residential development, provided that all of the following are met: 
(1)  The nonresidential component shall be located on a lot of sufficient size to contain all such structures, parking, and landscape buffering. The total area occupied by the nonresidential land uses may not exceed ten percent of the gross area of the development. 
(2)  All nonresidential uses shall be compatible with the residential area. 
(3)  The planning commission finds that the architectural design of the structure(s) is compatible with the balance of the development. 
(4)  All nonresidential structures are connected to a pedestrian access system servicing the project. 
All parking and loading areas serving the nonresidential uses shall be to the rear or side of the structure and fully screened from view of any public roadway, except that the planning commission may allow up to 25 percent of the minimum number of required parking spaces in the front yard. Where the parking lot is visible from residential units or open space, it shall be planted with a landscape buffer consisting of evergreen trees spaced no more than ten feet on center. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.05. - Design standards. 
(a)  Open space preservation. 
(1)  When completed, the PUD shall have significant areas, but not less than 40 percent of total land area, devoted to open space, which shall remain in a natural state and/or be restricted for use for active and/or passive outdoor recreational purposes. Priority shall be on preserving the most important natural features on the site, as identified by a site analysis. The amount of open space, including the area and percentage of the site, shall be specified on the site plan. 
(2)  In addition to preservation of the most important natural features, additional open space shall be, where possible, located and designed to achieve the following: 
a.  Provide areas for active recreation; 
b.  Provide areas for informal recreation and pathways that connect into adjacent open space, parks, bike paths or pedestrian paths; 
c.  Provide natural greenbelts along roadways to preserve the rural character as viewed from roads; and 
d.  Preserve an existing natural buffer from adjacent land uses where appropriate. 
(3)  Areas not considered open space. The following land areas are not considered as open space for the purposes of this article: 
a.  The area within a public street right-of-way or private road access easements or other easements that include roads, drives or overhead utility lines. 
b.  The area located below the ordinary high water mark of an inland lake, river or stream, or any pond with standing water year round. 
c.  The area within any manmade stormwater detention or retention pond. Stormwater detention ponds developed in a naturalized fashion that meets the best management practices (BMP's) of the Washtenaw County Water Resources Commission (WCWRC) shall be included in open space. 
d.  The required front yard greenbelt. Side and rear yards may be included in the open space calculation. 
(4)  Maintenance. 
a.  No PUD shall be approved by the city council until documents pertaining to maintenance and preservation of common natural open space areas, common landscaped areas and common recreation facilities located within the development plan have been reviewed by the city attorney. 
b.  The city shall be identified as having the right to enforce the conditions, covenants and restrictions placed on the open space, unless otherwise directed by the city council and the city attorney, with the documentation utilized for such purpose to be in a form approved by the city attorney. Any costs associated with enforcement can be assessed to the property owner. 
(b)  Setbacks. All regulations applicable to front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon zoning district regulations in which the proposed use is listed as a permitted principal or conditional use. 
(c)  Buffering from adjacent property. There shall be a perimeter setback and buffering of a minimum of 100 feet, taking into consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development. The city council, upon a recommendation of the planning commission, may reduce the perimeter setback and buffering in cases where the density of the proposed development is compatible with adjacent uses and/or natural features including, but not limited to woodlands and topographical features that provide adequate buffering to protect adjacent uses. 
If natural features, including, but not limited to woodlands and topographical features do not provide adequate buffering from adjacent property, the perimeter setback shall include noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms including, but not limited to landscaping, berms and/or decorative walls. 
(d)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation. 
(1)  Vehicular circulation shall be designed in a manner which provides safe and convenient access to all portions of the site, promotes safety, contributes to coherence of site design, and adapts to site topography. 
(2)  Physical design techniques, known as traffic calming are encouraged. These techniques are intended to alter driver behavior to reduce speed and cut-through traffic, improve vehicular safety, and improve conditions for non-motorized traffic. 
(3)  Walkways shall be provided in a manner which promotes pedestrian safety and circulation. Walkways shall be separated from vehicular traffic except where roadway crossings are necessary. The plan shall provide pedestrian/bicycle access to, between or through all open space areas, and to appropriate off-site amenities, and located in accordance with the natural features of the site. The city may require construction of a pathway of up to eight feet in width and constructed of concrete or asphalt in accordance with the city's non-motorized future improvement map of the master plan. 
(4)  Locations for school bus stops shall also be provided on the site plan. 
(e)  Utilities. There shall be underground installation of utilities, including electricity and telephone. Overhead utilities shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Stormwater drainage/erosion control. All stormwater drainage and erosion control plans shall meet the standards adopted by the city for design and construction pursuant to section 7.12. Stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.06. - Application and processing procedures. 
(a)  Effects. The granting of a PUD application shall require an amendment of the Zoning Ordinance and the zoning map constituting a part of this ordinance. An approval granted under this article including all aspects of the final PUD plan and conditions imposed shall constitute an inseparable part of the Zoning Ordinance. 
(b)  Concept review meeting. Prior to the submission of an application for PUD, the applicant shall meet with zoning administrator, a member of the planning commission, and such consultants or staff as deemed appropriate. Additional concept review meetings may be requested by the applicant or city representatives. The applicant shall present at such meeting, or meetings, a sketch plan of the PUD, and the following information: 
(1)  A legal description of the property in question. 
(2)  The total number of acres to be included in the project. 
(3)  A statement of the approximate number of residential units and/or the approximate number, type, and square footage of non-residential units. 
(4)  The approximate number of acres to be occupied and/or devoted to or by each type of use. 
(5)  Departures from the regulations of the ordinance which may be requested. 
(6)  The number of acres to be preserved as open space or recreation space. 
(7)  All known natural resources and natural features. 
(8)  The location of all existing and proposed water and sewage treatment systems serving the property. 
(c)  Preliminary PUD plan application-Submission and content. Following the above meeting or meetings, 16 copies of the application and all required materials for preliminary PUD plan shall be submitted. The submission shall be made to the city clerk for distribution to the zoning administrator and applicable reviewing parties and agencies. The plan shall be accompanied by an application form and fee as determined by the city council. The preliminary PUD plan shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date, north arrow, and scale which shall not be more than 1" = 100'. 
(2)  Locational sketch of site in relation to surrounding area. 
(3)  Legal description of property including common street address and tax identification number. 
(4)  Size of parcel. 
(5)  All lot or property lines with dimensions. 
(6)  General location of all buildings within 100 feet of the property lines. 
(7)  General location and size of all existing structures on the site. 
(8)  General location and size of all proposed structures on the site. The general size of all buildings shall be within 5,000 square feet or five percent, whichever is smaller of whatever is constructed. 
(9)  General location and dimensions of all existing and proposed streets, driveways, parking areas, including total number of spaces and typical dimensions. 
(10)  General size and location of all areas devoted to open space. 
(11)  Location of existing vegetation and general location and size of proposed landscaped areas and buffer strips. 
(12)  All areas within the 100-year floodplain, wetland areas or bodies of water. 
(13)  Generalized topographical information including contours and/or spot elevations which illustrate drainage patterns. 
(14)  Preliminary phasing lines of PUD if applicable. 
(15)  A narrative describing: 
a.  The nature of the project, projected phases and timetable. 
b.  The proposed density, number, and types of dwelling units if a residential PUD. 
c.  A statement describing how the proposed project meets the objectives of the PUD District pursuant to section 10.02(c). 
d.  A statement from a registered professional engineer describing how the proposed project will be served by public water, sanitary sewer, and storm drainage. 
e.  Proof of ownership or legal interest in property. 
(d)  Planning commission review and recommendation-Preliminary PUD plan. The planning commission shall review the preliminary PUD plan according to the provisions of sections 10.02 through 10.05. Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council either approval, denial, or approval with conditions. In making its recommendation, the planning commission shall find that the proposed PUD meets the intent of the PUD district and the following standards. 
(1)  In relation to underlying zoning, the proposed type and density of use shall not result in a material increase in the need for public services, facilities, and utilities, and shall not place a material burden upon the subject or surrounding land or property owners and occupants or the natural environment. 
(2)  The proposed development shall be compatible with the city master plan and shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of this article. 
(3)  The PUD shall not change the essential character of the surrounding area. 
(4)  The proposed PUD shall be under single ownership or control such that there is a single person or entity having responsibility for completing the project in conformity with this ordinance. This provision shall not prohibit a transfer of ownership or control upon due notice to the zoning administrator. 
(e)  Public hearing-Planning commission. The planning commission shall hold a public hearing and give notice in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act. 
(f)  City council review and determination-Preliminary PUD plan. After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the preliminary PUD plan in accordance with the standards for approval and conditions for a PUD as contained herein. 
(g)  Effect of approval-Preliminary PUD plan. Approval of the preliminary PUD plan that is required to accompany a PUD application does not constitute final PUD plan or rezoning approval, but only bestows the right on the applicant to proceed to the final site plan stage. The application for final PUD consideration shall be submitted within 12 months of receiving preliminary PUD approval or the preliminary PUD application shall be considered null and void. 
(h)  Contents of the final PUD plan. Following preliminary PUD plan approval, copies of the application for final PUD plan shall be submitted. The submission shall be made to the zoning administrator. The plan shall be accompanied by an application form and fee as determined by the city council. The final PUD plan shall contain the same information required for the preliminary PUD plan along with the following information and any information specifically requested by the planning commission in its review of the preliminary PUD plan: 
(1)  Location and size of all water, sanitary sewer, and storm sewer lines serving the development. 
(2)  Proposed grading plan. 
(3)  Proposed landscaping including type, number and size of trees and shrubs. 
(4)  Location of signs and exterior lighting. 
(5)  Location of sidewalk, foot paths, or other pedestrian walkways. 
(6)  Distance of all buildings from lot lines, rights-of-way, and other principal buildings. 
(7)  Exterior architectural drawings noting building materials, height and area of buildings and accessory structures. 
(8)  Proposed phases of project and projected timetable. 
(9)  All information contained in section 8.05. of this ordinance. 
(i)  Planning commission review and recommendation-Final PUD plan and rezoning. After receiving approval of the preliminary PUD plan from the city, the planning commission shall review the final PUD plan and rezoning application and shall recommend to the city council either approval, denial, or approval with conditions. In making its recommendation, the planning commission shall find that the proposed PUD still meets the intent of the PUD district along with all development standards outlined in sections 10.02 through 10.05. 
(j)  City council review and determination-Final PUD plan and rezoning. After receiving the recommendation of the planning commission and considering the comments from the public hearing, the city council shall prepare a report stating its conclusions, its decision, the basis for its decision, and any conditions imposed on an affirmative decision. 
(k)  Effect of approval-Final PUD plan and rezoning. The final PUD plan, the narrative and all conditions imposed, if any, shall constitute the land use authorization for the property. All uses not specifically specified in the final PUD plan are disallowed and not permitted on the property notwithstanding that the property is zoned PUD. All improvements and uses shall be in conformity with this zoning amendment to PUD. The applicant shall record an affidavit with the Washtenaw County Register of Deeds, which shall contain the following: 
(1)  Date of approval of the final PUD plan by the city council. 
(2)  Legal description of the property. 
(3)  Legal description of the required green space along with a plan stating how this green space is to be maintained. 
(4)  A statement that the property will be developed in accordance with the approved final PUD plan and any conditions imposed by the city council or planning commission unless an amendment thereto is duly approved by the city upon the request and/or approval of the applicant or applicant's transferee's and/or assigns. This statement shall also include the duration of approval and action for non-compliance. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.07. - Resolution of ambiguities and chapter deviations. 
(a)  The city council, based upon the recommendation of the planning commission, shall resolve all ambiguities as to applicable regulations using this zoning chapter, the master plan and other C standards or policies as a guide. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the immediately preceding standards, deviations with respect to such regulations may be granted as part of the overall approval of the PUD provided there are features or elements demonstrated by the applicant and deemed adequate by the city council upon the recommendation of the planning commission designed into the project plan for the purpose of achieving the objectives of this article. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.08. - Conditions. 
(a)  Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a PUD, to the extent authorized by law. Conditions may be included which are deemed necessary to ensure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserving natural resources and energy, to ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
(b)  Conditions imposed shall meet the following requirements: be designed to protect natural resources and the public health, safety, and welfare of individuals in the project and those immediately adjacent, and the community as a whole; reasonably related to the purposes affected by the planned unit development; and, necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance, and be related to the objective of ensuring compliance with the standards of this ordinance. All conditions imposed shall be made a part of the record of the approved planned unit development. 
(c)  Conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the city council and the landowner. The city shall maintain a record of conditions which are changed. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.09. - Phasing and commencement of construction. 
(a)  Phasing. Where a project is proposed for construction in phases, the planning and designing shall be such that, upon completion, each phase shall be capable of standing on its own in terms of the presence of services, facilities, and open space, and shall contain the necessary components to ensure protection of natural resources and the health, safety, and welfare of the users of the planned unit development and the residents of the surrounding area. In addition, in developments which include residential and nonresidential uses, the relative mix of uses and the scheduled completion of construction for each phase shall be disclosed and determined to be reasonable in the discretion of the city council after recommendation from the planning commission. 
(b)  Commencement and completion of construction. Construction shall be commenced within one year following final plan approval of a PUD and shall proceed substantially in conformance with the schedule set forth by the applicant, as approved by the city. If construction is not commenced within such time, any approval of a PUD plan shall expire and be null and void, provided, an extension for a specified period may be granted by the city council upon good cause shown if such request is made to the city council prior to the expiration of the initial period. Moreover, in the event a PUD plan has expired, the city council, based on a recommendation from the planning commission, shall be authorized to rezone the property in any reasonable manner, and, if the property remains classified as PUD, a new application shall be required, and shall be reviewed in light of then existing and applicable law and ordinance provisions. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.10. - Performance guarantees. 
    The planning commission may require a performance bond or similar guarantee in accordance with section 3.05 in order to ensure completion of the required improvements. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 10.11. - Modifications to an approved PUD plan. 
    A developer may request a change to an approved preliminary PUD plan, or an approved final PUD plan. A change in an approved preliminary PUD plan or change in an approved final PUD plan which results in a major change, as defined in this section, shall require an amendment to the preliminary PUD and final PUD plan. All amendment shall follow the procedures and conditions herein required for original submittal and review. A change which results in a minor change as defined in this section shall require a revision to the approved final PUD site plans and approval by the city council following review by the planning commission. 
(a)  The following changes shall be considered major: 
(1)  Change in the concept of the development; 
(2)  Change in use or character of the development; 
(3)  Change in the type of dwelling unit; 
(4)  Change in the number of dwelling units (density); 
(5)  Change in nonresidential floor area; 
(6)  Change in lot coverage or floor area ratio of the entire PUD; 
(7)  Change in the character or function of any street; 
(8)  Change in land area set aside for common space or the relocation of such areas; and 
(9)  Change in building height. 
(b)  The following changes shall be considered minor: 
(1)  A change in residential floor space; 
(2)  Minor variations in layout which do not constitute major changes. 
(c)  The planning commission shall have the authority to determine whether a requested change is major or minor, in accordance with this section. The burden shall be on the applicant to show good cause as to any requested change. 
(Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
ARTICLE 11. - SPA SPECIAL PLANNING AREA LAND USE ZONE DISTRICT 
    The purpose of the article is to establish a process whereby the planning commission may initiate proceedings to regulate property in areas throughout the city that have unique environmental, historic, architectural, or other features which require special conditions not provided through the application of standard zone regulations. It is recognized that in certain circumstances it may be desirable to provide a greater range of mixture of uses in an area than would be permitted in the standard land use zones of article 4 of this Code. This article provides the method for the city to guide the development of such areas so as to preserve such unique characteristics or provide for a broader mixture of land uses when appropriate. 

Section 11.01. - Designation. 
    The abbreviation SPA appearing on a comprehensive zone plan incorporated in appendix A, article 4, section 4.02 of the Code indicates that the property so classified is subject to the provisions of the article and an ordinance adopted pursuant to this article. 
Section 11.02. - Initiation of zone. 
    The planning commission may initiate proceedings to place parcels within the SPA land use zone, provided that said planning commission has made the findings set forth in section 11.04. 
Section 11.03. - Mandatory contents of SPA ordinance. 
    An SPA zone shall be established by ordinance, and provisions shall be included in each SPA ordinance for the following matters: 
A.  Legal description of property covered by the ordinance. 
B.  Statement of intent for establishment of an SPA land use zone on the particular property. 
C.  A list of permitted uses. 
D.  A list of prohibited uses. 
E.  Performance and development requirements relating to setbacks, lot area, building heights, intensity of development on each lot, parking, and signs. 
F.  Other design standards appropriate for the specific site and development. 
Section 11.04. - Additional permissive contents of SPA ordinance. 
    The following provisions are permissive and are not intended to be an exclusive list of the provisions which may be included in an SPA ordinance. 
A.  The area included within the SPA zone has one or more unusual environmental, historic, architectural, or other specified significant features which justify the adoption of the SPA zone. 
B.  That the said unusual features cannot adequately be protected by the adoption of any other land use zone. 
C.  That the SPA zone is of sufficient size that the adoption of the regulations contained therein will not constitute the granting of a special privilege or deprivation of property rights. 
D.  That the SPA zone will provide for a reasonable use of the land and not cause undue hardship on property owners within the zone. 
Section 11.05. - Application for amendment to the SPA land use zone. 
    The procedures amending an SPA land use zone adopted pursuant to this article shall be the same as for any amendment to the zoning ordinance, as set forth in article 16. 
ARTICLE 11a. - SPA-1 EAST MICHIGAN DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT 

Section 11a.01. - Intent. 
    The city planning commission, in adopting this special planning area ordinance, intends to encourage development on the property described in exhibit A which will accomplish the following objectives: 
(1)  Protect the natural runoff patterns, wetlands and rolling landform, to prevent disruption of natural drainage, and minimize storm runoff loads. 
(2)  Preserve existing trees and natural vegetation. 
(3)  Reduce curb cuts and street intersections on East Michigan Avenue to maintain adequate traffic flow and increase safety, by reducing turning movements. 
(4)  Cluster development to reduce street length and utility runs and organize circulation. 
(5)  Reduce sign clutter. 
(6)  Limit commercial development to that which will supplement, but not replace, downtown commercial uses, to maintain economic balance in the community. 
(7)  Encourage mixed land use to maintain and extend the image and quality of life of the city. 
Section 11a.02. - Property included. 
    The properties described in exhibit A, located in section 31 and part of section 30, Pittsfield Township, are included in this SPA. SPA-1 includes all property in the described area that is within the city limits and all property within the described area which may at some time be annexed to the city. The annexed land shall be zoned SPA-1 effective as of the date of annexation. The SPA-1 district is shown on the following map. (Exhibit A) 

Exhibit A - SPA-1 
Section 11a.03. - Property rezoned. 
    The land described in said exhibit A, which is currently within the city limits, was zoned from its previous zoning to SPA-1 on December 21, 1981. 
Section 11a.04. - Uses. 
(1)  All uses permitted in the following land use groups, as regulated and described by articles of this ordinance, may be permitted in SPA-1, subject to planning commission findings that the site plan for any proposed use satisfies the standards set forth in sections 11.06, 11.07, and other applicable portions of this ordinance. Land use groups as regulated by SPA-1: 
Residential Article 4, section 4.04. 1 through 7. Office Article 4, section 4.04. 9 through 10. Commercial Article 4, section 4.04. 11 through 13. Industrial Article 4, section 4.04. 14 through 16.  
(2)  The following uses shall not be permitted in this zone: 
A.  Storage or parking or use of moving vans, etc. 
B.  Outdoor storage or parking of wrecked or partially dismantled vehicles. 
C.  Drive-in theaters. 
(3)  The following uses shall not be permitted to front on East Michigan Avenue: 
A.  Drive-in restaurants. 
B.  Automotive wash establishments. 
C.  Other drive-through facilities, except those that are customarily incidental to the permitted principle uses and structures located on the same site. 
D.  Adult entertainment businesses. 
Section 11a.05. - Development review. 
    Prior to issuance of a building permit for any building to be built or modified, a site plan shall be approved as provided for by article 8, site plan review. The plan shall comply in substance with the standards set forth in section 11.06 and 11.07 of this article. In addition to the requirements of article 8, the site plan submission shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Preliminary site plan. 
A.  Existing topography recorded at a minimum contour interval of two feet showing all natural features such as trees, wooded areas, streams and wetlands; all features shall be identified as to which remain and which will be removed or altered. Topography shall extend 50 feet beyond all property lines. 
B.  General soils information. 
C.  Location and size of buffer areas. 
D.  Use and general class of each different type of structure. 
(2)  Final site plan. 
A.  The site plan shall be at a scale of not greater than one inch equals 20 feet nor less than one inch equals 50 feet. 
B.  The site plan shall show all signage and provisions for pedestrian circulation both on the site and to and from it. 
C.  Name and address of all property owners, as listed by city assessor or county register of deeds. 
D.  Statement of interest in the property including conditions for sale or purchase of parcel such as deed restrictions, reservations of land for other uses, or other conditions which may have bearing on the total land development. 
E.  Maps of applicant's entire holding and/or interest in land contiguous to the proposed project. 
F.  Existing topography shall record all features extending 50 feet beyond the property line. 
G.  Vicinity map of all property within 300 feet of the proposed development showing streets, zonings and land uses at a scale no greater than one inch equals 200 feet. 
H.  Elevation drawings of typical proposed structures and improvements including signs, except for single-family detached homes. 
I.  A model of the proposed development, showing all elements of the development, shall be provided on special request of the planning commission. It shall show all buildings or portions of a building located within 300 feet of the site. 
J.  Proposed agreements, deed restrictions, bylaws or articles of incorporation which relate to the preservation or maintenance of open space and associations created to preserve and maintain said open space. 
K.  Soil boring logs for soil borings located beneath each building. One boring is required for each 2,500 s.f. or part thereof ground area occupied by a building. 
L.  Proposed grading shall show one-foot contour intervals. 
M.  All existing vegetation four-inch caliper and over must be located on the plans. 
N.  Total amount of open space required by this ordinance. 
O.  Total amount of landscape area required by this ordinance. 
P.  Quantity of cut and fill required to complete site grading, certified by an engineer. 
Q.  A map showing the drainage area of all land which drains onto or across the site, and estimated runoff of the entire drainage area. Show existing runoff and estimated runoff after construction. 
R.  Location and dimension of all curb cuts. 
S.  Details and general specifications for protection of existing plant materials. 
Section 11a.06. - General standards. 
(1)  East Michigan Avenue corridor. For purposes of this ordinance the portion of East Michigan Avenue which lies within SPA-1 shall be divided into two zones: 
A.  The east corridor shall extend from the easterly boundary of SPA-1 west to the westerly property line of parcel 3117A-1B-2 (approximately north of the SW 1/4 post of Section 31 Pittsfield Township). 
B.  The west corridor shall begin at that point and extend west to the centerline of Maple Road. 
(2)  Bemis Road corridor. For purposes of this ordinance, the portion of the north side of Bemis Road which lies within SPA-1 shall be divided into two zones: 
A.  The east corridor shall extend from the easterly boundary of SPA-1 west to the SW 1/4 post of Section 31 Pittsfield Township. 
B.  The west corridor shall extend from that point west to the centerline of East Michigan Avenue. 
(3)  Roadway intersections on East Michigan Avenue. For roadways serving more than one lot, shall be limited as follows: 
A.  East corridor: 1,000 feet between the centerlines of any curb cut or intersections regardless of the side of the highway on which they occur. 
B.  West corridor: 500 feet between the centerlines of curb cuts, regardless of the side of the highway on which they occur. 
(4)  Curb cuts on East Michigan Avenue. Shall be limited to one per lot, unless lot frontage is sufficient to allow the distances specified under item 3 (above) between the curb cuts. 
(5)  Land use organization. 
A.  All commercial or office land uses, including required yards and greenbelts, shall be within 700 feet of the centerline of East Michigan Avenue, as shown on Exhibit B located at the end of this section. The depth of a commercial or office development from East Michigan Avenue may be increased 2.5 feet for each one foot additional front yard (beyond the required greenbelt). The maximum depth shall not exceed 1,200 feet according to the following schedule: 
Front Yard Beyond Greenbelt 
(feet) Depth of Use from Michigan Avenue 
(feet) 0 700 1 702.5 10 725 50 825 100 950 200 and more 1,200  
B.  Industrial development south of East Michigan Avenue shall be confined to the same area as commercial and office uses. 
C.  No nonresidential land use shall be permitted within 500 feet of the east corridor of Bemis Road. 
D.  No commercial land use shall be approved which fronts on Bemis Road. 
E.  No commercial land use shall be permitted within 2,000 feet of any commercial land use existing in Pittsfield Township east of SPA-1. 
F.  Lots containing commercial land uses shall not total more than 4,200 lineal feet of frontage on East Michigan Avenue, or on any service drive parallel thereto. 
G.  Residential density on any lot within 750 feet of the east corridor of Bemis Road shall not exceed seven dwelling units per acre. 
(6)  Protection of existing vegetation. Existing trees over four inches caliper shall not be removed from any lands in SPA-1 without approval of the zoning or code inspector. Approval shall take the form of a tree removal permit. 
A.  All trees removed from any site except as noted below shall be replaced as required in this ordinance. To issue a tree removal permit the zoning or code inspector must find that at least one of items 1 through 5 and item 6 below exist: 
1.  The tree falls within the building limits of a proposed approved structure, or within ten feet of the walls of said structure; or 
2.  The tree falls within the pavement and shoulder area of an approved street and drive; or 
3.  Proper execution of site drainage, as described by an approved grading plan, is not possible without removal of the tree; or 
4.  Other approved construction activities require removal of the tree; and 
5.  The tree is determined to be unhealthy or otherwise not worth saving due to its physical condition. 
6.  No reasonable modifications to the approved plans can be made which will allow the tree to be saved. 
B.  A permit shall be required, but replacement shall not be required, for the following tree removal: 
1.  All land within the dripline of the following categories of vegetation on any lands in SPA-1 shall remain undisturbed to the degree listed below: 
(a)  Woodland, 75 percent undisturbed. 
(b)  Hedgerow, 60 percent undisturbed. 
(c)  Specimen tree, 80 percent undisturbed. 
(d)  Removal of trees in excess of the percentage allowed under this paragraph shall require replacement according to the schedule set forth under subsection D. below. 
2.  Standing dead trees. 
C.  A tree that represents a hazard to the health or safety of persons or property may be removed. 
D.  Tree replacement schedule. Trees removed by permit as described under subsection (A) above and all trees removed without permit shall be replaced with new plant material which meets the standards established under section 11a.08. Replacements must be made or the developer shall place in escrow with the city an amount necessary to cover replacement cost before a building permit is issued. Replacement plant material shall not be considered as part of total plant count required under section 11a.08 
Plant material replacement shall be according to the following schedule: 
Existing Tree (caliper) Replacement (caliper) 4-inch 1 tree at 4-inch 5-inch 1 tree at 5-inch 6-inch 1 tree at 6-inch 8-inch 1 tree at 8-inch 10-inch 2 trees at 6-inch 12-inch 2 trees at 6-inch plus 1 at 4-inch 14-inch 3 trees at 6-inch 16-inch 3 trees at 6-inch plus 1 at 4-inch 18-inch 2 trees at 8-inch plus 1 at 4-inch 20-inch 2 trees at 8-inch plus 1 at 6-inch 22-inch 3 trees at 8-inch 24-inch 2 trees at 8-inch plus 2 at 6-inch 26-inch 3 trees at 8-inch plus 1 at 4-inch 28-inch 4 trees at 8-inch 30-inch 4 trees at 8-inch plus 1 at 6-inch Over 30-inch 7 trees at 8-inch Landmark specimen 1 specimen tree at 12-inch plus all trees required by caliper of the tree removed.  
E.  Sixty percent of the land beneath the dripline of a specimen tree shall remain undisturbed except that grass or other ground cover may be planted. 
(7)  Protection of other natural features. The following natural features, if found on any lands within SPA-1 (on the effective date of this ordinance, or in the future), shall be protected according to the following standards: 
A.  Water. Streams, ponds, lakes, wetlands, or drainageways which contain water all or part of the year shall remain undeveloped and protected from disruption to the extent listed below: 
1.  Floodplain, 100 percent unaltered. 
2.  Ponds, lakes, wetlands, 100 percent unaltered. 
3.  Drainageways (streams), 80 percent unaltered. 
4.  Muck soils, 70 percent unaltered. 
B.  Landform. Existing slopes and landforms shall be one basis of design decisions in SPA-1. Slopes and landforms found on all lands within SPA-1 shall be retained undisturbed to the degree listed below. 
1.  Slopes (six to 12 percent), 40 percent undisturbed. 
2.  Slopes (12 to 18 percent), 60 percent undisturbed. 
3.  Steep slopes (18 to 25 percent), 80 percent undisturbed. 
4.  Bluff (over 25 percent), 90 percent undisturbed. 
C.  Existing structures. Existing structures shall be retained and reused wherever possible. The planning commission may approve variations to and deviations from the requirements of this ordinance that may be required to allow preservation or reuse of existing structures. 

Exhibit B - SPA-1 
Section 11a.07. - Specific standards. 
(1)  Building height. Unless modified by this section, height limitations imposed by the most restrictive applicable article shall apply to each use. The following height limitations shall apply to SPA-1: 
A.  Buildings fronting (principal access) on East Michigan Avenue: 
Residential 30 feet 2 stories Office 30 feet 2 stories Commercial 20 feet 1 story Industrial 30 feet 2 stories  
B.  Buildings fronting on all other streets: 
Residential 35 feet 2 stories Office 35 feet 2 stories Commercial 35 feet* 2 stories Industrial 30 feet* 2 stories  
*Except as noted in Article 4.03(4). 
(2)  Lot area. 
A.  Lots fronting on East Michigan Avenue, east corridor shall be a minimum of four acres with a lot width of not less than 400 feet. 
B.  Lots fronting on East Michigan Avenue, west corridor shall be a minimum of 60,000 s.f. with a width of not less than 200 feet. 
C.  Unless modified by this section, lots fronting on all other streets shall conform to the size and width requirements of the most restrictive article under which the use is allowed. 
D.  No nonresidential lot shall be less than 80 feet wide. 
E.  Clustered single-family housing may be permitted, with narrower lot width than otherwise allowed, if the planning commission finds that the plan provides sufficient open space and preserves natural features. 
F.  Lot area for multiple-family housing units built within 700 feet of the centerline of East Michigan Avenue (including the bonus area where additional front yard is provided) shall be 7,800 s.f. for the first living unit and not less than 1,800 s.f. for each additional efficiency unit or one bedroom unit, and not less than 2,400 s.f. of lot area for each two-bedroom unit, and not less than 3,000 s.f. for each three-bedroom unit. 
_____
(3)  Lot coverage. 
A.  Lots fronting on East Michigan Avenue may be permitted increases in allowed lot coverage based on increased front yard from the required greenbelt as follows: 
Added Front Yards as a Percentage of Greenbelt 
Greenbelt Only 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% and Over Office 30% 32% 34% 36% 38% 40% Commercial 25% 28% 31% 34% 37% 40% Industrial 25% 28% 31% 34% 37% 40%  
B.  Lots which front on all other streets shall be permitted the following lot coverage: 
1.  Office, 40 percent. 
2.  Commercial, 50 percent. 
3.  Industrial, 50 percent. 
C.  Commercial uses allowed under this ordinance shall be limited to not more than 180,000 s.f. of floor space in SPA-1. 
(4)  Greenbelts. The following greenbelts shall be used between land uses in SPA-1: 
Width Berm or Opaque Fence Average Plants per 100 Lineal Feet A. 100 feet 5-foot height 3 canopy 0 evergreen 4 understory 0 shrubs B. 50 feet 2-foot height 3 canopy 0 evergreen 2 understory 0 shrubs C. 50 feet None 6 canopy 5 evergreen 8 understory 30 shrubs D. 50 feet 3-foot berm 6 canopy 8 evergreen 8 understory 30 shrubs E. 25 feet 5-foot fence or 5-foot berm 6 canopy 3 evergreen 6 understory 20 shrubs F. 25 feet 3-foot berm 5 canopy 3 evergreen 6 understory 20 shrubs G. 25 feet None 5 canopy 3 evergreen 4 understory 20 shrubs H. 25 feet None 3 canopy 0 evergreen 6 understory 10 shrubs  
A.  Greenbelt (A) shall be used on both sides of the east corridor of East Michigan Avenue (measured from the right-of-way). 
B.  Greenbelt (B) shall be used on both sides of the west corridor of East Michigan Avenue (measured from the right-of-way). 
C.  Greenbelt (B) shall be used on the north side of the west corridor of Bemis Road (measured from the right-of-way). 
D.  Greenbelt (B) shall be used on the east side of Maple Road beginning at East Michigan Avenue and extending north a minimum of 800 feet as measured by the centerline, of Maple Road. The greenbelt shall extend to the limit of commercial or office development which utilizes the bonus area. 
E.  The following table lists landscape buffers required between various land uses in SPA-1. 
Agriculture* Residential* Office Commercial Industrial Agricultural H G F or C F or C Residential H G F or C E or D Office G G F E or D Commercial F or C F or C F E or D Industrial F or C F or C E or D E or D  
*Agricultural  and residential uses include land adjoining SPA-1 buffers. 
_____ 
F.  Greenbelts may include paths or walks for pedestrian and nonmotorized traffic. Pedestrian paths shall be a minimum of six feet wide; paths for bicycle or other nonmotorized vehicles shall be a minimum of eight feet wide. 
G.  Landscape development of greenbelts and buffers shall conform to the requirements of section 11a.08. 
H.  The height of all berms required in connection with greenbelts fronting on all streets and highways shall be modified at all drive entrances to the extent necessary to comply with all applicable traffic safety sight line requirements. 
(5)  Front yard. 
A.  Front yards on East Michigan Avenue shall consist of the required greenbelts. 
B.  On all other streets, front yards shall conform to the most restrictive zoning district in which the use is allowed, except that the minimum front yard shall be 15 feet. 
(6)  Side yards. 
A.  Lots fronting on East Michigan Avenue shall have a side yard of not less than 60 feet for either yard. 
B.  Lots fronting on all other streets shall have side yards conforming to the most restrictive zoning district in which the use is allowed, except that no side yard may be less than ten feet. 
C.  Where landscape buffers are required, side yards shall include the landscape buffer and shall not be less than this required landscape buffer. 
(7)  Side yards abutting streets. 
A.  Side yards abutting East Michigan Avenue shall consist of the required greenbelt. 
B.  Side yards abutting other streets shall equal the front yard required for the use on the lot. 
(8)  Rear yards. 
A.  Rear yards shall not be less than 20 feet for all lots in SPA-1. 
B.  Where landscape buffers are required, rear yards shall include the landscape buffer, and shall not be less than this required landscape buffer. 
(9)  Off-street parking facilities. 
A.  Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as specified in article 13 of this ordinance. 
B.  Parking shall not be allowed within required yards, except that parking may be allowed in side yards on lots fronting East Michigan Avenue provided that the elevation of the parking area is such that without raising the greenbelt berm above five feet no cars may be seen from East Michigan Avenue. 
C.  Parking and vehicular circulation shall not occur between buildings and East Michigan Avenue unless the building is set back from the greenbelt 50 percent of the greenbelt width. In such cases parking may occupy up to 50 percent of the area between greenbelt and building. 
(10)  Walkways. Every lot shall be served by paths or walks for nonmotorized use. Such paths shall connect adjoining properties to ensure continuous circulation and connection to routes outside SPA-1. 
Section 11a.08. - Landscape requirements. 
(1)  Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to all lots, sites and parcels which hereafter are developed or expanded within SPA-1. Issuance of a building permit will follow submission of a satisfactory plan for landscaping to meet these requirements. A certificate of occupancy will not be issued unless the provisions of this section have been met or a performance bond or other security is posted with the city. In all cases where reference is made to the zoning or code inspector, this section shall require that the zoning or code inspector consult with the city forester. 
(2)  Definitions. Please see the definition section of this ordinance. 
(3)  Plant material and landscape elements. 
A.  Quality. Plant and grass materials shall be of acceptable varieties and species, free of pests and diseases, hardy in the county, and shall conform to standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have passed any inspections required under state regulations. 
B.  Use of nonliving materials. No plant materials used to satisfy some or all planting requirements of this section shall be comprised of nonliving materials, such as petrochemical plants. No polyethylene film shall be used under nonliving, decorative landscape materials such as stone, wood chips and gravel in a manner which will cause erosion of the decorative materials. Use of the films shall be approved by the zoning or code inspector. 
C.  Deciduous trees. Deciduous trees shall be species having an average mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet in the county and having trunk(s) which can be maintained with over five feet of clear stem if conditions of visibility require, except, however, at intersections, where the requirement of ten-foot clear stem as established in article 7, section 7.04 of this ordinance shall be followed. Deciduous tree species shall be a minimum of ten feet overall height or of a minimum caliper of 11/4 inches and burlap ball size of at least ten times the caliper size, immediately after planting. 
D.  Evergreen trees. Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in height with a minimum spread of three feet and burlap ball size of at least ten times the caliper immediately after planting. 
E.  Shrubs and hedges. Shrubs shall be a minimum of two feet in height when measured immediately after planting or two feet in spread if plants are low-growing evergreens. Hedges, where provided, shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, visual screen within a maximum of two years after time of planting. 
F.  Vines. Vines shall be a minimum of 30 inches in length after one growing season and may be used in conjunction with fences, screens, or walls to meet physical buffer requirements so specified. 
G.  Ground covers. Ground covers used in lieu of grass in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage after one complete growing season with at least two plants per square foot. 
H.  Lawn grass. Grass areas shall be planted in species normally grown as permanent lawns in the city. Grass may be plugged, sprigged, seeded or sodded except that rolled sod, erosion-reducing net or suitable mulch shall be used in swales or other areas subject to erosion. When complete sodding or seeding is not used, nursegrass seed shall be sown and mulched for immediate protection until coverage is otherwise achieved. Grass sod and seed shall be clean and free of weeds and noxious pests or diseases. 
(4)  Landscape elements. 
A.  Earth mounds and berms. Berms and mounds shall be constructed with slopes no greater than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal with at least a four-foot flat area on the top and with adequate protection to prevent erosion, unless alternative designs are approved by the planning commission. 
B.  Mulches. Mulching material for planted trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of two-inch-deep wood chip mulch. Straw or other mulch shall be used to protect seeded areas, of a depth approved by the zoning or code inspector. Mulches must be installed in a manner as to present a finished appearance. 
C.  Walls and fences. Walls shall be constructed of stone, brick or other artificial materials, while fences shall be constructed of wood or vinyl with the appearance of wood. Chainlink or other wire mesh fencing will be permitted only if covered with plant materials. 
D.  Paving materials. Paving materials shall be installed in a manner that will either contrast with or compliment the other landscape elements. 
(5)  Perimeter and buffer landscaping requirements. 
A.  General. In addition to greenbelts required under section 11a.08 the owner of a parking lot or a vehicular use area which abuts a public right-of-way shall install and maintain landscaping between such area and such right-of-way unless the parking lot or vehicular use area is visually screened by a building or structure or existing landscaping which meets the buffering requirements. 
B.  Landscape elements. Where an off-street parking lot or a vehicular use area in any of the zoning districts abuts a public right-of-way, screening shall be placed at all locations, excluding sidewalks and driveways, which are between any portion of the right-of-way and the parking lot or vehicular use area visible from the right-of-way as follows: 
1.  A strip of land at least five feet in width located between the abutting right-of-way and the parking or vehicular use area exposed to the abutting right-of-way. 
2.  One tree per 50 lineal feet, or fraction thereof, located between the abutting right-of-way and parking or vehicular use area. 
3.  A hedge, wall, berm, change of grade, or any combination of these landscape elements forming a continuous screen at least three feet in height. If a wall or fence is used, a minimum average of one shrub or vine per ten lineal feet of wall length shall be provided. 
4.  Grass or ground cover shall be planted and maintained on all portions of the required landscaped strip not occupied by other landscape material or existing vegetation. 
5.  In cases where the parking areas or vehicular use areas are 150 feet or more from the public right-of-way, and provided that such an area has trees and shrubs which serve to buffer the parking area or vehicular use area, buffering as required in this section may be reduced provided the intent of this section is carried out to the satisfaction of the zoning or code inspector. 
(6)  Interior landscaping requirements. 
A.  General. 
1.  Each separate interior landscaped area shall be adequately planted and maintained, and shall be located in such a manner as to divide and break up the expanse of paving, define parking areas, delineate vehicular circulation areas and separate them from parking areas of any off-street parking area. 
2.  The minimum landscape area permitted shall be 50 square feet. 
3.  Authorized landscaping material, excepting trees, shall be maintained not to exceed 21/2 feet in height, except the screening of refuse areas. 
4.  Two feet of said landscaped area may be part of the parking space required by article 13, section 13.05 of this ordinance. Wheel stops or curbing shall be installed to prevent vehicles from encroaching more than three feet by three feet into any interior landscaped area. 
5.  Garbage and refuse collection areas shall be screened from view from a public right-of-way and from any adjacent residential uses. The screening shall be of live landscape material such as, but not limited to, trees, shrubs, and hedges. The layout of the landscape screen shall in no way impede the pickup and collection operation. If site restriction and site layout prohibit the use of live landscape material, opaque fencing shall be used. 
B.  Commercial uses. Property containing commercial uses shall meet the following interior landscaping requirements: 
1.  There shall be one square foot of interior landscaping for each 15 square feet of parking space. Spaces abutting perimeter or buffer landscaping or greenbelts shall be excluded from computed interior landscaping requirements. 
2.  The total number of trees shall be at least one tree for each 150 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required interior landscape area. 
C.  Industrial uses. 
1.  There shall be one square foot of interior landscaping for each 22 square feet of parking space. Spaces abutting buffer landscaping or greenbelt shall be excluded from the interior landscaping requirements. 
2.  The total number of trees shall be at least one tree for each 200 square feet, or fraction thereof, of required interior landscaped area. 
(7)  Existing plant material. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the planning commission may adjust the application of the above standards to allow credit for such plant material if such an adjustment is in keeping with, and will preserve the intent of this section. 
A.  All existing plant materials must first be inspected by the zoning or code inspector to determine the health and desirability of such materials. 
B.  If such existing plant material is labeled "To Be Saved" on site plans, protective techniques, such as, but not limited to, fencing or boards placed at the dripline around the perimeter of the plant material, shall be installed. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any plant material intended to be saved. Other protective techniques may be used provided such techniques are approved by the zoning or code inspector. 
(8)  Landscape plan requirements. Landscape provisions of this section shall be shown on site plans required by this ordinance. The following shall be included: 
A.  A planting list for all proposed landscape materials showing caliper sizes, height of material, method of installation, botanical and common names, type and amount of mulch, ground cover and grasses. 
B.  Sections, elevations, plans and details of all landscape elements, such as earth mounds, retaining walls and planting details. 
C.  The proposed planting dates. 
D.  A statement of intent to install and maintain all such landscaped areas in accordance with the requirements of this section. 
E.  Other information and data as may be required by the planning commission. 
(9)  Notice of installation to zoning or code inspector. 
A.  Prior to the installation of plant materials required by this section, the owner or developer must notify the zoning or code inspector of the installation schedule and provide an opportunity for inspection. 
B.  If any plant material is diseased, damaged, dead or planted in such a way to injure or kill the plant, the zoning or code inspector will require immediate removal or correction. 
C.  Species of proposed plant materials may be altered pending notification and approval by the zoning or code inspector. 
(10)  Planting dates. 
A.  Planting dates recommended by the city are March 1 to May 15 for all materials; October 15 to December 15, weather permitting, for deciduous materials. 
B.  If plantings are done outside these dates, written approval must first be obtained from the zoning or code inspector. 
(11)  Inspection, review and enforcement. The requirements of this section shall be enforced by the zoning or code inspector, who shall review, approve, disapprove or require modifications to the proposed landscape plan. The zoning or code inspector shall inspect all work including existing plant material protection, installation, and maintenance. If the zoning or code inspector finds any existing conditions not as stated on the approved plans, he may refuse to approve further work until approval of a revised plan is obtained. 
(12)  Responsibility of landscaper. Any person installing landscape elements to meet requirements of this section shall be responsible for: 
A.  The approved plans made available for inspection at all times on the site to be landscaped. 
B.  The prevention of damage to any utilities or the interruption of utility services. 
C.  The prevention of damage or littering onto adjacent property or public streets, sidewalks, or other public thoroughfares with dirt, sediment, water, plant material or other miscellaneous debris which constitutes a public nuisance or hazard. All such debris shall be promptly removed. 
D.  In no case shall any trees, shrubs or hedges be planted in a way which will interfere with or cause damage to underground utility lines, public roadways or other public works. Species or trees whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways or other public works shall not be planted closer than 15 feet to such public works. 
E.  All plant materials installed will be disease-free and pest free and not of a species known to carry or be host to destructive pathogens or pests. 
(13)  Responsibility for compliance. The owner of property subject to the requirements of this section shall be responsible for installing and maintaining landscaping as specified in this section. Where an entire parcel subject to the requirements of this section is occupied by a person other than the owner, the occupant of the property shall also be responsible for installing and maintaining the landscaping. 
(14)  Penalty. Section 3.07 of this ordinance shall govern violations of this section with the following additions: 
A.  Notice. In case any person shall refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of this section, the city clerk shall serve, personally or by certified mail with return receipt requested, a copy of this section, together with a notice to said owner, possessor or occupier of land to correct the identified deficiencies in landscaping and/or maintenance, within a period of 15 days from and after service of said notice. 
B.  In case any person shall fail and neglect to comply with this chapter [section], the city superintendent shall have the right to enter upon said land and correct said deficiencies in landscaping or maintenance. The city superintendent shall keep an accurate account of the cost of so doing, and shall make a report in writing, signed by him, showing the date(s) of corrective measures taken. He shall turn such statement over to the city treasurer, and the cost thereof, in addition to an amount equal to 50 percent of the cost thereof to cover administrative and legal costs, shall be a lien on the property and added to the taxes assessed against the property as a special assessment, and collected the same as taxes. 
ARTICLE 12. - SIGN REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 755 , adopted April 11, 2016, amended Art. 12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. 12, §§ 12.01-12.17, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No 718, § 2, adopted March 23, 2009. 

Section 12.01. - Intent. 
(1)  It is the intent of this section to ensure the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; to maintain and enhance the esthetic environment; to improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign restrictions. This section is intended to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, a limited variety of signs in other zones, and other incidental signs. 
(2)  In the application of this ordinance, it is the intent to protect the public welfare and to enhance the appearance and economic value of the landscape by providing that signs: 
A.  Do not add to or create visual clutter; 
B.  Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public right-of-way; 
C.  Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of nearby property by their brightness, size, height, or movement; and 
D.  Are not detrimental to land or property values. 
(3)  A sign may be established or maintained in the city only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.02. - Administration. 
(1)  Site plan review. For new development subject to site plan review under the provisions of section 8.02, the final site plan shall include a comprehensive sign plan including ground, wall and directional sign locations and details. Any sign, other than directional signs, not included in the comprehensive sign plan at the time of final site plan approval shall be subject to planning commission approval. 
(2)  Permits required. Application for a permit to erect or replace a sign, or to change copy thereon, shall be made by the owner of the property, or his authorized agent, to the city zoning or code inspector, by submitting the required forms, fees, exhibits and information. Fees for sign permits shall be established by resolution of the city council. An application for a sign permit shall contain the following: 
A.  The applicant's name and address in full, and a complete description of his relationship to the property owner. 
B.  If applicant is other than the business owner, the signature of the business owner concurring in submittal of said application is required. 
C.  The address of the property. 
D.  An accurate survey drawing of the property showing location of all buildings and structures and their uses and location of the proposed sign. 
E.  A complete description and scale drawings of the sign, including all dimensions and the area in square feet. 
(3)  All signs shall be inspected by the city zoning or code inspector for conformance to this ordinance prior to placement on the site. Foundations shall be inspected by the building department on the site prior to pouring of the concrete for the sign support structure. 
(4)  A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six months after the date of the permit. 
(5)  Painting, repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural or size change is made, shall not require a sign permit. 
(6)  Signs for which a permit is required shall be inspected periodically by the zoning or code inspector for compliance with this ordinance and other laws of the city. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.03. - General conditions. 
(1)  Location. All signs must direct attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises or to a commodity, service, or entertainment primarily sold, offered, manufactured, processed, or fabricated thereon unless specified elsewhere in these regulations. 
(2)  Illumination. 
A.  No sign shall be illuminated by other than electrical means. 
B.  The light from illuminated signs shall be directed in a manner that will not interfere with vehicular traffic or with the enjoyment or use of adjacent properties, nor directly shine onto adjacent or abutting properties. Illuminated signs adjacent to residentially zoned or used property shall be designed and maintained such that illumination levels do not exceed 0.1 foot-candle along the adjacent property line. 
C.  No sign including all electronic message signs shall have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices which have a changing light intensity, brightness or color, or which are so constructed and operated as to create an appearance or illusion of writing, printing, or change of image except as permitted elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Movement showing the date, the time and the temperature exclusively may be permitted. 
D.  No exposed reflective type bulbs and no strobe lights or incandescent lamps shall be used on the exterior surface of any sign so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. 
E.  The illumination provisions above shall not apply to sign lighting systems owned or controlled by any public agency for the purpose of directing traffic. 
F.  Neon lighting is prohibited outside of the sign structure and shall not be permitted as accent lighting along a building wall or window. 
(3)  Prohibited signs. All signs not expressly permitted under this ordinance are prohibited in the city. Such prohibited signs include, but are not limited to, the following: 
A.  Beacons; 
B.  Pennants; 
C.  Portable signs; 
D.  Roof signs; 
E.  Inflatable signs and tethered balloons greater than 18 inches in diameter for commercial or advertising purposes; 
F.  Animated signs as defined in this ordinance. This provision is not intended to exclude those signs which give the time or temperature, provided no other animated messages are displayed; 
G.  Signs affixed to trees, rocks, shrubs or natural features, provided, signs denoting a site of historic significance may be allowed; 
H.  Signs which imitate traffic signals, traffic direction signs, or similar traffic control devices or signs which make use of words such as "Stop", "Look", "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic; 
I.  Permanent signs (other than those erected by a public agency) which are located within or overhang the public right-of-way or on public property unless specified elsewhere in these regulations; 
J.  Any strobe, flashing, or oscillating lights either from the interior or exterior of a building; 
K.  Moving signs. Except as otherwise provided in this section no sign or any portion thereof shall be permitted which moves or assumes any motion constituting a non-stationary or fixed condition except for the rotation of barber poles, and except currently licensed vehicles and trailers which have painted upon them in a permanent manner the name of the product which they deliver and/or the name and address of the owner; 
L.  Abandoned signs. Signs that advertise an activity, business, product or service no longer conducted or available on the premises on which the sign is located shall be prohibited; 
M.  Signs which emit audible sound, odor or visible matter, unless otherwise permitted; 
N.  Exterior string lights used to advertise a commercial premises; and 
O.  Any sign erected on a tree or utility pole except signs of any political subdivision of this state. 
(4)  Signs and activity permitted in all districts without a permit. 
A.  Incidental signs which are intended to direct the flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on private property. Incidental signs shall not have more than two sides back-to-back and shall not exceed the following requirements: 
Lot size/type of use Sign area allowed per site Height to top of sign feet Setbacks from property lines Setbacks from driveways Stand-alone 
business 2 square feet 4 feet 10 feet 15 feet Business Centers, 5 or less tenants 6 square feet 4 feet 10 feet 15 feet Business Centers, 6 or more tenants 8 square feet 6 feet 15 feet 15 feet Industrial lots 
< 1 acre 8 square feet 8 feet 10 feet 15 feet Industrial lots 
> 1 acre 10 square feet 8 feet 15 feet 15 feet 1 & 2 Family Residential Incidental signs not allowed  
Additional requirements: 
 Such signs may contain a business logo or business name of not more than one square foot and may be illuminated. 
 Only one incidental sign is allowed at a driveway entrance. 
 Incidental signs may not be changeable copy signs. 
B.  Signs erected for traffic safety purposes by public road agencies. 
C.  Federal, state, county, or local required signs on private property not to exceed six square feet. 
D.  Real estate signs subject to the provisions of this ordinance. 
E.  Changing of advertising copy or message on a theater marquee or similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy. 
F.  Painting, repainting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance and repair of a sign or any sign structure unless a structural change is made. 
G.  Integral signs, not to exceed a maximum area of six square feet. 
H.  Paper notices placed on kiosks as approved by the city. 
I.  Authorized signs of the state or a political subdivision of the state. 
J.  Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution, church or fraternal organization. Flags bearing the official seal or emblem of a company or corporation including related slogans, messages or graphics. Zone lots shall be limited to four of the above flags. Two additional flags may be permitted for any secondary two-way entrance serving the zone lot. Flag poles shall meet the minimum 15-foot setback required for all signs to adjacent property lines. When site plan review is required, the location of flag poles shall be indicated on the site plan. 
K.  Permanent signs on vending machines or ice containers indicating only the contents of such devices provided that such devices must be located within ten feet of the building. 
L.  Business signs containing information on credit cards, business affiliations, hours of operation, open/closed, etc. The combined area of all such signs shall not exceed four square feet and shall be included in the maximum window coverage calculation. 
M.  Banner signs installed by the city, intended to announce civic activities, promote general business interests, or otherwise convey public information. Such signs shall be attached top and bottom (or two sides) to permanent structural members on a post or building erected for another purpose. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.04. - Ground signs. 
(1)  General requirements. 
A.  Within all nonresidential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot. If the frontage of a zoning lot exceeds 400 linear feet two such ground signs may be permitted. One additional ground sign may be permitted at a secondary entrance if it is not located on the same street as the primary entrance. Sign size, number of signs, and location shall be determined during site plan review. Maximum sign area is provided in Table A found in the following pages. 
B.  Within all residential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted at the primary entrance for the purpose of identifying a subdivision, site condominium, multiple family development, or mobile home park. 
C.  Within all residential zoning districts, only one ground sign shall be permitted per zoning lot for the purpose of identifying a nonresidential special land use. One additional ground sign may be permitted at a secondary entrance if it is not located on the same street as the primary entrance. Size and location shall be determined during site plan review. Maximum area is provided in Table A below. 
D.  One freestanding identification sign stating the name of a business center and major tenants therein may be erected for a shopping center, office park, industrial park or other integrated group of stores, commercial buildings, office buildings or industrial buildings. The sign area shall not exceed one square foot per front foot of building or buildings for which it is erected; however, such signs shall not exceed 150 square feet in area. Such signs may be up to 20 feet in height. The size of such signs may be increased to 200 square feet in area if the maximum height is reduced to 15 feet and it does not obstruct views. If the lot fronts on two or more collector or arterial streets one such sign may be permitted for each frontage. 
E.  Within all PUD districts, the number and size and location of ground signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the city during PUD plan review. 
F.  Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance all ground signs shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from all road rights-of-way and shall be located no closer than 15 feet from the edge of the principal entrance driveway and all property lines. 
G.  The support structure for a ground sign shall not exceed 25 percent of the maximum permissible area of the sign measured by viewing the elevation of the sign perpendicular to the sign face, unless otherwise approved during the site plan review process. 
H.  Up to two incidental business signs (menu boards) shall be permitted for businesses with a drive-through component. Such signs shall not exceed 15 square feet in area per sign, per face and eight feet in height. 
I.  Electronic message board signs shall be permitted in all commercial zoning districts. An electronic message board sign shall be allowed as either a freestanding or wall-mounted sign. Such signs shall be allowed by permit subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The electronic display shall not be animated, flashing, or scrolling. 
2.  The frequency of message change shall be restricted to no more than once every 15 seconds. 
3.  The maximum area of an electronic message board shall be considered a part of a wall or freestanding sign and shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign area as outlined in Table A and Table B below. 
4.  The maximum height of an electronic message board shall conform to the standards of this ordinance. 
5.  Glare and lighting created by electronic message board signs shall be in accordance with section 7.09.2.C.2. Electronic message board signs shall not be permitted when facing a residentially zoned parcel. 
(2)  [Maximum height and area requirements.] Maximum height and area requirements for ground signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule. The maximum height and area for ground signs within business centers are pursuant to paragraph D. above: 
Table A-Ground Signs 
District Max. Height (ft.) Maximum Area (sq. ft.) Per Side Total R-1A 6 18 36 R-1B 6 18 36 R-1C 6 18 36 R-1 6 18 36 R-2 6 18 36 R-3A 6 18 36 R-3 6 18 36 RMH 6 18 36 PB 6 18 36 OS 8 32 64 C-1 8 25 50 C-2 8 * 32 64 C-3 8 * 32 64 C-4 8 * 32 64 I-1 6 * 32 64 I-2 6 * 32 64 I-4 6 * 32 64 SPA-1 8 * 32 64 D-1 8 25 50 D-2 8 * 32 64  
       *One additional foot in height may be permitted for each additional foot setback beyond the required front setback as noted in section 12.04 (1) F. In no case shall a sign exceed 18 feet in height regardless of setback. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14; Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 12.05. - Building signs. 
(1)  General requirements. 
A.  Within all nonresidential zoning districts, a combination of building signs may be established not to exceed the maximum sign area per Table B for each zoning lot (for a single business). Signs for multiple tenant shopping centers shall not exceed one square foot of sign area per one lineal foot of building frontage per tenant. 
B.  Within all PUD districts, the number and size of building signs shall be determined by the intended use of the premises, subject to the review and approval of the city, during PUD plan review. 
C.  One projecting sign may be permitted for each first-floor business within the D-1 Downtown core district and within the D-2 Downtown edge district. The projecting sign may be a maximum of eight square feet in area (each side) and shall be included in the total amount of signs permitted for the subject building. Changeable copy shall not be permitted as a part of projecting signs. Projecting signs must provide a clear distance of nine feet from the sidewalk or private drive or parking lot to the bottom edge of the sign. Projecting signs may extend over abutting sidewalk, but shall not extend over public or private roadways, or parking areas. Signs which extend into the road right-of-way shall require approval by the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and/or the city. The leading edge of a projecting sign shall not extend more than four feet from the face of the building that it is attached to. 
D.  Channel letter signs are considered to be wall signs that are mounted so that the face of the letters are parallel to the building wall. Mounting regulations for channel letter signs, from wall to outermost face, are as follows: 
1.  Channel letters with transformers mounted inside the letters shall not extend more than 16 inches from the building wall. 
2.  Channel letters with remote transformers shall not extend more than 12 inches from the building wall. 
3.  Channel letters mounted on a raceway shall not extend more than 16 inches from the building wall. 
4.  Channel letter signs must provide a clear distance of nine feet from the sidewalk to bottom edge of the sign, but shall not extend over public or private roadways, or parking lots. 
E.  Fuel pump/dispensing signs not to exceed two square feet in area per side. Due to potentially negative impacts to adjacent traffic and land uses, electronic fuel pump dispensing signs shall not be directly visible from adjacent public or private streets, or adjacent residentially used or zoned property. Any sound emitted from a fuel pump/dispensing sign shall not be audible from any adjacent property line. 
(2)  [Distance from wall.] A cabinet flat wall sign shall not exceed more than 12 inches from the building wall. Other wall signs shall not exceed more than eight inches from the wall. 
(3)  [Maximum area requirements.] Maximum area requirements for building signs shall be applied within each zoning district according to the following schedule: 
Table B-Building Signs 
District Area (s.f.) per One Foot of Building Frontage Maximum Area in s.f. PB .5 50 OS 1 100 C-1 1 100 C-2 1 100 C-3 1 100 C-4 1 100 I-1 1 100 I-2 1 100 I-4 1 100 SPA-1 1 100 D-1 1 100 D-2 1 100  
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14; Ord. No. 785 , 7-11-16) 
Section 12.06. - Outdoor advertising sign (off-site sign). 
    Outdoor advertising signs are permitted only in accordance with the following regulations: 
(1)  Outdoor advertising signs are permitted only on undeveloped and vacant unimproved lots in C-3, C-4, I-1, I-2, and I-4 districts, and shall be considered the principal use of such lots. Such signs shall not be placed on a lot with any other building thereon, and no structure shall be placed on a lot on which such sign is located. 
(2)  Where two or more outdoor advertising signs are located along the frontage of a street or highway, they shall not be less than 300 feet apart. A double-face (back to back) or a V-type structure where the interior angle of said "V" does not exceed 20 degrees shall be considered a single sign. 
(3)  The total surface area, facing in the same direction, of any outdoor advertising sign shall not exceed 300 square feet. Such signs may be single-face or double-face, but no such sign shall contain more than two faces, signs or panels. 
(4)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be more than 20 feet in height from ground level, provided, however, that the permitted height may be increased to a maximum of 40 feet by the zoning or code inspector, if it can be shown that excessive grades, building interference, bridge obstruction and similar conditions obstruct views of the sign. 
(5)  No outdoor advertising signs shall be erected on the roof of any building, nor have one sign above another sign. 
(6)  Such signs shall be setback a minimum 40 feet from any property line. 
(7)  No outdoor advertising sign shall be located within 500 feet of any residential district. No billboard may be erected within 500 feet of any park, playground, school, residential dwelling or church, or within 50 feet of any street. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.07. - Computations. 
    The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height: 
(1)  [Computation of area.] The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop of structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself. 
    Where a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the total area of the sign. A two-faced sign may include a "V" or "wing" type sign with the condition that the interior angle of the "V" not exceed 45 degrees to limit the visibility of the sign from a single viewing position. If the interior angle of the two-sided "V" type sign exceeds 45 degrees, the sign will be considered a single-sided sign and not a double sided sign for the purpose of calculating sign area. 
(2)  Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of: 
A.  Existing grade prior to construction; or 
B.  The newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding, or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases where the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the principal structure on the zoning lot, whichever is lower. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.08. - Temporary signs. 
    Temporary signs shall be permitted in accordance with the regulations herein: 
(1)  Permit required. Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance a permit shall be required to display any temporary sign described by these regulations. Such permit shall be issued by the city zoning or code inspector or designee and shall clearly specify the name, address and telephone number of the applicant as well as the title and dates of the event advertised and authorized location for placement of the sign. The permit number shall be clearly displayed on the sign. Permit fee, if any, is to be established by resolution of the city council. 
(2)  Authorization of exceptions. Any exceptions to these regulations require prior permission by the planning commission. 
(3)  Unilluminated on-site temporary. Real estate and development signs may be erected in accordance with the regulations of this ordinance: 
A.  Large tract residential development (more than two residential units). In all single-family or two family use areas, one sign for each public street advertising a recorded subdivision or development shall be permitted. Each sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area. Such a sign may indicate only that the property is for sale or for rent and the address or telephone number where the inquiry can be made. It shall have a maximum height of six feet and shall be set back at least 20 feet from any street unless attached to the house. Each sign shall be removed after the sale of 90 percent of all lots or units within said subdivision or development or within two years after date of erection, whichever occurs first. 
B.  Residential districts. One temporary real estate "For Sale," "For Rent" or "For Lease" sign located on the property and not exceeding eight suqare feet in area per side shall be permitted for each lot. If the lot or parcel has multiple frontages, one additional sign not exceeding eight square feet per side in area shall be permitted on the property on each frontage. Under no circumstance shall more than two such signs be permitted on a lot or parcel. Such sign(s) shall be removed within seven days following sale, rental or leasing. Maximum height of such signs shall be six feet. A permit is not required for this type of sign. 
C.  Commercial and/or industrial districts. One temporary real estate "For Sale," "For Rent" or "For Lease" sign located on the property and not exceeding 32 square feet in area per side shall be permitted for each lot. If the lot or parcel has multiple frontages, one additional sign not exceeding 32 square feet in area per side shall be permitted on the property on each frontage. Under no circumstance shall more than two such signs be permitted on a lot or parcel. Such sign(s) shall be removed within seven days following sale, rental or leasing. Maximum height of such signs shall be eight feet. A permit is not required for this type of sign. 
D.  Temporary portable real estate directional sign, not exceeding three square feet in area and four in number, saying "Open House" and/or showing a directional arrow and placed back of property lines outside the public right-of-way shall be permitted on approach routes to an open house, only for the day of the open house. The top of such signs shall not exceed three feet in height, nor may such signs be displayed for more than one day in any seven-day period. No such signs shall be placed on private property without the consent of the owner. A permit is not required for this type of sign. 
(4)  Political signs, subject to the following: 
A.  Signs advocating or opposing a candidate for public office or a position on an issue to be determined at the election, except as prohibited elsewhere in this ordinance, are permitted. 
Such signs must be removed within ten days following the election. Such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area per side in residential or professional business areas, or 16 square feet in area per side in all other areas. With a maximum four feet height to the top of the sign. 
B.  Political signs shall be permitted in the public right-of-way at the location of the voting place on the day of the election only. Such signs shall conform to state and federal election laws. Such signs shall not be placed in such positions as shall interfere with traffic sight lines. Such signs which do interfere with traffic sights shall be relocated on order of the city traffic engineer, or removed, if not so relocated as ordered. 
C.  Political messages on outdoor advertising signs are exempted from this section. 
D.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed so as to prohibit political signs, or other noncommercial advertising, on any sign on which commercial advertising is permitted. 
(5)  Other temporary signs which comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Casual sales signs (on or off-site) not to exceed six square feet per side. A permit is not required for this type of sign. Off-site casual sales signs are permitted with approval of the off-site property owner. 
B.  Institutional signs not to exceed 24 square feet on-site and 12 square feet off-site in area per side. Such signs shall be allowed no more than 14 days prior to the event or function when located "on-site" and must be removed within 48 hours after the event or function. If building mounted, these signs shall be flat wall signs and shall not project above the roof line. If ground-mounted, the top shall be no more than six feet above ground level. Such signs may be illuminated in accordance with this ordinance. Off-site signs for such events and functions are permitted when approved by the building and engineering department and may be allowed up to seven days prior to the event. Such "off-site" signs shall be removed within 48 hours after the event or function. The building and engineering department shall, as a part of approval, list the number, location and size of such off-site signs it is permitting. 
C.  Commercial activity signs not to exceed 20 square feet per side. Commercial activity signs shall include by definition banner signs. 
D.  Signs intended to be utilized until a permanent sign may be obtained and erected can be approved by the building and engineering department for a period not to exceed 60 days. Such signs shall not exceed sign area permitted within the appropriate zones. 
E.  Upon approval of a final site plan one nonilluminated freestanding sign listing persons or firms connected with construction work being performed may be permitted upon application to the building and engineering department provided such signs are located on the property under construction. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in area, a height of eight feet, and will be removed upon the completion of construction or after one year whichever comes first. 
F.  Signs six square feet per side in area or less and a maximum of four feet in height which list persons or firms connected with construction, maintenance, or service work being performed at the time, shall be permitted without permit. Such signs must be located on the property under consideration and must be removed upon completion of work on site. 
G.  Portable sidewalk signs may be allowed in the following circumstances: 
1.  Due to the unique nature of the D-1 Downtown core district portable sidewalk signs may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  The maximum area of a sidewalk sign is six square feet per side with no dimension greater than three feet. 
b.  The sign shall be located on the building side of the sidewalk in such a manner that a pedestrian travel area width of five feet is maintained between the sign and any tree grate or other street elements along the curb side of the sidewalk. 
c.  The sign shall not unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of adjacent property. 
d.  A sign permit is not required for each sidewalk sign displayed. 
e.  Sidewalk signs shall be removed after business hours. 
f.  Sidewalk signs within the road right-of-way shall require approval by the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) and/or the city. 
2.  For multi-tenant shopping centers portable sidewalk signs may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  The maximum area of a sidewalk sign is six square feet per side with no dimension greater than three feet. 
b.  The sign shall be located directly in front of the tenant space on the adjacent pedestrian walk. A pedestrian travel area of five feet must be maintained along the walkway. In no circumstances shall a portable sidewalk sign be located within a parking area or landscape area of the site. 
c.  The sign shall not unreasonably interfere with the view, access to, or use of adjacent tenants or adjacent property. 
d.  A sign permit is not required for each sidewalk sign displayed. 
e.  Sidewalk signs shall be removed after business hours. 
H.  Window signs which occupy 25 percent or less of the total window area may be permitted without a permit. Signs which occupy greater than 25 percent of the total window area shall be prohibited and considered a violation of this ordinance. 
I.  Balloons less than 18 inches in diameter and/or length are permitted to announce a community or commercial event subject to the following: 
1.  Balloons are to be displayed only at the location of the community or commercial event. 
2.  Balloon displays shall not obstruct visibility of vehicles or pedestrians and be maintained at a maximum height of six feet above ground level. 
J.  One "Help Wanted" sign not exceeding eight square feet in area and six feet in height may be placed on the property of the business seeking to hire employees. Such sign shall not require a permit, but shall be removed seven days after employee is hired. 
(6)  Placement and duration of temporary signs. Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance the placement and duration of temporary signs shall be regulated as follows: 
A.  No temporary sign shall be placed on public property or public rights-of-way unless it is advertising an event to be held on public property unless specified elsewhere in these regulations. 
B.  No temporary sign shall be placed on private property other than the location of the event unless permission is granted by the property owner. 
C.  All temporary signs shall be setback at least five feet from the back of the sidewalk, or 15 feet from the edge of the street when no sidewalk is present. Temporary signs must follow the clear vision requirements found in section 7.04 of the city zoning ordinance. 
D.  Duration of display. Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance temporary signs may be displayed up to seven consecutive days. Only one such sign shall be permitted in any 30-day period. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.09 - Signs in the public right-of-way. 
    No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following: 
(1)  Signs erected by or on behalf of a governmental or other public agency to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, and direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(2)  Projecting signs pursuant to the provisions of these regulations. 
(3)  Portable sidewalk signs pursuant to the provisions of these regulations. 
(4)  Banner signs pursuant to the provisions of these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.10. - Nonconforming existing signs. 
(1)  A nonconforming sign shall not: 
A.  Be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or so as to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign. 
B.  Be changed unless such change is in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, except words or symbols displayed on such sign may be changed. 
C.  Be relocated or replaced. 
D.  Be reestablished after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for 90 days or longer except for seasonal business. In the case of a seasonal business such activity, business or usage to which the sign relates shall have been discontinued for a period of 270 days. 
E.  Be reestablished after damage or destruction if the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 60 percent of the replacement cost as determined by the zoning or code inspector. 
(2)  On the happening of (1), A.-C. above, the sign shall be immediately brought into compliance with this ordinance with a new permit secured thereto, or removed. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall relieve the owner or user of the property on which a legal nonconforming sign is located from the provisions of this ordinance regarding safety, maintenance and repair of signs, provided, however, that any repainting, cleaning and other normal maintenance or repair of the sign or sign structure shall not modify the sign structure or copy in any way which makes it more nonconforming or the sign may lose its legal nonconforming status. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.11. - Authorized sign contractors. 
    Every person, before engaging or continuing in the business of erecting or repairing signs in the city, shall obtain an annual sign contractor license. To obtain said license the contractor shall first furnish the city a public liability insurance policy in the amount of $50,000.00 for injury to one person and $100,000.00 for injury to more than one person and property damage insurance in the amount of $25,000.00 for damage to property. Said license shall terminate upon the expiration of the insurance policy unless evidence of renewal is filed with the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.12. - Liability for damages. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall not be construed to relieve or limit in any way the responsibility or liability of any firm, person or corporation which erects or owns any sign for personal injury or property damage caused by the sign; nor shall the provisions of this ordinance be construed to impose upon the city, its officers or its employees any responsibility or liability by reason of the approval of any sign under the provisions of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.13. - Removal of signs. 
(1)  Except for legal nonconforming signs as defined by this article, if any sign, structural element or supporting framework is determined by the zoning or code inspector, or his or her designee, to be in violation of this article, a notice may be served on the owner of the premises on which said sign, structural element or supporting framework is located. The notice shall specify: 
A.  The reason(s) why the city official has determined that the sign, structural element or supporting framework is in violation of this article. 
B.  The time and place of a hearing before the city's planning commission. The owner(s) shall be given the opportunity to show cause at the hearing why the sign, structural element or supporting framework should not be removed, demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. 
(2)  The notice shall be in writing and shall be served either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner(s) address as shown on the city's tax assessment records. The notice shall be served upon the owner(s) at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
(3)  At the hearing required by subsection (2) above, the planning commission shall take testimony of the zoning or code inspector, the owner(s) of the premises, and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the planning commission shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the sign, structural element or supporting framework removed, demolished, otherwise made safe, or properly maintained. The planning commission's order shall specify what action the owner(s) shall take and set a date by which the owner(s) shall comply with the order. Failure to comply with the order shall be considered a municipal civil infraction. 
(4)  If the owner(s) fails to appear or neglects or refuses to comply with the order issued under this section, in addition to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation, the zoning or code inspector may take all necessary action to enforce the order, including employing the necessary labor and materials to perform any removal, demolition, abatement, repairs, maintenance or other required work to bring the sign, structural element or supporting framework into compliance with this article. All costs for the removal, demolition, abatement, repair, maintenance or other required work shall be the responsibility of the owner(s). 
(5)  Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever, in the opinion of the zoning or code inspector, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe sign, structural element or supporting framework, the zoning or code inspector may immediately take any action necessary to abate the danger caused by the unsafe sign, structural element or supporting framework. 
A.  Prior to the initiation of the emergency measures provided above, the zoning or code inspector shall, if possible, attempt to contact the owner of the premises on which said sign, structural element or supporting framework is located to provide the owner opportunity to immediately address the imminent danger. If the owner cannot be reached, or if the owner refuses to address or addresses in an unsatisfactory manner the danger caused by the unsafe sign, structural element or supporting framework, the zoning or code inspector may immediately proceed with emergency measures. 
B.  For the purposes of this subsection, the zoning or code inspector may employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as expeditiously as possible. 
C.  All costs for the abatement of the imminent danger caused by an unsafe sign, structural element or supporting framework pursuant to this subsection shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(6)  A sign shall be removed by the owner(s) of the premises upon which the sign is located within 30 days after the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner(s) fails to remove the sign, the city shall remove it in accordance with the provisions stated in sections 12.13(1) through 12.13(4) above. These removal provisions shall not apply where a subsequent owner or lessee conducts the same type of business and agrees to maintain the signs to advertise the type of business being conducted on the premises and provided the signs comply with the other provisions of this article. 
(7)  The actual cost, plus accrued interest at the rate of one percent per month from the date of the completion of the work, incurred by the city in its removal, demolition, abatement, repair, maintenance or other required work pursuant to this section shall be charged by invoice to the owner(s) of the premises on which the sign, structural element or supporting framework was located. 
A.  If payment is not received, the costs plus accrued interest shall be added to the next regular tax bill forwarded to the owner(s) by the city and such costs shall be due and payable at the time of payment of such tax bill. Additionally, the city treasurer may cause to be recorded a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred for the work and the date and premises on which said work was done. The recordation of such sworn statement shall constitute a lien on the premises, and shall remain in full force and effect for the amount due in principal and interest, plus costs of court, if any, for collection until final payment has been made. The costs and expenses shall be collected in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes, and, further, shall be subject to a delinquent penalty of one percent per month in the event it is not paid in full on or before the date the tax bill upon which said charge appears becomes delinquent. Sworn statements recorded in accordance with this section shall be prima facie evidence that all legal formalities have been complied with and that the work has been properly and satisfactorily done, and shall be full notice that the amount of the statement, plus interest, constitutes a charge against the premises designated or described in the statement and is due and collectible as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.14. - Construction specifications. 
    Compliance with building code. All signs shall comply with the appropriate detailed provisions of adopted city building codes relating to design, structural members and connections. Signs shall also comply with the provisions of the applicable electrical code and additional construction standards hereinafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.15. - Construction of signs, auxiliary specifications. 
(1)  Obstruction to exits. No sign shall be erected, constructed or maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape, required exit, window or door opening used as a means of egress. 
(2)  Obstruction to ventilation. No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will interfere with any opening required for ventilation, except that such signs may be erected in front of and may cover transom windows when not in violation of the provisions of the building or fire prevention codes. 
(3)  Clearance from high-voltage power lines. Signs shall be located in such a way that they maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all overhead electrical conductors in accordance with National Electrical Code specifications, depending on voltages concerned. However, in no case shall a sign be installed closer than 24 inches horizontally or vertically from any conductor or public utility guy wire. 
(4)  Drainage. The roofs of all marquees exceeding 40 square feet shall be properly guttered and connected with down spouts to storm sewers so that water will not drip or flow into public sidewalks or streets. 
(5)  Freestanding signs. All freestanding sign structures or poles shall be self-supporting structures erected on and permanently attached to concrete foundations. Such structures or poles shall be fabricated only from painted steel or such other materials as will meet adopted city building codes. 
(6)  Electric signs. All electric signs shall be approved and labeled as conforming to the standards of the United States Bureau of Standards, the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or other similar institutions of recognized standing. The full number of illuminating elements thereof shall be kept in satisfactory working condition or immediately repaired or replaced. Signs that are only partially illuminated shall meet all electrical requirements for that portion directly illuminated. All electric signs shall have a disconnecting switch located in accordance with the provisions of the safety code. 
(7)  Glass. When glass is used for sign letters or transparent panels it shall be at least double-strength thickness for sign areas up to and including 300 square inches. When glass is used for sign letters or transparent panels for sign areas in excess of 300 square inches at least one-quarter-inch wire glass shall be used and the maximum span between supports shall be four feet. 
(8)  Strength of parapet wall. A wall must be designed for and have sufficient strength to support any sign which is attached thereto. 
(9)  Supports and braces. Metal supports or braces shall be adequate for wind loading, as required in subparagraph A. following. Wire or cable supports shall have a safety factor of four. All metal, wire cable supports and braces and all bolts used to attach signs to bracket or brackets and signs to the supporting building or structures shall be of galvanized or of an equivalent material. There shall be no visible angle irons or unsightly supports. All such sign supports shall be an integral part of the sign. 
(10)  Wind loads. All signs, except those attached flat against the wall of a building, shall be constructed to withstand wind loads as follows: 
A.  For solid signs, 30 pounds per square feet on one face of the sign. 
B.  For skeleton signs, 36 pounds per square feet of the total face area of the letters and other sign surfaces, or ten pounds per square feet of the glass area of the sign as determined by the overall dimensions of the sign, whichever is greater. 
(11)  Sign anchoring. No sign shall be suspended by chains or other devices that will allow the sign to swing due to wind action. Signs shall be anchored to prevent any lateral movement that would cause wear on supporting members or connections. 
(12)  [Sign placement.] All signs shall be so placed as to not interfere with the visibility or effectiveness of any official traffic sign or signal; driver vision at any access point or intersection; or, pedestrian movement on any public sidewalk or safety path. 
(13)  [Obstruction.] No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to obstruct firefighting or prevent free access to any door, window or fire escape. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.16. - Violations. 
(1)  Any of the following shall be a violation of this ordinance: 
A.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way inconsistent with the terms of this ordinance or that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such sign or the zoning lot on which the sign is located; 
B.  To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such a permit; 
(2)  Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this ordinance shall be considered a separate violation. 
(3)  Unless specified elsewhere in this ordinance any signs placed within a road right-of-way (ROW) and on utility poles will be considered a violation of this ordinance and may be removed by the city at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
Section 12.17. - Enforcement. 
    Knowing and willful violation of the provisions of this ordinance shall be a municipal civil infraction. Enforcement of this ordinance may proceed through the municipal civil infraction process. Each day that such violation continues after receipt of written notice to remove a sign shall be deemed a separate offense. Violation of these regulations shall result in a revocation of the subject sign permit. 
(Ord. No. 755 , 4-7-14) 
ARTICLE 13. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Section 13.01. - Intent. 
    The intent of this section is to ensure the provision of off-street parking facilities that are sufficient in number, adequately sized and properly designed to meet the range of parking needs and demands that are associated with land uses now in place in the city or with land uses allowed by this ordinance. 
Section 13.02. - General provisions. 
(1)  Where required. In all zoning districts, off-street parking facilities for the storage and parking of self-propelled motor vehicles for the use of occupants, employees, and patrons of the buildings hereafter erected, altered, or extended after the effective date of this ordinance, shall be provided as herein prescribed. Such space shall be maintained and shall not be encroached upon so long as said main building or structure remains, unless an equivalent number of such spaces are provided elsewhere in conformance with this ordinance. 
(2)  Existing off-street parking at effective date of ordinance. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance which serves an existing building or use, shall not be reduced in size to less than that required under the terms of this ordinance. 
(3)  Required greenbelt and setbacks. Off-street parking, including maneuvering lanes, shall not be located within the required front greenbelt in accordance with section 7.02(6). Off-street parking shall be permitted within the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum five-foot setback is maintained between off-street parking and the side and rear lot lines of all adjoining properties. 
(4)  Parking duration. Except when land is used as storage space in connection with the business of a repair or service garage, a 24-hour time limit for parking in nonresidential off-street parking areas shall prevail, it being the purpose and intention of the foregoing that the requirement of maintaining vehicle storage or parking space is to provide for the public safety in keeping parked cars off the streets, but such requirement is not designed to or intended to provide, and it shall be unlawful to permit, the storage or prolonged parking on any such parking area in any such district wrecked or junked cars, or for creating a junk yard or a nuisance in such areas or for the purpose of selling cars. 
(5)  Units and methods of measurement. For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements, the following units of measurement shall apply: 
A.  Floor area. Where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of off-street parking spaces, said unit shall mean the gross floor area, except that floor area's within the principal building used for parking, incidental service and storage, housing of mechanical equipment, heating systems and similar uses need not be included. 
B.  Employees. For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based upon the maximum number of employees likely to be on the premises during the largest shift. 
C.  Places of assembly. In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews, or other similar seating facilities, each 24 inches of such shall be counted as one seat. In cases where a place of assembly has both fixed seats and open assembly area, requirements shall be computed separately for each type and added together. 
D.  Fractional requirements. When units or measurements determining number of required parking spaces result in requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall require one parking space. 
(6)  Location of parking. 
A.  One- and two-family dwellings. The off-street parking facilities required for one- and two-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the building they are intended to serve, but shall not be considered a parking lot under the provisions of this article. 
B.  Multiple-family residential. The off-street parking facilities for multiple-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot or plot of ground as the dwellings they are intended to serve, and shall consist of a parking lot as set forth in this article. In no event shall any parking space be located nearer than ten feet to any main building. 
C.  Other land uses. The off-street parking facilities required for all other uses shall be located on the lot or within 500 feet of the permitted uses requiring such off-street parking, such distance to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the nearest point of the parking facility to the building to be served. 
D.  Restriction on parking on private property. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to park any motor vehicle on any private property without the authorization of the owner or agent of such property. 
(7)  Motor vehicle storage. No motor vehicle shall be stored outside on any residential lot or in any residential district unless it shall be in operating condition, currently registered, and the registration plate attached to the rear of the vehicle, as required by MCL 257.225. No motor vehicle in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight shall be parked or stored on any residential lot or in any residential district except when making a delivery. Only one (1) commercial vehicle less than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight per lot may be parked or stored on any residential lot or on an adjacent city right of way. Recreational vehicles are not subject to the 10,000 pound gross vehicle weight limit if they comply with all other requirements for storage of recreational vehicles. Personal noncommercial vehicles in excess of 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight may be parked or stored on residential lots upon approval of the zoning or code inspector. 
(Ord. No. 674, § 1, 12-15-03; Ord. No. 701, § 2, 2-5-07) 
Section 13.03. - Off-street parking requirements. 
(1)  The amount of required off-street parking spaces for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in section 13.04. Parking requirements listed in section 13.04 shall not include off-street stacking spaces for drive-through facilities set forth in section 13.07. 
(2)  Similar uses and requirements. When a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements of off-street parking for a similar use shall apply as determined by the zoning official. 
(3)  Collective provisions. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses, provided such facilities collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the various individual uses computed separately in accordance with section 13.04 of this article. Uses that "share" parking should provide a "parking agreement" when required by the city. 
(4)  Flexibility in application. The city recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards set forth in section 13.04 may result in development with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space. 
The planning commission may permit deviations from the requirements of section 13.04 and may require more or allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. 
The planning commission may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the requirement of section 13.04 that bind such approval to the specific use in question. Where a deviation results in a reduction of parking, the planning commission may further impose conditions which ensure that adequate reserve area is set aside for future parking, if needed. 
_____
Section 13.04. - Table of off-street parking requirements. 
    The amount of required off-street parking space for new uses or buildings, additions thereto, and additions to existing buildings shall be determined in accordance with the following table: 
Use Required No. of Parking Spaces Per Each Unit of Measure as Follows: (1) Residential Uses. A. Single- or two-family dwelling 2 Per each dwelling unit B. Multiple-family dwelling 2 Per each dwelling, plus 1 Per each ten dwelling units C. Senior citizen housing and senior assisted living 1 
1 
1 Per each dwelling unit, plus 
Per each ten dwelling units 
Per each employee (2) Institutional Uses. A. Churches 1 Per each three seats based on maximum seating capacity in the main place of assembly therein. B. Private clubs and lodges 1 Per each three individual members allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by fire and/or building codes C. Hospitals 1 
1 
1 Per each four beds, plus 
Per staff doctor, plus 
Per each employee at peak shift D. Convalescent homes, homes for the aged, children's homes 1 
1 
1 Per each five beds, plus 
Per each staff doctor, plus 
Per each employee at peak shift E. High schools, trade schools, colleges and universities 1 
1 
1 Per each teacher, plus 
Per each ten students, plus 
Per each employee F. Elementary and middle schools 1 
1 
1 Per each teacher, plus 
Per each 25 students, plus 
Per each employee G. Child care center, or nursery schools 1 
1 Per each ten students, plus 
Per each employee H. Day care facilities (including group day care) 1 Per each employee and/or caregiver I. Stadiums, sports arenas, and auditoriums 1 Per each four seats based on maximum seating capacity J. Libraries and museums 1 Per each 500 sq. ft. of floor area (3) General Commercial Uses. A. Retail stores, except as otherwise described below specified herein 1 Per each 100 sq. ft. of floor area B. Supermarkets, drugstores, and other self-serve retail establishments 1 Per 150 sq. ft. of floor area C. Convenience stores and video stores 1 Per 100 sq. ft. of floor area D. Planned shopping center 1 
  
1 Per 100 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 15,000 sq. ft., plus 
Per 150 sq. ft. of floor area in excess of 15,000 sq. ft. E. Furniture, appliances, hardware, household equipment sales 1 
1 Per each 400 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 
Per each employee F. Motels and hotels 1 
1 Per each guest bedroom, plus 
Per employee, plus amount required for accessory uses, such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge G. Fast food restaurants 1 
1 Per each 125 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 
Per each employee H. Sit-down restaurants 1 
  
1 Per each three seats, based on maximum seating capacity, plus 
Per each employee I. Taverns and cocktail lounges 1 
  
  
1 Per each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by fire and/or building codes, plus 
Per each employee J. Garden stores, building material sales 1 Per each 800 sq. ft. of lot area used for said business provided for herein K. Movie theaters 1 
  
1 Per each four seats based on the maximum seating capacity, plus 
Per each employee L. Wholesale stores, machinery sales, and other similar uses 1 
1 Per each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 
Per each employee (4) Automotive uses. A. Auto sales 1 
  
1 
1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of showroom floor area, plus 
Per each employee, plus 
Per each service stall B. Automotive repair facilities 2 
1 
1 Per each service stall, plus 
Per each employee, plus 
Per each service vehicle C. Gasoline stations without convenience store 1 
2 
1 Per each pump unit, plus 
Per each service stall, plus 
Per each employee D. Gasoline stations with convenience store 1 
2 
1 
1 Per each pump unit (at unit), plus 
Per each service stall, plus 
Per each employee, plus 
Per each 100 sq. ft. of floor area devoted to retail sales and customer service E. Car washes (self-serve) 1 
1 
1 Per each wash stall, plus 
Per each vacuum station, plus 
Per each employee F. Car washes (automatic) 1 
  
1 
1 Per 200 sq. ft. of floor area of customer waiting and service areas, plus 
Per each vacuum station, plus 
Per each employee G. Collision or bump shops, and other similar uses 2 
1 Per each stall or service area, plus 
Per each employee (5) Office and Service Uses. A. Medical and dental office 1 Per each 150 sq. ft. of floor area B. Business and professional offices 1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of floor area C. Banks 1 Per each 200 sq. ft. of floor area D. Barber and beauty shops 1 
1 
1 Per each chair, plus 
Per employee, plus 
Per each five chairs (6) Recreational Uses. A. Bowling alleys 4 
1 Per bowling lane, plus 
Per employee, plus 
Amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge B. Private tennis, swim or golf clubs, or other similar uses 1 Per each two memberships, plus 
Amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge C. Golf course, open to the general public 5 
1 Per each hole, plus 
Per each employee, plus 
Amount required for accessory uses such as a restaurant or cocktail lounge (7) Industrial Uses. A. Industrial or manufacturing or establishments 1 
1 Per each employee, or 
Per each 800 sq. ft. of floor area (whichever is greater) B. Warehouses and storage buildings 1 
1 Per each employee, or 
Per each 2,000 sq. ft. of floor area (whichever is greater) C. Contractors office 1 Per each employee  
.....
Section 13.05. - Off-street parking lot design and construction. 
    The construction of any parking lot shall be in accordance with the requirements of the provisions of this ordinance and such construction shall be completed and approved by the zoning or code inspector before use of the property as a parking lot and before a certificate of occupancy is issued. Unless incorporated in a site plan prepared and approved in accordance with article 8, plans for the development of any parking lot must be submitted to the zoning or code inspector, prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet equals one inch and indicating existing and proposed grades, drainage, pipe sizes, parking of all dimensions, type of curbing, drive and aisle dimensions, lighting, adjacent main buildings, sidewalks, landscaping, surfacing and base materials to be used and the layout of the proposed parking lot per city standard specifications. 
(1)  All such parking lots, driveways, or loading areas required shall be hard-surfaced with asphalt, concrete or brick pavement, shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface water which might accumulate within or upon such area, and shall be completely constructed prior to a certificate of occupancy being issued. Drainage for parking lots shall conform to the standards set forth in section 7.12. 
(2)  All illumination for all such parking lots shall meet the standards set forth in section 7.09. 
(3)  Parking lot landscaping and buffering requirements shall meet the standards set forth in section 7.02 (5). 
(4)  Adequate designed ingress and egress to the parking lot, by means of limited and clearly defined drives, shall be provided for all vehicles. 
(5)  Where necessary to prevent encroaching upon pedestrian walkway or damaging required landscaping, wheel stops shall be provided. No portion of a parking space and/or maneuvering aisle shall obstruct or encroach upon a public sidewalk. 
_____ 
(6)  Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with the following minimum regulations: 
Maneuvering Lane Width Parking Pattern One-way Two-way Parking Space Width Parking Space Length 0-Parallel 12 ft. 20 ft. 9 ft. 25 ft. 30-53 12 ft. 20 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 54-74 15 ft. 24 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft. 75-90 15 ft. 24 ft. 9 ft. 20 ft.  
_____ 
(7)  Barrier-free parking. Off-street barrier-free parking facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the State of Michigan. Barrier-free parking shall be included in the total number of required parking spaces according to section 13.04. 
Section 13.06. - Off-street loading requirements. 
    On the same premises with every building or part thereof, erected and occupied for any uses involving the receipt or distribution of trucks and/or delivery vehicles, material or merchandise, adequate space for loading and unloading shall be provided in accordance with the following: 
(1)  Such loading and unloading space, unless completely and adequately provided for within a building, shall be an area ten feet by 50 feet, with 14-foot height clearance, and shall be provided according to the following schedule. 
Gross Floor Area of Building (sq ft) Required Loading and Unloading Spaces 0-2,000 None 2,000-20,000 One space 20,000-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 sq. ft. in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 100,000-500,000 Five spaces plus one space for each 40,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft. Over 500,000 15 spaces plus one space for each 80,000 sq. ft. in excess of 500,000 sq. ft.  
(2)  Required greenbelt, setbacks, and screening. 
A.  Off-street loading areas, including maneuvering lanes, shall not be located within the front greenbelt required in accordance with section 7.02(6) Off-street loading shall be permitted within the required side or rear yard setbacks, provided a minimum ten-foot setback is maintained between off-street loading and the abutting side and rear lot lines. 
B.  Off-street loading which abuts residentially zoned or used property shall be screened in accordance with section 7.02(4). 
(3)  Double count. Off-street loading space areas shall not be construed as, or counted toward, the supplying of area required as off-street parking space area. 
Section 13.07. - Off-street stacking space for drive-through facilities. 
    All businesses which provide drive-through facilities for serving customers within their automobile shall provide adequate off-street stacking space and lanes which meets the following requirements: 
(1)  Each stacking space shall be computed on the basis of ten feet in width and 20 feet in length. Each stacking lane shall be a minimum of 12 feet in width. 
(2)  Clear identification and delineation between the drive-through facility and parking lot shall be provided. Drive-through facilities shall be designed in a manner which promotes pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
(3)  For all drive-through facilities which have a single stacking lane, an escape lane shall be provided which allows other vehicles to pass those waiting to be serviced. 
(4)  The number of stacking spaces per service lane shall be provided for the following uses. When a use is not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street stacking space for the similar use shall apply. 
Use Stacking Spaces Per Service Lane Banks, including ATM's 4 Photo service 4 Dry-cleaning 4 Fast-food restaurants 6 Car washes (self-service)  Entry 3  Exit 1 Car washes (automatic)  Entry 6  Exit 2 Pharmacy 4  
Section 13.08. - Outdoor storage of recreational vehicles, utility trailers, and commercial trailers. 
    In all residential districts, not more than one recreational vehicle or utility trailer may be parked or stored per lot. For the purpose of these regulations a utility trailer that is used for transportation of a recreational vehicle shall be considered a single unit when the recreational vehicle is stored on or in the trailer. 
(1)  Storage or parking shall not be permitted on vacant lots or parcels, except as approved by the zoning or code inspector. 
(2)  Unless within a completely enclosed building, a recreational vehicle or utility trailer shall be parked or stored in one of the following manners: 
A.  Within the side or rear yard, but no closer than five feet from any side or rear lot line; or, 
B.  In those instances where the side or rear yard is not accessible or has insufficient clearance for the passage of a recreational vehicle, the zoning or code inspector may allow the parking or storage or a recreational vehicle or utility trailer in the front yard. In those instances where a recreational vehicle or utility trailer is to be parked or stored in a front yard, only the driveway portion of such yard shall be utilized and in no instance shall such recreational vehicle or utility trailer be parked or stored in a manner which obstructs pedestrian or vehicular visibility. If stored on the driveway, recreational vehicles or utility trailers must be not closer than ten feet to the sidewalk. 
(3)  No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes on the premises, except for occasional living purposes to accommodate visitors not to exceed a maximum period of two weeks per year. 
(4)  No recreational vehicle, utility trailer, or commercial trailer shall be stored on a public street or right-of-way or private road easement. 
(5)  A recreational vehicle or utility trailer stored outside shall be in a condition for the safe, effective, and legal performance of its intended function. 
(6)  An open top utility trailer may not be used for the storage of any material other than a recreational vehicle. 
(7)  Unless within a completely enclosed building, no commercial trailer shall be stored on any residential lot or in any residential district. 
(Ord. No. 701, § 3, 2-5-07) 
Section 13.09. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 736-1, § 8, adopted Dec. 17, 2012, repealed § 13.09, which pertained to central area parking and exemption and derived from Ord. No. 661, adopted June 16, 2003. 
ARTICLE 14. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT 

Section 14.01. - Intent. 
    The MDOT has jurisdiction within the highway's right-of-way, while the city has authority for land use and site plan decisions within individual parcels along the highway. The access management standards were created to help ensure a collaborative process between the MDOT and the city on access decisions along US-12 to implement the recommendations of the "US-12 Corridor Access Management Plan" and other adopted city plans such as the "Michigan Avenue Gateway Strategic Plan." 
Section 14.02. - Applicability. 
    The standards of this section shall apply to all lands with frontage along US-12 and along adjacent streets within 100 feet of the US-12 right-of-way. The standards herein apply in addition to, and simultaneously with, the other applicable regulations of the zoning ordinance. Permitted and special land uses on these lands shall be as regulated in the applicable zoning district (as designated on the zoning map), and shall meet the following additional provisions: 
(1)  The number of access points is the fewest needed to allow motorists reasonable access to the site. 
(2)  Access spacing from intersections and other driveways shall meet the US-12 access management standards and MDOT's guidelines. 
(3)  Provision has been made to share access with adjacent uses, either now or in the future, including any necessary written shared access and maintenance agreements to be recorded with the county. 
(4)  No building or structure, nor the enlargement of any building or structure, shall be erected unless the US-12 access management regulations are met and maintained in connection with such building, structure, or enlargement 
(5)  No land division or subdivision or site condominium project shall be approved unless compliance with the access spacing standards herein is demonstrated. 
(6)  Any change in use that requires a site plan review per article 8 shall identify the extent of compliance with the standards herein and shall submit information to the MDOT to determine if a new access permit is required. 
(7)  For building or parking lot expansions, or changes in use, the planning commission shall determine the extent of upgrades to bring the site into greater compliance with the access standards. In making its decision, the planning commission shall consider the existing and projected traffic conditions, any sight distance limitations, site topography or natural features, impacts on internal site circulation, and any recommendations from the MDOT. Required improvements may include removal or rearrangement or redesign of site access points. 
(8)  The standards herein were developed collaboratively between the city and MDOT. Where conflict occurs, the more restrictive standards shall apply. 
Section 14.03. - Additional submittal information. 
    In addition to the submittal information required for site plan review in article 8, the following shall be provided with any application for site plan or special land use review. The information listed in items (1)-(4) below shall be required with any request for a land division. 
(1)  Existing access points. Existing access points within 500 feet on either side of the US-12 frontage, and along both sides of any adjoining roads, shall be shown on the site plan, aerial photographs or on a plan sheet. 
(2)  The applicant shall submit evidence indicating that the city's and or MDOT's sight distance requirements are met. 
(3)  Dimensions between proposed and existing access points (and median cross-overs if applicable in the future). 
(4)  Where shared access is proposed or required, a shared access and maintenance agreement shall be submitted for approval. Once approved, this agreement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(5)  Dimensions shall be provided for driveways (width, radii, throat length, length of any deceleration lanes or tapers, pavement markings and signs) and all curb radii within the site. 
(6)  The site plan shall illustrate the route and dimensioned turning movements of any expected truck traffic, tankers, delivery vehicles, waste receptacle vehicles and similar vehicles. The plan should confirm that routing the vehicles will not disrupt operations at the access points nor impede maneuvering or parking within the site. 
(7)  Traffic impact study. A traffic impact study is a specialized study which assesses the effects that a particular development's traffic will have on the surrounding transportation network. A traffic impact study will vary in range and complexity depending on the type and size of the proposed development. Such a study will determine the potential need for transportation improvements due to the changes in projected traffic and traffic movements. Submittal of a traffic impact study may be required for any special land use that would be expected to generate 100 or more vehicle trips during any peak hour, or 1,000 or more vehicle trips daily, or where modifications from the generally applicable access spacing standards are requested. The traffic impact study shall be prepared by a firm or individual that is a member of the Institute of Transportation Engineers with demonstrated experience in production of such studies. The methodology and analysis of the study shall be in accordance with accepted principles as described in the handbook "Evaluating Traffic Impact Studies, a Recommended Practice for Michigan," developed by the MDOT and other Michigan transportation agencies. The city and or MDOT may require calculations or micro-scale modeling to illustrate future operations at the access points and nearby intersections and/or to evaluate various access alternatives. 
(8)  Review coordination. The applicant shall provide correspondence that the preliminary site plan has been submitted to the MDOT for their information and comment. Any correspondence from the MDOT on the general access design and geometrics (not approval) shall be considered during the preliminary and final site plan review processes. The city may request attendance at coordination meetings with representatives of the MDOT. Once a final site plan has been approved by the city, the applicant shall request an access permit from MDOT. The approval of a land division or site plan does not negate the responsibility of an applicant to subsequently secure access permits from the MDOT. 
Section 14.04. - Access management standards. 
    Access points (not including driveways that serve a single family home, duplex or essential service facility structure) shall meet the following standards. These standards are based on considerable research in Michigan and nationally, and were prepared concurrent with guidelines promoted by the MDOT. 
(1)  Each lot shall be permitted one access point. This access point may consist of an individual driveway, a shared access with an adjacent use, or access via a service drive or frontage road. As noted above, land divisions shall not be permitted that may prevent compliance with the access location standards. 
(2)  An additional driveway may be permitted by the planning commission upon finding the conditions A and B, or C and D, below exist. The additional driveway may be required to be along a side street or a shared access with an adjacent site. 
A.  The site has a frontage of over 660 feet and the spacing standards between access points listed below are met, and 
B.  The additional access will not prevent adjacent lands from complying with the access spacing standards when such lands develop or redevelop in the future. 
or 
C.  A traffic impact study, prepared in accordance with accepted practices as described in this chapter, demonstrates the site will generate over 300 trips in a peak hour or 3,000 trips daily, or 400 and 4,000 respectively if the site has access to a traffic signal, and 

Minimum Driveway Spacing Measurement 
D.  The traffic study demonstrates the additional driveway will provide improved conditions for the motoring public and will not create negative impacts on through traffic flow. 
(3)  Access points shall provide the following spacing from other access points along the same side of the public street (measured from centerline to centerline as shown on the figure), based on the posted speed limit along the public street segment. Required spacing along US-12 is greater than other roadways to acknowledge MDOT access guidelines and that their primary function is to accommodate through traffic while the function of other roads is more balanced with access to properties. 

Minimum Offset Spacing 
Posted Speed Limit 
(m.p.h.) Along U.S. 12* 
(feet) Intersecting Streets 
(feet) *35 or less 245 150 40 300 185 45 350 230 50 455 275 55 455 350  
*  Unless greater spacing is required by MDOT or required to meet other standards herein. 
(4)  Where the subject site adjoins land that may be developed or redeveloped in the future, including adjacent lands or potential outlots, the access shall be located to ensure the adjacent site(s) can also meet the access location standards in the future. 
(5)  Access points along sections of US-12 with an existing or planned median shall be located in consideration of existing or approved median crossovers. A sufficient length for weaving across travel lanes and storage within the median shall be provided, consistent with MDOT published standards. The city supports MDOT policies to limit the number of median crossovers to maintain traffic flow and reduce the potential for accidents. In some cases, existing median cuts may need to be redesigned to meet current design standards. 
(6)  Access points shall be aligned with driveways on the opposite side of the street or offset a minimum of 250 feet, centerline to centerline. The planning commission may reduce this to not less than 150 feet where each of the opposing access point generates less than 50 trips (inbound and outbound) during the peak hour of the public street or where sight distance limitations exist. 

Driveway Spacing from Intersections 
(7)  Minimum spacing of access points from intersections shall be in accordance with the table below (measured from pavement edge to pavement edge as shown on the figure): 
Signalized locations:* Along U.S. 12 300 feet Along other public streets 200 feet Unsignalized locations: Along U.S. 12 300 feet Intersections with U.S. 12 300 feet Other intersections 150 feet  
*  Spacing shown for signalized intersections shall also be applied at intersections where MDOT indicates spacing and approach volumes may warrant a signal in the future. 
(8)  Where direct access consistent with the various standards above cannot be achieved, access should be via a shared driveway or service drive, and or side street. In particular, the planning commission may require development of frontage roads, or rear service drives where such facilities can provide access to signalized locations, where service drives may minimize the number of driveways, and as a means to ensure that traffic is able to more efficiently and safely ingress and egress. 
Frontage roads or service drives shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
Frontage Road Minimum Setbacks 
A.  Service drives and frontage roads shall be set back as far as reasonably possible from the intersection of the access driveway with the public street. A minimum of 25 feet shall be maintained between the public street right-of-way and the pavement of the frontage road, with a minimum 60 feet of throat depth provided at the access point. 
B.  The alignment of the service drive can be refined to meet the needs of the site and anticipated traffic conditions, provided the resulting terminus allows the drive to be extended through the adjacent site(s). This may require use of aerial photographs, property line maps, topographic information and other supporting documentation. 

Rear Service Drive Design 
C.  In cases where a shared access facility is recommended, but is not yet available, temporary direct access may be permitted, provided the plan is designed to accommodate the future service drive, and a written agreement is submitted that the temporary access will be removed by the applicant, when the alternative access system becomes available. This may require posting of a financial performance guarantee. 
(9)  Driveways shall be located to provide safe sight distance, or determined by the applicable road agency. 
(10)  No driveway shall interfere with municipal facilities such as street light or traffic signal poles, signs, fire hydrants, cross walks, bus loading zones, utility poles, fire alarm supports, drainage structures, or other necessary street structures. The zoning administrator is authorized to order and effect the removal or reconstruction of any driveway which is constructed in conflict with street structures. The cost of reconstructing or relocating such driveways shall be at the expense of the abutting property owner. 
Section 14.05. - Application to existing sites and modification of standards. 
    Modifications by planning commission. Given the variation in existing physical conditions along the corridor, modifications to the spacing and other standards above may be permitted by the planning commission as part of the site plan review process upon a finding that the following conditions apply: 
(1)  Practical difficulties exist on the site that make compliance unreasonable (sight distance limitations, topography, wetlands, drain or water body, woodlands that will be preserved, existing development, existing nonconforming width, unique site configuration or shape), or existing off-site access points make it impractical to fully comply with the standards. 
(2)  The use involves an access improvement to an existing site or a new use that will not generate any more traffic than the previous use or there is only one access point that is not being changed. 
(3)  The proposed modification is consistent with the general intent of the preceding standards, the recommendations of the US-12 Corridor Access Management Plan in the city's Master Plan and/or the Michigan Avenue Corridor Preservation Plan, MDOT guidelines, and both city and MDOT staff support the proposed access design. 
(4)  If deemed necessary by the planning commission, a traffic study by a qualified traffic engineer has been provided that certifies the modification will improve traffic operations and safety along US-12, and is not simply for convenience of the development. Roadway or intersection control or driveway design change improvements will be made to improve overall traffic operations prior to the project completion or occupancy of the first building. 
(5)  Indirect or shared access has been provided to the extent practical. 
The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the zoning board of appeals. In consideration of this variance, the board shall also apply the standards above in addition to the other variance. 
ARTICLE 15. - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS 

Section 15.01. - Intent. 
    Certain existing lots, structures and uses of lots and structures were lawful before this ordinance was adopted, but have become nonconformities under the terms of this ordinance and its amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit such nonconformities to remain until they are discontinued or removed, but not to encourage their survival or, where discontinuance or removal is not feasible, to gradually upgrade such nonconformities to conforming status. Nonconformities shall not be enlarged, expanded, or extended, except as provided herein, and shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures and uses of lots and structures which are prohibited. Nonconformities are declared by this ordinance to be incompatible with the structures and uses permitted in the various districts. 
Section 15.02. - Nonconforming lots. 
    In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this ordinance, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district; provided that required yard setbacks and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of the lots shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. 
    If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width and area as established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered to be an undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no portion of said parcel or lot shall be used or sold which does not meet lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the parcel or lot be made which leaves remaining any parcel or lot with width or area below the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
Section 15.03. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of the ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance. 
(3)  If such nonconforming use of land ceases operation for any reason for a period of more than 365 days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by the ordinance for the district in which such land is located. 
Section 15.04. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or other characteristics of the structure or its setbacks, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of replacement value at the time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of the ordinance. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
Section 15.05. - Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this ordinance, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject of the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a building which was manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter conform to the regulations pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. Section 15.04 of this article shall apply to any nonconformity relating to the structure(s). 
(4)  If such nonconforming use of land and structures ceases operation with the intent of abandonment for a period of more than six months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this ordinance pertaining to the uses permitted in the district in which such land is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this provision only so long as seasonal uses shall continue. 
(5)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and premises in combination, removal, or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(6)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of structure, or structure and premises, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. Where a nonconforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less restricted classification. 
Section 15.06. - Repairs and maintenance. 
    On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of non-bearing walls, fixtures, wiring, or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the replacement value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased. 
Section 15.07. - Uses allowed as conditional uses, not nonconforming uses. 
    Any use for which conditional approval is permitted as provided in this ordinance shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
Section 15.08. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    There may be a change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures, and premises provided there is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 16. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 16.01. - Authority. 
    There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals, the membership, powers, duties of which are prescribed in P.A. 110 of 2006, As Amended (Being The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, M.C.L. 125.3101 et seq.). The zoning board of appeals in addition to the general powers and duties conferred upon it, by said Act, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, shall interpret and determine the application of the regulations established under this Ordinance in harmony with their purpose and intent as hereinafter set forth. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 2, 5-4-09) 
Section 16.02. - Creation and membership. 
    A board of appeals is hereby established, and shall consist of not less than five members and two alternate members to be appointed by the legislative body, in accordance with P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended. Vacancies shall be filled by resolution of the council for any expired term or the vacant term. One member of the board shall be a member of the planning commission and one shall be a member of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 670, § 1, 8-25-03; Ord. No. 719, § 3, 5-4-09) 
Section 16.03. - Meetings. 
(1)  All decisions of the board shall be made at a meeting open to the public. All deliberations of the board constituting a quorum of its members shall take place at a meeting open to the public except as provided in compliance with the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of 1976 as amended. 
(2)  A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for purposes of transacting the business of the board and the Open Meetings Act, Act 267 of 1976, as amended. Each member of the board shall have one vote. 
(3)  Regular meetings of the board shall be called as needed in response to receipt of a notice of appeal, so long as the meeting is scheduled within 20 days of the notice of appeal. The meeting can be called by the zoning or code inspector, the chair of the appeals board, or, in his or her absence, the vice-chair. Public notice of the date, time, and place of a public meeting of the board shall be given in the manner required by Act 267 of 1976, as amended. 
(4)  The business of the board of appeals shall be conducted in accordance with its adopted bylaws. 
(5)  The chair, or in his or her absence, vice-chair may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
Section 16.04. - Powers and duties. 
(1)  General. The board has the power to act on matters as provided in this ordinance and P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended. The specific powers of the board are enumerated in the following sections of this article. 
(2)  Voting. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse an order, requirements, decision, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant a matter upon which the board is required to pass under an ordinance, or to effect a variation in an ordinance except that a concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in an ordinance. 
A member shall be disqualified from a vote in which there is a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disclose a conflict of interest and be disqualified from a vote shall constitute misconduct in office. 
(3)  Administrative review. The board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, or refusal made by the zoning official or other duly authorized enforcing agent, in enforcing any provision of this ordinance. 
(4)  Interpretation. 
A.  The board shall hear and decide requests for interpretation of this ordinance or the zoning map taking into consideration the intent and purpose of the ordinance and the master plan. 
B.  A record shall be kept by the board of all decisions for interpretation of this ordinance or zoning map and land uses which are approved under the terms of this section. The board shall request the planning commission to review any ordinance amendment it deems necessary. 
(5)  Variances. Upon an appeal, the board is authorized to grant a variance from the strict provisions of this article, whereby extraordinary or exceptional conditions of such property, the strict application of the regulations enacted would result in peculiar or exceptional practical difficulties to, or exceptional undue hardship upon the owner of such property provided such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without substantially impairing the intent and purpose of this chapter. In granting a variance the board may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character and other features of the proposed uses as it may deem reasonable in furtherance of the purpose of this chapter. Further, in granting a variance, the board shall state the grounds upon which it justifies the granting of a variance as outlined below. When granting any variance, the board must ensure that the spirit of the ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
A.  Use variance. The applicant must present evidence to show that if the Zoning Ordinance is applied strictly, unnecessary hardship to the applicant will result, and that all four of the following requirements are met: 
1.  That the property could not be reasonably used for the purposes permitted in that zone; 
2.  That the appeal results from unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not from general neighborhood conditions; 
3.  That the use requested by the variance would not alter the essential character of the area; and 
4.  That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
B.  Nonuse variances. The applicant must present evidence to show that if the zoning ordinance is applied strictly, practical difficulties will result to the applicant and: 
1.  That the ordinance restrictions unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose; 
2.  That the variance would do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district, and a lesser relaxation than that requested would not give substantial relief to the owner of the property or be more consistent with justice to other property owners; 
3.  That the plight of the landowner is due to the unique circumstances of the property; and 
4.  That the alleged hardship has not been created by any person presently having an interest in the property. 
(Ord. No. 719, §§ 4, 5, 5-4-09) 
Section 16.05. - Procedure for appeal. 
(1)  An applicant requesting any action by the board shall commence such request by filing a notice of appeal, on the form supplied by the city, accompanied by such appeal fee as determined by the city council, and all plans, studies and any other information and data as applicable, all of which shall be made a part of the record. 
(2)  Every appeal from a determination of the zoning official or other duly authorized agent shall be made by the applicant within 21 days of the date of the order issuance or refusal to issue permit, requirement, or refusal. 
(3)  The board shall fix a time for a hearing on the appeal, and shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing. Notice of all public hearings conducted by the board shall appear in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 15 days prior to the hearing where the appeal pertains to a specific parcel(s) of property. Notice of the public hearings shall be sent to the persons to whom real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants of single and two family dwellings within 300 feet, the notice to be delivered personally or by mail addressed to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the term occupant may be used. 
(4)  Any person may appear in person at the public hearing, or be represented by an agent or attorney, and present any evidence in support of their appeal. The board of appeals shall have the power to require the attendance of witness, administer oaths, compel testimony, and otherwise cause the production of books, papers, files, and other evidence pertaining to matters properly coming before the board of appeals. 
(5)  The board shall not decide an appeal until after a public hearing. 
(6)  The board may reverse, affirm, vary, or modify, any order, requirement, or determination, as to which it has the power to consider, and have all the powers of the officer or body from whom the appeal was taken and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(7)  The board may impose conditions with any decision. Such conditions imposed shall meet all of the following requirements: 
A.  Be designed to protect natural resources, public health, safety, and welfare and the social and economic well being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
B.  Be related to the valid exercise of the police power, and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
C.  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning ordinance, be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards. Violations of any of these conditions shall be deemed a violation of this ordinance, enforceable as such, and/or may be grounds for revocation or reversal of such decision. 
(8)  All decisions of the board shall be in writing and so far as it is practicable, in the form of a general statement or resolution reciting the conditions, facts, and findings of the board. The applicant shall be advised of the decision after the public hearing unless the board moves for a continuation of such hearing. 
(9)  Any decision of the board favorable to the applicant shall remain valid only as long as the information or data relating thereto are found to be correct, and the conditions upon which the decision was based are maintained. 
(10)  The board may reconsider an earlier decision, if, in the opinion of the board, circumstances justify taking such action. 
(11)  No order of the board of appeals permitting the erection or alteration of a building shall be valid for a period of longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(12)  No order of the board of appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period, and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with such permit. 
(13)  Any person or persons, or any board or department of the city having an interest affected by a decision of the board shall have the right to appeal to the circuit court on questions of law and fact. Such appeal must be taken within 30 days after the zoning board of appeals issues its decision in writing and signed by the chairperson, or within 21 days after the zoning board of appeals approves the minutes of its decision. A request for reconsideration under subsection (10) above shall not toll the time for taking such appeal. In the event a request for reconsideration is granted, the time period for appeal shall commence from the approval of the minutes of the meeting where the appeal was reconsidered. In any event, only one request for reconsideration on each appeal shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 719, §§ 6, 7, 5-4-09) 
ARTICLE 17. - AMENDMENTS 

Section 17.01. - Procedure. 
(1)  The city council may, from time to time, on its own motion, on recommendation of the planning commission, or on petition, after public notice, hearing and report by the planning commission as provided by law, amend, supplement or change the boundaries or regulations herein or subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established in P.A. 110 of 2006, as amended. 
(2)  At least one public hearing shall be held by the planning commission, and a report made thereon, before the city council shall adopt any amendment to this ordinance or the maps adopted thereunder. Not less than 15 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall first be published in a paper of general circulation in the city, and not less than 15 days' notice of the time and place of the public hearing shall first be given by mail to each public utility company and to each railroad company owning or operating any public utility or railroad within the districts or zones affected that registers its name and mailing address with the city clerk for the purpose of receiving such notice. An affidavit of mailing shall be maintained. A hearing shall be granted a person interested at the time and place specified on the notice. A summary of the comments submitted at the public hearing shall be transmitted with the report of the planning commission to the city council. The city council may hold additional public hearings if it considers it necessary. 
(3)  After receipt of the planning commission's report, the city council may adopt the proposed amendment, with or without amendments, or refer the proposed amendment again to the planning commission for a further report. 
(4)  If an individual property or up to ten adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, notice of the proposed rezoning and hearing shall be given by mail to the owners of the property in question and to all persons to whom real property is assessed, and to the occupants of all structures, within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question, at least 15 days before the hearing. For any group of adjacent properties numbering 11 or more proposed for rezoning, the modifications specified above are not required pursuant to section 202(3) of PA 110 of 2006. 
(5)  Upon presentation of a protest petition meeting the requirements hereinafter set forth, an amendment to a zoning ordinance which is the object of the petition shall be passed only by a two-thirds vote of the city council. The protest petition shall be presented to the city council before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one of the following: 
A.  The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of the land included in the proposed change. 
B.  The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included in the proposed change. 
C.  Publicly owned land shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent land area requirements. 
(6)  Following the adoption of a zoning ordinance and subsequent amendments by the city council, one notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within 15 days after adoption. The notice shall include the following information: 
A.  In the case of a newly adopted zoning ordinance the following statement; "A Zoning Ordinance regulating the development and use of land has been adopted by the City Council of the City of Saline. 
B.  In the case of an amendment to an existing ordinance, either a summary of the regulatory effect of the amendment including the geographic area affected, or the text of the amendment. 
C.  The effective date of the ordinance. 
D.  The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be purchased or inspected. The filing and publication requirements in this section relating to city zoning ordinances supersede charter provisions relating to the filing and publication of city ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 719, § 8, 5-4-09) 
ARTICLE 18. - REPEAL OF EXISTING ZONING ORDINANCE 

Section 18.01. - Repeal. 
    The existing zoning regulations of the city being the "Appendix A - Zoning" comprised of Articles I thru XXVI are hereby repealed as of the date this ordinance becomes effective. The adoption of this ordinance, however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing violation of the aforementioned ordinance, as amended, if the use so in violation is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance. This section shall not constitute the repeal of article XVII, board of appeals, of appendix A, zoning, of the Saline City Code until the effective date of the new alternative board of appeals established by said Ordinance No. 661. 
(Ord. No. 669, § 3, 7-21-03) 
Section 18.02. - Savings. 
    All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the time this ordinance takes effect are saved and may be consummated according to the law in force when they are commenced. 
Section 18.03. - Effective date. 
    The city clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance and cause the same to be published as required by law; and this ordinance shall take full force and effect ten days after the date of publication. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1968 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1968 Code, as updated through September 28, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the 1968 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances, see the table immediately following this table. 
1968 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-9 1-1-1-9 2-1, 2-2 2-26, 2-27 2-3 2-1 2-4 2-51 2-5, 2-6 2-101, 2-102 2-7 2-52 2-7.1 2-53 2-8 2-176 2-11-2-16 2-66-2-71 2-16.1 2-72 2-17 2-86 2-20 2-87 2-22-2-24 2-88-2-90 2-35, 2-36 2-116, 2-117 2-47-2-55 2-131-2-139 2-60-2-62 2-151-2-153 2-71-2-74 2-186-2-189 2-78, 2-79 2-201, 2-202 2-80-2-94 2-216-2-230 2-100-2-103 2-241-2-244 2-108-2-112 2-256-2-260 2-121-2-125 2-271-2-275 21/2-11-21/2-20 34-26-34-35 3-1-3-9 6-1-6-9 3-9.1 6-10 3-10-3-14 6-11-6-15 4-11-4-16 10-26-10-31 5-1-5-5 14-1-14-5 5-16-5-27 14-31-14-42 5-29-5-31 14-43-14-45 6-1-6-15 18-1-18-15 6-25, 6-26 18-37, 18-38 6-28-6-37 18-39-18-48 6-38, 6-39 18-71, 18-72 6-94 18-96 6-95 94-83 6-97 94-14 6-144 18-116 6-151, 6-152 18-136, 18-137 7-1-7-17 26-1-26-17 71/4-1-71/4-18 30-1-30-18 71/2-1-71/2-5 46-26-46-30 71/2-11-71/2-15 46-41-46-45 71/2-21 46-56 71/2-28-71/2-30 46-66-46-68 8-1-8-4 42-1-42-4 8-15-8-17 42-31-42-33 9-13 70-2 9-14 70-1 9-15 70-3 9-16-9-19 70-5-70-8 9-20(b) 74-237 9-20(c) 70-9 9-21 70-4 10-1-10-5 54-31-54-35 10-6-10-8 54-1-54-3 12-1-12-12 62-26-62-37 13-1, 13-2 22-26 13-3-13-17 22-27-22-41 13-28-13-33 22-42 14-1-14-19 66-26-66-44 14-30-14-36 66-66-66-72 14-47-14-50 66-96-66-99 14-61-14-66 66-121-66-126 15-1-15-4 50-1-50-4 15-14-15-22 50-31-50-39 15-23-15-25 50-39-50-41 151/2-1(a) 38-26 151/2-1(b) 38-28 151/2-2 38-27 151/2-3-151/2-5 38-29-38-31 151/2-6-151/2-8 38-32-38-34 16-1 74-1 16-11-16-14 74-26-74-29 16-25-16-28 74-51-74-54 16-34-16-39 74-66-74-71 16-45-16-52 74-81-74-88 16-58-16-64 74-101-74-107 16-70-16-73 74-121-74-124 16-80-16-84 74-136-74-140 16-90-16-97 74-151-74-158 16-111-16-120 74-181-74-190 16-131-16-136 74-211-74-216 16-141-16-146 74-236-74-241 17-1 78-1 17-2 78-3 17-3 78-2 17-4-17-8 78-4-78-8 17-19, 17-20 78-31, 78-32 17-26-17-28 78-33-78-35 17-31-17-34 78-36-78-39 17-34.1 78-40 17-35-17-38 78-41-78-44 18-1-18-6 82-2-82-7 19-1-19-4 86-26-86-29 19-16-19-36 86-51-86-71 20-1-20-22 90-1-90-22 20-33-20-36 90-46-90-49 21-11-21-21 98-26-98-36 22-11-22-16 94-1-94-6 22-18-22-22 94-7-94-11 22-29, 22-30 94-12, 94-13 22-40 94-37 22-41 94-36 22-42, 22-43 94-38, 94-39 22-43.1 94-40 22-44 94-41 22-45(a)-22-45(f) 94-81-94-86 22-46-22-56 94-96-94-106 22-57(a)-22-57(g) 94-51-94-57 22-58-22-67 94-58-94-67 22-82-22-86 94-136-94-140 23-1-23-4 90-71-90-74  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances which are included herein. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 100  7- 6-31 1 2-86-2-90 2 2-116, 2-117 3 2-131, 2-132 4 2-151-2-153 5 50-1-50-3 6 42-1-42-4 8 2-102 9 2-1 101  8- 6-34 7 94-12 102 1938 1 74-182 2 74-183-74-185 4 74-186-74-189 5 74-190 8 74-181 107  9-20-39 1-7 22-42 111 1942 1, 2 26-2, 26-3 116  4-12-48 1-5 14-1-14-5 117 1948 1 98-27-98-30 2 98-26 3 98-31, 98-32 5-8 98-33-98-36 128  6- 2-53 1 86-51 2 86-52-86-54 3 86-55-86-57 4 86-58-86-60 5-13 86-61-86-69 15, 16 86-70, 86-71 128-1  1- 4-54 86-58-86-60 130  2- 1-54 2-5 90-46-90-49 131  8-30-54 10 94-1-94-3 94-5, 94-6 12 94-7 137  9-19-56 1 90-1 2 90-2, 90-3 3 90-4-90-7 4-8 90-8-90-12 9 90-13, 90-14 10-12 90-15-90-17 13 90-19-90-21 14 90-22 15, 16 90-18 139  9-19-57 2, 3 2-26, 2-27 142  6- 3-57 1-4 90-71-90-74 143  7- 1-57 1 14-31 2 14-32, 14-33 3, 4 14-34, 14-35 5 14-36-14-40 6 14-41 7 14-42, 14-43 8, 9 14-44, 14-45 145  3- 3-58 1 86-58-86-60 150  5-26-60 1 74-54 74-66-74-71 2 74-81-74-88 3 74-101-74-107 4 74-121-74-124 5 74-136-74-140 8 74-52, 74-53 151 12- 5-60 1 6-11-6-13 153  6-19-61 1 66-26-66-31 2 66-32-66-34 3 66-35-66-37 4 66-66 66-68 66-71, 66-72 5 66-67 66-69 6 66-70 7 66-96, 66-97 8 66-99 9 66-38-66-44 66-98 11, 12 66-121, 66-122 13 66-123-66-126 156  2-19-62 2 98-31 98-33 159  3-19-62 1-4 94-1-94-4 160  4-16-62 1 22-27 2, 3 22-26 4 22-28, 22-29 5 22-30-22-32 6 22-33 7-9 22-35-22-37 10 22-38, 22-39 11, 12 22-40, 22-41 160(Res.)  5-24-62 22-34 161  5-24-62 1-5 94-136-94-140 162 12- 3-62 1 74-211 2 74-214 3, 4 74-212, 74-213 5 74-215 7 74-216 163  3- 4-63 2 82-2-82-7 164  3- 4-63 1 74-54 165  4- 4-63 1 94-3 166  7- 1-63 1 10-27 2 10-28, 10-29 3, 4 10-30, 10-31 5 10-26 170 12-16-63 1 94-3 171  1- 6-64 1 26-1 2 26-4, 26-5 26-9 3 26-6, 26-7 26-10 4 26-8 5 26-11 6 26-12, 26-13 7, 8 26-14, 26-15 9 26-16, 26-17 172  2-17-64 2 74-26, 74-27 3 74-28 4, 5 74-29 173  4-20-64 1 78-1 2 78-3 3 78-2 4 78-35-78-39 78-41 5, 6 78-42, 78-43 7 78-4-78-8 174  5-11-64 1-4 54-31-54-34 5 54-1 6 54-35 7, 8 54-2, 54-3  5-27-65(Ord.) App. A, §§ 1.101-26.01 186  2-28-66 2 App. A § 4.33 App. A, § 9.03 188  4- 4-66 1 78-43 193  1-23-67 1-3 6-1-6-3 4 6-6 5 6-8 6 6-7 6-9 7 6-14 8, 9 6-4, 6-5 10 6-15 194 12-19-66 1 26-6, 26-7 195  1- 9-67 1 App. A, § 2.51a 3 App. A, § 8a.01-App. A, § 8a.07 198  6- 5-67 1 50-31 50-33-50-41 3 50-32 202 10- 2-67 2 App. A, § 4.17 205  9-16-68 101-104 46-26-46-29 201-204 46-41-46-44 205 46-43 46-45 301 46-56 401 46-67 402 46-30 501 46-66 502 46-68 207  9- 9-68 1 App. A, § 4.06 2 App. A, § 4.26 208 11-18-68 1 2-51 209  2-17-69 1 App. A, § 2.41a 3 App. A, § 2.06 App. A, § 3.03 App. A, § 4.03 App. A, § 5.06 App. A, § 6.05 App. A, § 7.05 App. A, § 8.18 App. A, § 9.02 App. A, § 9a.01 App. A, § 10.02 App. A, § 11.02 App. A, Art. IXa 210  6- 2-69 1 
2 90-1 
90-4 3-5 90-18-90-20 214 12-15-69 1, 2 App. A, § 8a.03, App. A, § 8a.04 3 App. A, § 8a.08 4 App. A, § 9.12 216  2- 2-70 1 2-51 2 2-101 218 11- 2-70 1, 2 App. A, § 2.09 223  8-16-71 1, 2 App. A, § 3.01 3 App. A § 4.41 4, 5 App. A, § 11.01, App. A, § 11.02 App. A, § 11.04-App. A, § 11.11 6, 7 App. A, Art. XII App. A, § 12.01-App. A, § 12.03 App. A, § 12.05-App. A, § 12.11 8, 9 App. A, Art. XIII App. A, § 13.01, App. A, § 13.02 App. A, § 13.04-App. A, § 13.10 10 App. A, Art. XIIIa 224  8- 2-71 1 2-51 2 2-101 225  8-23-71 1-4 2-186-2-189 226  8-16-71 1 90-73 228 10- 4-71 1 App. A, § 2.26a 229  9- 1-72 1 App. A, § 4.43 233  1-17-72 1.1 70-2 2.1 70-1 3.1, 3.2 70-3 4.0-4.8 70-5 5.1-5.7 70-6 6.1-6.8 70-7 7.1, 7.2 70-8 8.3 70-9 9.1 70-4 238 10-16-72 1 App. A, § 3.05 241  5-15-72 1 94-1 2 94-3 242  6-19-72 1 6-6 2 6-11, 6-12 4 6-13 243  2-19-73 1-14 2-216-2-229 245  7-17-72 1 2-51 2 2-101 246  7-17-72 1 94-3 248 10- 2-72 1 App. A, § 5.01 2 App. A, § 8.01 249 10- 2-72 1 App. A, § 4.42 2 App. A, § 9.11 3, 4 App. A, § 3.03 5, 6 App. A, § 4.03 7 App. A, § 15.01 250 12- 1-72 1 2-51 251  9-18-72 1, 2 94-1 252 10- 2-72 1 94-5 256  5- 7-73 1-7 94-13 259  7- 9-73 1 2-51 
2-101 260  9-10-73 art. I 38-26 38-28 art. II 38-27 art. III 38-29 art. IV- 38-30-38-34 art. VIII 261 11- 5-73 1 2-51 264  1-21-74 1 14-31 2 14-39 266  2- 4-74 1 App. A, § 4.14 268  4- 1-74 1 78-2 2, 3 78-43 4 78-42 5 78-44 270  4-15-74 1 App. A, § 10a.01- 
App. A, § 10a.10 2 App. A, § 3.01 3 App. A, § 4.15 4 App. A, § 4.21 5 App. A, Art. 4 6 App. A, § 4.32 271  5- 6-74 1 94-3 272  5-21-74 1 94-1 274  7- 1-74 1 2-51 2 2-101 275  7-15-74 1 14-38 276  7-15-74 1 App. A, § 4.43 277  8-19-74 1 2-51 279  7-15-74 1 App. A, § 4.43 281 12- 2-74 1 94-1 282  1-20-75 1 App. A, § 18.02 283  4-18-77 1, 2 App. A, § 11.01 284  1-20-75 1 App. A, § 2.18 2 App. A, § 2.27a 3 App. A, § 8.01 4 App. A, § 8a.01 5 App. A, § 9.01 6 App. A, § 4.44 285  4-19-76 1 78-2 2 78-8 3 78-31, 78-32 4 78-33, 78-34 
78-36 78-38, 78-39 5, 6 78-43 286  1- 6-75 2 90-1 291  7- 7-75 2 2-101 293 11-17-75 1-3 2-176 294 10-20-75 1-3 2-52 296 12-15-75 2 App. A, § 8.18 297  4-19-76 3 74-151-74-158 299  4- 5-76 1 2-216 300  4- 5-76 1 38-33 301  5-19-76 1 94-3 302  4- 4-77 1 74-1 304  7-19-76 1 6-10 305  9-13-76 1 78-43 306  7- 6-76 2 2-101 310 11-15-76 1 38-26 38-28 2 38-27 3 38-32 313  5-17-77 1 2-186 317  8- 1-77 1 2-256-2-260 318  5-17-77 2 62-26-62-37 319  9-12-77 1 18-116 321  8- 1-77 1-5 18-39 325  2- 6-78 1 18-71, 18-72 326  2- 6-78 1 2-201, 2-202 328  2- 6-76 1 2-256 329  2- 5-79 1 18-39 330  6- 6-78 1 66-122 331  8-21-78 1 18-39 333  7-10-78 1, 2 78-43, 78-44 334  7-10-78 2 2-101 335 11-20-78 4 42-33 336  2-19-79 1 App. A, § 9.02 339  8- 6-79 1 90-71 340  7-16-79 2 2-101 342 10- 1-79 1 App. A, § 21.01 343 10-15-79 1 App. A, § 4.42 2, 3 App. A, § 18.02, App. A, § 18.03 4-6 App. A, § 18.06-App. A, § 18.08 344  3-17-80 1-15 30-1-30-15 17 30-17 18 30-16 30-18 345  1-21-80 1-3 6-11-6-13 346  5-20-80 1 App. A, § 17.03 2, 3 App. A, § 17.04 347  5-20-80 1-10 34-26-34-35 349  6- 2-80 1 94-1 350  7- 7-80 1-6 2-66-2-71 351  7- 7-80 2 2-101 355 10-20-80 1 26-14 357  4-27-81 1 30-14 359  6- 1-81 1, 2 18-136, 18-137 360  6- 1-81 1 30-8 361  6-15-81 2-5 86-26-86-29 363  6-21-82 1 50-4 367 12-21-81 1 App. A, § 15a.01- 
App. A, § 15a.05 App. A, Art. XVa 2 App. A, § 3.01 3 App. A, § 3.05 4 App. A, § 15b.01- 
App. A, § 15b.08 App. A, § 15b.10 369  6-21-82 1 94-1 370  7-12-82 2 2-101 371  9-20-82 1 26-17 374  3-14-83 2 86-29 375  4- 4-83 1-6 74-236-74-241 376  9-19-83 1 App. A, § 2.29 378  9-19-83 1 App. A, § 3.06 App. A, § 4a.01, App. A, § 4a.02 App. A, § 4a.04 App. A, § 4a.06 App. A, § 4a.10 App. A, § 4a.14, App. A, § 4a.15 App. A, § 4a.18 App. A, § 4a.22, App. A, § 4a.23 App. A, § 4a.25 App. A, § 5.03 App. A, § 7.05 App. A, § 8.07 App. A, § 9.07 App. A, § 11.09 App. A, § 12.13 App. A, § 13.03 App. A, § 16.02 App. A, § 17.06 App. A, § 19.07 App. A, § 20.02 App. A, § 21.06 App. A, § 24.02 App. A, § 26.13 App. A, Art. IVa 381 12- 5-83 2 2-101 382  1-23-84 1 App. A, § 4.45 2 App. A, § 5.01 3 App. A, § 2.06 384  1- 9-84 1-9 42-33 385  2-20-84 1 App. A, § 5.01 386  7- 2-84 1 App. A, § 10a.10 387  6-18-84 1 94-1 388 11- 5-84 2 2-101 389  8- 6-84 1 86-29 390  9-24-84 1 App. A, § 11.09 391 11-19-84 1 App. A, § 12.13 392 12-17-84 1 94-37 2, 3 94-36 4.01-4.03 94-38 4.04 94-39 5.01-5.04 94-41 6.01-6.06 94-81-94-86 7.01-7.11 94-96-94-106 8.01-8.07 94-51-94-57 9.01, 9.02 94-58 10.01-10.08 94-59-94-66 11.01-11.03 94-67 393  5-21-85 1 App. A, § 15b.08 394  7- 1-85 1 2-72 395  7- 1-85 2 2-101 396  1-13-86 1 86-29 397  8-19-85 2 94-1 399 10-21-85 1 94-97 10-21-85(Res.) 94-97 403  4- 7-86 1 18-40-18-48 404  4-21-86 1, 2 6-9, 6-10 406  7-21-86 1 26-7 407  9- 8-86 2 2-101 408  4-20-87 2 94-8, 94-9 3 94-36 4 94-40 5 94-97 6 94-104 7 94-67 409  4-20-87 1 94-3 410  6- 1-87 1, 2 App. A, § 9.07 3 App. A, § 11.09 4 App. A, § 4a.27 5 App. A, § 24.02 411  7-20-87 2, 3 18-40, 18-41 4 42-33 412  7-20-87 2 2-101 418 11-23-87 1 94-10, 94-11 419 12- 7-87 1 74-241 421 12-21-87 1, 2 94-1, 94-2 422  4- 4-88 1 App. A, § 2.29 423  2- 1-88 1 18-40 424  2- 1-88 1 2-68 425  8- 1-88 1 App. A, § 5.01 2 App. A, § 2.09a 3 App. A, § 2.31 App. A, § 2.31a 427  7-18-88 1 14-4 428  7- 5-88 2 2-101 429  7- 5-88 1 2-53 432  9-26-88 1 70-5 437  3- 6-89 1 78-31 2, 3 78-34 4 78-35 7 78-38, 78-39 8 78-40 438  3-20-89 1 90-7 439  7-24-89 1, 2 App. A, § 4.42 440  7-24-89 1 2-216, 2-217 2-220-2-226 2-228 441  9-11-89 1 74-241 442  9-11-89 2 2-132, 2-133 3 2-134-2-139 443 11- 6-89 1 App. A, § 4.13 444 11- 6-89 1 App. A, § 2.09b App. A, § 2.45a 2 App. A, § 4.33 3 App. A, § 5.01 App. A, § 8.01 446 10-16-89 1 78-41 447 11-20-89 2 2-101 448 11-20-89 1 70-7 452  5- 7-90 1 18-136 453  5- 7-90 1 18-71 454  5- 7-90 1 18-96 94-14 94-83 455  5- 7-90 1 26-14 459  7-23-90 1 App. A, § 4.47 2 App. A, § 14.02 3 App. A, § 4.41 460  8- 6-90 1 App. A, § 4.48 463  9-24-90 1 2-216, 2-217 2-220-2-222 2-224-2-226 2-228 2 2-216 465 12-17-90 1 App. A, § 21.01 466 11-19-90 1 74-237 2 74-241 467 11-19-90 2 2-101 3 2-52 468 11-19-90 1-5 2-271-2-275 469  1-21-91 1 App. A, § 5.01 470 12-17-90 1 2-222 2 2-230 471 12-17-90 1 74-237 2 74-241 472  2- 4-91 1 26-7 473  2- 4-91 1 2-241-2-244 474  2- 4-91 1 74-241 476  2-18-91 1 74-241 477  3-18-91 1 18-37 3 18-38 478  4-15-91 1-5 62-61-62-65 480  4-15-91 1 2-256 481  7-15-91 1 App. A, § 4.47 3 App. A, § 4.41 483  9-23-91 1 App. A, § 4.46 484  9-23-91 1 58-91 2, 3 58-93, 58-94 4 58-96 5 58-95 6 58-97 7 58-92 486  8- 5-91 2 2-101 3 2-52 488 10- 7-91 1 App. A, § 5.01 489  9- 9-91 1 74-51 490  9-23-91 1 App. A, § 2.30a App. A, § 5.01 492 12-16-91 1 86-29 493  3- 2-92 1 70-6 496  4- 6-92 1 18-71 497  5- 4-92 1 18-96 498  6- 1-92 1-8 18-36 500  9-28-92 1(11-1)-(11-7) 58-1-58-7 1(11-31)-(11-35) 58-31-58-35 1(11-51)-(11-54) 58-56-58-59 1(11-86)-(11-97) 58-111-58-122 1(11-116)-(11-119) 58-136-58-139 1(11-136)-(11-138) 58-151-58-153 1(11-156)-(11-165) 58-176-58-185 1(11-181), (11-182) 58-206, 58-207 1(11-201)-(11-205) 58-221-58-225 1(11-221)-(11-226) 58-236-58-241 1(11-246)-(11-251) 58-251-58-256 1(11-301)-(11-303) 58-276-58-278 1(11-326)-(11-337) 58-291-58-302 1(11-356)-(11-362) 58-326-58-332 1(11-386)-(11-389) 58-356-58-359 1(11-401)-(11-403) 58-371-58-373 501  3- 1-93 1 App. A, § 10.01-App. A, § 10.15 2 App. A, § 10.15 3 App. A, § 12a.01- 
App. A, § 12a.12 4 App. A, § 2.20a App. A, § 2.44a 5 App. A, § 3.01 502  8-17-92 1 82-1 504 12-21-92 2-101 505 10- 3-94 1-9 38-101-38-109 506  3-15-93 1 App. A § 4.33 508  2-15-93 1-29 22-61-22-89 509  3- 1-93 1 18-136 510  5- 3-93 1 App. A, § 4.42(5) 511  6- 7-93 1 App. A, § 4a.13(13.04) 514  6-21-93 1.01 94-37 2, 3 94-36(a), (b) 4.01-4.03 94-38 4.04, 4.05 94-39, 94-40 5.01-5.04 94-41 6.01-6.06 94-81-94-86 7.01-7.10 94-96-94-105 7.11-7.13 94-105.1-94-105.3 7.14 94-106 8.01-8.05 94-51-94-55 8.06 94-55.1 8.07, 8.08 94-56, 94-57 9.01, 9.02 94-58 10.01-10.08 94-59-94-66 11.01-11.03 94-67 516 10- 4-93 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 517  9-13-93 1-19 30-51-30-69 518 10-18-93 1 94-1(1), (2) 519  1-17-94 1 2-51 2 2-101 521  3- 7-94 1 App. A, § 2.29a 527  7-11-94 1 94-1(4) 528  3-21-94 1 2-51(7) 531  4-18-94 1 18-37 3 18-38 532  6-20-94 1 App. A, § 5.01(n) 533  6-20-94 1 App. A, § 5.01(m)(4) 535  6-20-94 1 App. A, § 15.01 536  5- 2-94 1       Rpld 2-256-2-260       Added 2-256-2-264 537  5-15-95 1 App. A, § 4.13 2 App. A, § 4.32 3 App. A, § 4.33(h)(23) 4 App. A, §§ 14.01-14.06 5       Rpld App. A, § 16.02 6       Rpld App. A, § 16.04 539  8-15-94 1 74-52 2       Rpld 74-54 4       Rpld 74-66-74-71, 74-81-74-88, 74-101-74-107, 74-121-74-124, 74-136-74-140       Added 74-65-74-72 6       Rnbd Ch. 74, Art. III, Div. 7       as Ch. 74, Art. III, Div. 3 7 18-39(a) 541  9-19-94 1 94-6 542  9-19-94 1 2-51 2 2-101 543  3-20-95 1 App. A, § 4.49 544  3-20-95 1 App. A, § 2.29a(4) 545  2-20-95 1, 2 2-291, 2-292 547  6-19-95       Rpld 30-1-30-18 1-28       Added 30-1-30-28 548  7-24-95 1 App. A, § 4.05 549 10- 2-95 1 App. A, § 3.01 2 App. A, § 3.05 3 App. A, § 4.33(l), (m) 4 App. A, §§ 5a.01-5a.11 550  7-10-95 1 74-159 551  7-10-95 1 38-103 2 38-104 552  7-24-95 1 26-14(a) 554  8-21-95 1 94-3(a) 555  8-21-95 1-6 86-101-86-106 556 11- 6-95 1-15 74-251-74-265 557  9-11-95 1 6-13(a) 558 10- 2-95 1 2-51(d) 561  4-15-96 1 App. A, § 2.02a. 2 App. A, § 4.50 562  1-15-96 1 94-3(b) 564  2- 5-96 1 94-3(a) 565  2-19-96 1 18-71 566  2-19-96 1 18-96 567  2-19-96 1 18-136 568  5-20-96 1 App. A, § 4.27 2 App. A, § 4.48(2) 3 App. A, § 4.48(3) 4 App. A, § 4.48(4)(b) 5 App. A, § 4.48(4)(c) 6 App. A, § 4.48(4)(d) 7 App. A, § 4.48(g)-(i) 8 App. A, § 5.12 569  3- 4-96 1 2-51(d) 571  5-20-96 1 94-1(1), (2) 2 94-3(a) 3 94-3(b) 572  6-17-96 1 2-134 2       Rpld 2-136-2-138 3 2-140 4 2-160-2-163 5 2-166-2-171 573  7-22-96 1 2-51 2 2-101 575  9- 9-96 1 6-13(a) 576  1- 6-97 1       Added 2-73 577  4-21-97 1       Added 74-2, 74-3, 74-4 578  4-21-97 1-27       Added 30-85-30-111 579  7- 7-97 1 App. A, § 4.49(i) 580  5-19-97 1       Added 86-29, 2.5d(i) 582  8- 4-97 1 2-291 583 10-20-97 1 2-51(a)-(h) 2 2-101 584  9-29-97 1 App. A, § 2.29a(1)(j) 585  1-19-98 1       Added 58-360 2       Added 58-333 587  4-20-98 1 2-51(a) 588  8-20-98 1       Rpld 2-216-2-230       Added 2-216-2-230 591  4-20-98 1 6-13 592  5-18-98 1 94-3(a) 594  6- 1-98 1 2-51(a)-(h) 2 2-101 596  8-24-98 1 App. A, § 15b.05(3) 599  8-10-98 1       Added 42-34-42-37 600  8-24-98 1       Added 78-9-78-13 601 12- 7-98 1       Added App. A, §§ 2.00-2.00e       Added App. A, §§ 2.46a, 2.46b       Added App. A, § 2.50a 2       Added App. A, § 12.02(k) 602 12- 7-98 1       Added App. A, § 2.42a 2       Added App. A, § 11.01(m) 3       Added App. A, § 4.51 603  9-14-98 1       Added 58-208 604 12- 7-98 1 App. A, § 21.01 605  2-22-99 1 App. A, § 2.29a 606  2-22-99 1 App. A, § 4.49 607 11- 9-98 1 90-19 608  1-11-99 1       Added 38-200-38-210 610  2- 1-99 1 18-37 3 18-38 611  2- 1-99 1 18-96 612  2- 1-99 1 18-136 613  8-16-99 1 74-241(a) 2 74-241(c) 614  2-22-99 1 2-241 616  6-21-99 1 2-51 2 2-101 618  9-20-99 1 58-138 619 10- 4-99 1 86-29(5.15) 86-29(5.15e) 86-29(5.62) 620 12-20-99 1 90-71 621  4- 3-00 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 4a.01-4a.27       Added App. A, §§ 4a.00-4a.17 2       Rpld App. A, § 4.14       Rpld App. A, § 4.41(j) 3 App. A, § 4.50(2)(e) 4       Rpld App. A, § 10a.09 5       Rpld App. A, § 11.11 6       Rpld App. A, § 13a.05 7       Rpld App. A, § 14.06 622  2-28-00 1 86-29 2-4 86-26-86-28 5       Added 86-30 623  3- 6-00 1-8       Added 34-51-34-58 626  4- 3-00 1       Rpld 30-85-30-111 627  4- 3-00 1-19       Added 30-85-30-103 628  4-17-00 1 94-4 2       Added 94-15 631  6- 5-00 1 2-51 2 2-101 632  7-10-00 1 18-5 633  8-28-00 1 94-2 634  9-18-00 1 14-31 2 14-34 635 10-16-00 1 14-31 636 12- 4-00 1 90-10 637 11-20-00 1 94-1 638  1-22-01 1 4a.01 2 4a.04 640  2-26-01 1       Rpld 18-8-18-14       Added 18-9-18-14 641  6-18-01 1 18-37       Rpld 18-38, 18-39 2 18-71 3 18-96 4 18-136 642  3-19-01 1       Rpld 38-27-38-34       Added 38-27, 38-28 643  6- 4-01 1 2-51 2 2-101 644 10-15-01 1-6       Added 58-8 645 11- 5-01 1 58-32 647  5-20-01 1       Added 38-301-38-306 649  2- 4-02 1       Added 2-301-2-305 651  3-18-02 1-9       Added 58-401-58-409 652  3- 4-02 1       Added 94-16 653  3- 4-02 1 46-66 654  3- 4-02 1       Rpld 98-26-98-36       Added 98-26-98-51 655  5- 6-02 1 2-256 2 2-259 3 2-260 657  6- 3-02 1 2-51 2 2-101 658  2- 3-03 1       Added 6-16-6-24 659  7- 1-02 1 Ch. 62, Art. II, §§ 62-26-62-37 660 10-21-02 1-21       Rpld 30-85-30-103       Added 30-86-30-106 661  6-16-03       Rpld App. A, §§ 1.01-26.01       Added App. A, §§ 1.01-18.03 662 12-16-02 1-6       Added 34-71-34-76 663  2-24-03 1       Added 58-186 664  2-24-03 1       Added 34-86-34-93 665  4- 7-03 1 46-67 666  6-16-03 1 2-51 2 2-101 667  7- 7-03 1 98-27 669  7-21-03 1, 2 App. A, art. 16(note) 3 18.01 670  8-25-03 1 App. A, § 16.02 671  8-25-03 1 94-1 673 11-17-03 1 58-408(1) 674 12-15-03 1 App. A, § 13.02(7) 675 12-15-03 1 App. A, § 5.03(3)A. 2 App. A, § 5.03(3)B. 3 App. A, § 5.03(3)D. 4 App. A, § 5.03(5)C. 5 App. A, § 5.07(1)A.2 6 App. A, § 5.07(2)A.2 677  2- 2-04 1 58-186(c)(3) 2 58-186(d) 678  6-21-04 1 2-51 2 2-101 679 11-22-04 1       Added App. A, § 5.17 2 App. A, § 2.02 682  2-14-05 1       Added App. A, § 6.12(4)A.15 2       Added App. A, § 6.12(5)A.8 683  1-24-05 1       Rpld 22-61-22-89 684  1-24-05 1 2-51 685  3-21-05 1-4       Added 30-29 687  6-20-05 1 2-51 2 2-101 690  4-17-06 1 18-41 2 18-43 3       Rpld 18-44-18-46 4       Rnbd 18-47       as 18-44 5       Rpld 18-48 691  4-17-06 1 42-33(b), (c) 2       Rpld 42-33(d)-(f), (h) 3       Rnbd 42-33(g)       as 42-33(d) 693  7-10-06 1-3 App. A, § 5.07 694  6-19-06 1 2-51 2 2-101 695  7-10-06 1-3 2-167-2-169 696  9-18-06 1 94-3(a) 697 10-16-06 1 94-4(a) 698 10-16-06 1 6-13 700  3-19-07 1       Added App. A, § 7.02(1)H. 2 App. A, § 7.02(10)F. 701  2- 5-07 1 App. A, § 2.02 2 App. A, § 13.02(7) 3 App. A, § 13.08 702  3- 5-07 1       Rpld 54-1-54-3 54-31-54-35 704  4-16-07 1 94-2 705  5- 7-07       Rpld 30-1-30-29       Added 30-1-30-19 706  5-21-07 1-3 94-13 707  6-18-07 1 94-1 708  6-18-07 1 2-51 2 2-101 710 12- 3-07 1 2-51 2 2-101 712  2- 4-08 1 App. A, § 4.04(15)B. 713  1-14-08 1 2-51 714  2-11-08 1       Added 82-8 715  6- 2-08 1       Added App. A, § 7.16. 716  6-23-08 1 2-51 2 2-101 718  3-23-09 1 App. A, § 2.02 2       Rpld App. A, §§ 12.01-12.17       Added App. A, §§ 12.01-12.17 719  5- 4-09 1 App. A, § 9.04 2 App. A, § 16.01 3 App. A, § 16.02 4, 5 App. A, § 16.04 6, 7 App. A, § 16.05 8 App. A, § 17.01 721  6-15-09 1 2-51 2 2-101 722  7-20-09 1 42-33 723 11- 2-09 1 2-291 724  8- 3-09 1 94-1 725 12-21-09 1 App. A, § 6.03 726 12- 7-09 1 94-1 727  6- 7-10 1 App. A, § 4.03 728  6- 7-10 1 86-29 729  6-21-10 1 2-51 2 2-101 731  9-20-10 1       Added 74-271-74-273 732 12-20-10 1 6-6 734  6-20-11       Rpld 66-26-66-126       Added 66-26-66-121 735 12- 5-11 1       Rpld 22-26-22-42       Added 22-26-22-37 737  2-27-12 1       Added 18-138-18-140 739  5-21-12 1 22-26 2 22-34 740  5-21-12 1       Added 94-3(e) 743  6- 4-12 3-7 58-278 736 12-17-12 1       Added App. A, §§ 4a.01-4a.06 736-1 12-17-12 1 App. A, § 2.02 2 App. A, § 5.11(2) 3 App. A, § 5.12 4 App. A, § 6.09 5 App. A, § 12.04(2) 6 App. A, § 12.05(1)C 7 App. A, § 12.05(3) 8 App. A, § 12.08(5)G 9       Rpld App. A, § 13.09 738 10- 1-12 1 App. A, § 4.04(1), (2) App. A, § 5.08       Added App. A, § 6.15 744  6-18-12 1 2-51 2 2-101 745 10- 1-12 1 App. A, § 8.02 746 11-13-12 1 2-51 747 11-13-12 1 2-134 2       Rpld 2-160-2-163 748  7- 1-13 58-278 750  9-30-13 1       Added 83-1-83-7 2       Rpld 82-1 751 11-18-13 App. A, 4a.03 752 11- 4-13 1 94-2 App. A, 4a.06 753 12-16-13 1       Rpld 42-31-42-36       Added 42-31-42-36 2 34-52, 32-53       Added 34-54       Rnbd 34-54       as 34-55       Rnbd 34-55, 34-56       as 34-56 754  1-13-14 1 94-1 755  4- 7-14 App. A, 12.01-12.17 756  9- 8-14 1 App. A, 5.08 757  9- 8-14 1 2-220 2-228 759 11-17-14 1 Ch. 86, Art. III (Title) 2 86-52 86-61 86-68, 86-69 760  3-16-15 1       Rpld 6-1-6-24       Added 6-1-6-10, 6-20-6-25 761  3-16-15 1       Rpld 14-1-14-5, 14-31-14-45       Added 14-1-14-10 762  3-16-15 1       Rpld 50-31       Added 50-31 2       Rpld 50-32 763  3-16-15 1       Rpld 58-371-58-373       Added 58-371-58-373 764  3-16-15 1 58-3 58-5, 58-6 58-92 58-181, 58-182       Rpld 58-185       Added 58-185 58-206, 58-207 765  3-16-15 1       Rpld 58-291-58-302       Added 58-291-58-296 766  3-16-15 1       Added 71-01-71-08 767  3-16-15 1 74-236, 74-237 2       Rpld 74-241 768  3-16-15 1       Rpld 90-71-90-74       Added 90-71-90-77 771  6-15-15 1 2-51 2 2-101 772  8-10-15 1       Added 58-279 773  8-17-15 1       Rpld 90-76-90-49       Added 90-46-90-50 2       Rpld 90-10 774  8-17-15 1 74-3 775  8-17-15 1       Rpld 74-181-74-190       Added 74-181-74-186 776  8-17-15 1       Added 74-280, 74-281 777  8-17-15 1       Rpld 82-1-82-8       Added 82-1-82-3 783  5- 2-16 1 58-401 785  7-11-16 App. A, 2.02 App. A, 12.04, 12.05       Rpld App. A, 10.01-10.08       Added App. A, 10.01-10.11 786  6-20-16 1 2-51 2-101 787  9-19-16 1       Rpld 86-26-86-30, 86-51-86-71       Added 86-1-86-10, 86-26-86-32, 86-51-86-54 788  9-19-16 1 2-169 790  5-15-17 1 App. A, 4.03(4) 791  6-19-17 1 2-51 2 2-101 793  3- 5-18 1       Added 46-1-46-10 2       Rpld 46-26-46-30, 46-41-46-45, 46-56, 46-66-46-68 794 12- 4-17 1       Rpld 6-25       Added 6-25 2       Added 6-26 3       Rpld 58-358 795 12-18-17 1       Rpld 2-51-2-53       Added 2-51, 2-52 796  2- 5-18 1       Rpld App. A, 6.12       Added App. A, 6.12 797  2- 5-18 1       Added 22-50 798  5- 7-18 1 22-27 2       Added 22-61-22-69 799  2- 5-18 1 14-6 800  2-12-18 1       Added 86-55 801  5- 7-18 1       Added App. A, 5.18 802  4-16-18 1 App. A, 2.02 2       Added 2.03-2.08 803  4- 5-18 1       Added 18-161-18-168  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section  
this Code 15.231 et seq. 2-222 2-275 18-12 15.261 et seq. 2-220(g) 2-222 2-274 Char. § 6.1 18-11 15.231 et seq. 2-220(h) 15.231-15.246 2-218(d) 2-220(h) 30-89 30-102 15.243(1)(G) App. A, § 6.11 15.261-15.275 2-218(b) 28.451 et seq. 58-278 29.1 et seq. Ch. 42 36.1-36.12 App. A, § 2.03 37.1102 46-5 41.806a 34-72 117.1 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-12.4 Char. § 7.9 Char. § 11.4 58-186 117.3(a) Char. § 4.1 Char. § 9.2 117.3(b) Char. § 3.5 117.3(c) Char. Ch. 3 117.3(i) Char. § 9.3 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 7 Char. § 7.2 117.3(m) Char. § 6.2 117.4a Char. § 9.5 Char. Ch. 10 117.4b Char. § 9.5 117.4d Char. § 9.5 117.4i(6) Char. § 7.4 117.4j(3) Char. § 2.1 117.5 Char. § 9.5 117.5b 1-1 117.56 Char. § 7.3 123.241 Ch. 70 123.361 et seq. Ch. 70 123.1102 58-186 125.31 et seq. 66-26 66-45 125.45 78-40 125.201-125.232 2-223 125.3101 et seq. 66-26 125.3801 et seq. 66-26 66-66 125.584 App. A, § 17.01 125.1401 et seq. 83-1, 83-2 125.1501 et seq. 2-220 18-71 18-96 18-116 125.1508b(1) 18-37 125.1508, 125.1509 18-96 125.1601 et seq. 2-202 141.120 et seq. 94-5 141.421 et seq. Char. § 8.1 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 3 Char. § 3.2 168.323 Char. § 3.7 168.492 Char. § 3.1 168.544a Char. § 3.5 168.631 Char. § 3.4 168.639 Char. § 3.4 168.706 Char. § 3.6 211.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 9 211.2 Char. § 9.1 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.1 211.27a 78-10(8) 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.741 et seq. Char. § 9.5 211.761 et seq. Char. § 9.5 247.183 30-85 257.1 et seq. Ch. 86 98-35 257.1-257.923 86-1 257.20 86-55 257.32b 86-55 257.216 86-55 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 86 257.610 Ch. 86 257.625(1)(C) 86-1 257.625(6) 34-88 34-89 257.675d 86-7 257.716-257.726b 86-106 257.923 58-91 257.727c 86-5 257.743 86-5 280.1 et seq. 38-27 282.101 et seq. 38-28 287.290 Ch. 14 299.401 et seq. Ch. 70 299.501-299.551 38-202 299.601 38-107 299.831-299.850 38-202 324.9106(5) 38-27 324.80176 6-25 324.81134 6-25 324.82127 6-25 330.110a 6-25 333.1101 et seq. 38-101 333.6230 6-25 333.7101 et seq. 58-8 333.7104 46-2 333.7410 App. A, 5.08 333.12701 et seq. 94-14 333.20106 6-25 333.20904 6-25 333.26421 et seq. App. A, § 5.08 333.26423 et seq. App. A, § 5.08 338.1051 et seq. 34-28 380.1-380.1852 58-333(3)(a) 380.171-380.187 58-333(3)(a) 400.60 58-118 400.701 et seq. App. A, § 2.04 400.701-400.737 App. A, § 6.03 Ch. 436 6-25 436.1 et seq. Ch. 6 436.1101 46-2 436.1701 6-25 436.1703 6-25 436.1707 6-25 460.701 et seq. 30-93(11) 460.701ff 30-15 480.11 et seq. 86-105 484.2101 et seq. 30-85 484.2102 30-88 484.2251 30-89 484.3101-484.3120 30-3 500.2102 86-55 500.3101 86-55 500.3102 86-55 500.3103 86-55 559.101 et seq. App. A, § 2.03 560.101 et seq. 66-121 78-2 78-8 
78-38 App. A, § 2.03 560.167 78-40 600.9921 Char. Ch. 11 712A.18m 6-25 722.1-722.6 6-25 750.49 et seq. Ch. 14 750.81 58-56 750.115 58-152 750.131 58-119 750.145 58-356 750.167 58-182 750.167(1)(c) 58-4 750.167(1)(e) 58-180 750.167(1)(f) 58-207 750.167(1)(h) 58-3 750.167(1)(j), 750.167(1)(k) 58-5, 58-6 750.167(1)(l) 58-178 750.167a 6-25 750.169 58-181 750.170 58-176 58-181 58-328, 58-329 750.200 et seq. Ch. 42 750.213 et seq. 58-330 750.215 58-33 750.227 58-300 750.237 6-25 750.240 58-35 750.240 et seq. Ch. 42 750.243a et seq. 58-278 750.271 et seq. 58-117 750.302 58-236 750.303, 750.304 58-239, 58-240 750.306 58-241 750.335a 58-206 750.356 58-111 750.356b 58-114 750.359 58-112 750.364 58-113 750.377 et seq. 58-332 750.377a 58-136 750.383a 58-138 750.390 58-58 750.416 58-139 750.448 58-225 750.448 et seq. 58-221 750.449 58-223 750.449a 58-223 750.452 58-222 750.454 58-224 750.479 58-31, 58-32 750.493d 58-276 750.520b 6-25 750.520g 6-25 750.535 58-121 750.540e 58-59 750.546 et seq. 58-327 750.552 58-151 750.561 58-116 750.1575 58-120 752.525 58-181 752.541-752.542 58-183, 58-184 767.39 58-2 769.1j 6-25 771.3 6-25  
