SOUTH LYON ;adv16;CITY CODE 
____________ 
Published by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: June 22, 1998 
Effective: July 9, 1998 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
;adv16;of the 
;adv16;CITY OF 
;adv16;SOUTH LYON, MICHIGAN 
;adv16;AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Jeffery L. Potter 
Mayor 
____________ 
John Galeas, Jr. 
Mark Dones 
Glenn Kivell 
John Doyle, Jr. 
City Council 
____________ 
Rodney L. Cook 
City Manager 
____________ 
Booth Patterson, P.C. 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Julie C. Zemke 
City Clerk-Treasurer 
____________ 
Josephine Lentine 
Assessor 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1988 Code, as supplemented through January 3, 1992, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of Chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and divisions may be included in the same way, or in the case of articles, may be places at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the numbers to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Heather Waldroup and William Eddy, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Julie C. Zemke, City Clerk-Treasurer, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Lyon, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 1998. 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CITY OF SOUTH LYON, MICHIGAN; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF SOUTH LYON, MICHIGAN: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "South Lyon City Code," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1 through 102, each inclusive, is adopted with the following correction: Section 102-10(a) should read as follows: 
(a)  Municipal Civil Infraction Penalties. A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before December 8, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance ther0eof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city council may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after December 8, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Julie C. Zemke 
City Clerk/Treasurer 
Adopted: 6-22-98 
Published: 7-9-98 
Effective: 7-9-98 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Ordaining clause. 
(a)  The within Ordinance Code was adopted by the South Lyon City Council pursuant to Act No. 279, Public Acts of 1909, State of Michigan, as amended, and ordered printed. 
(b)  The City of South Lyon ordains the provisions set forth in this Code. 
(Code 1988, tit. I, ch. 1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Short title. 
    This ordinance Code may be known and cited as the "South Lyon City Code." 
(Code 1988, § 1.5) 
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Code and any amendment thereto, shall for the purpose of this Code, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(1)  Person shall include any individual, copartnerships corporation, association, club, joint adventure, estate, trust, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
(2)  Public place shall mean any place to or upon which the public resorts, or travels, whether such place is owned or controlled by the city or any agency of the State of Michigan, or is a place to or upon which the public resorts or travels by custom, or by invitation, express or implied. 
(3)  Street, highway and alley shall mean the entire width subject to an easement for public right-of-way, or owned in fee by the city, county or state, of every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of public travel. The word "alley" shall mean any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from a property. 
(4)  Sidewalk shall mean that portion of a street between the curb line or lateral lines and the right-of-way lines which is intended for use of pedestrians. 
(5)  Tense. Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context, all words used in this Code indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of adoption of this Code but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any act, event, or requirement for which provision is made herein, either as a power, immunity, requirement or prohibition. 
(6)  City shall mean the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, §§ 1.8, 1.10) 
Sec. 1-4. - Headings. 
    No provision of this Code shall be held invalid by reason of deficiency in any chapter or section heading. 
(Code 1988, § 1.6) 
Sec. 1-5. - Responsibility. 
    Whenever any act is prohibited by this Code, by an amendment thereof, or by any rule or regulation adopted thereunder, such prohibition shall extend to and include the causing, securing, aiding, or abetting of another person to do said act. 
(Code 1988, § 1.7) 
Sec. 1-6. - Title of officer to include deputy or subordinate. 
    Whenever, by the provisions of this Code, any officer of the City of South Lyon is assigned any duty or empowered to perform any act or duty, the title of said officer shall mean and include such officer or his deputy or authorized subordinate. 
(Code 1988, § 1.9) 
Sec. 1-7. - Notice. 
    Notice regarding sidewalk repairs, sewer or water connections, dangerous structures, abating nuisances or any other act, the expense of which as performed by the city may be assessed against the premises under the provisions of this Code, shall be served: 
(1)  By delivering the notice to the owner personally or by leaving the same at his residence, office or place of business with some person of suitable age and discretion; or 
(2)  By mailing said notice by certified or registered mail to such owner at his last known address; or 
(3)  If the owner is unknown, by posting said notice in some conspicuous place on the premises at least five days before the act or action concerning which the notice is given is to take place. No person shall interfere with, obstruct, mutilate, conceal, or tear down any official notice or placard posted by any city officer, unless permission is given by said officer. 
(Code 1988, § 1.11) 
Sec. 1-8. - Contents of Code. 
(a)  This Code contains all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of South Lyon and includes ordinances dealing with municipal administration, utilities and services, parks and public grounds, streets and sidewalks, zoning and planning, food and health, businesses and trades, building, electrical, heating and plumbing regulations, police regulations and traffic regulations, and excludes ordinances granting franchises and special privileges, establishing sewer and other public improvement districts, providing for the construction of particular sewers, streets or sidewalks, or for the improvement thereof, and for the construction and improvement of other public works, authorizing the borrowing of money or the issuance of bonds. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, heretofore adopted, which are not included in this Code are hereby repealed. 
(b)  Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
(Code 1988, § 1.4) 
Sec. 1-9. - Severability. 
(a)  It is the legislative intent of the council in adopting this Code, that all provisions and sections of this Ordinance Code be liberally construed to protect and preserve the peace, health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of South Lyon and should any provision or section of this Ordinance Code be held unconstitutional or invalid, such holding shall not be construed as affecting the validity of any of the remaining provisions or sections, it being the intent that this Ordinance Code shall stand, notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section thereof. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code whether or not the wording of this section is set forth in the amendatory ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1.13) 
Sec. 1-10. - Publication and distribution of Code. 
(a)  Publication of the within codification of the ordinances of the City of South Lyon is hereby directed. Twenty-five copies of the Code shall be published in looseleaf form and shall be distributed as follows: 
Officer No. of Copies Mayor 1 Each councilman 1 Manager 1 Clerk 2 Attorney 1 Treasurer 1 Assessor 1 Director of public safety 4 Superintendent of public works 1 Building inspector 1 Health officer 1 Other officers 8  
(b)  Each copy of said Code shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by each officer having custody thereof upon expiration of his term of office to the city clerk. 
(c)  One hundred copies of the original printing of this Code shall be published and made available to the public at a reasonable charge. In addition, the clerk shall keep one of the copies of the Code assigned to him available for public inspection during office hours. 
(Code 1988, § 1.1) 
Sec. 1-11. - Amendment procedure. 
    This Code shall be amended by ordinance. The title of each amendatory ordinance, adapted to the particular circumstances and purposes of the amendment, shall be substantially as follows: 
(1)  To amend any section: 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND SECTION _____ (or SECTIONS _____ AND _____) OF THE CODE OF THE City of South Lyon. 
(2)  To insert a new section or chapter: 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE CODE OF THE CITY OF SOUTH LYON BY ADDING A NEW SECTION (_____ NEW SECTIONS or A NEW CHAPTER, as the case may be) WHICH NEW SECTION (SECTIONS or CHAPTER) SHALL BE DESIGNATED AS SECTION _____ (SECTIONS _____ AND _____ OF CHAPTER _____ (or proper designation if a chapter is added) OF SAID CODE. 
(3)  To repeal a section, chapter or title: 
AN ORDINANCE TO REPEAL SECTION _____(SECTIONS _____ AND _____) or CHAPTER _____, as the case may be) OF THE CODE OF THE City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.2) 
Sec. 1-12. - Publication and distribution of amendments. 
    Amendments to the Code shall be published as required by the Charter of the City of South Lyon and not less than 25 copies of each amendment shall be published in looseleaf form suitable for insertion in the looseleaf copies of this Code. The city clerk shall distribute such copies to the officers of the city having copies of the Code assigned to them. Each officer assigned a copy of the Code shall be responsible for maintaining the same and for the proper insertion of amendatory pages as received. Each copy of said Code shall remain the property of the city and shall be turned over by each officer to his successor or to the city clerk, in case he shall have no successor. 
(Code 1988, § 1.3) 
Sec. 1-13. - Appearance ticket authority. 
(a)  Title. This section shall be known and may be referred to as the City of South Lyon Appearance Ticket Ordinance. 
(b)  Intent and purpose. It is the intent and purpose of this section to identify and authorize certain public servants of the City of South Lyon, County of Oakland, State of Michigan, to issue and serve appearance tickets as provided by Act Number 366 of Public Acts of 1984. 
(c)  Definitions. For purposes of this section words and phrases in this section have the following meanings: 
    Appearance ticket means a complaint or written notice, on a form determined by the attorney general, state court administrator and director of the department of state police as modified with the prior approval of said state officials to accommodate local enforcement and court procedures and practices, issued and subscribed by a public servant authorized by this section, directing a designated person to appear in a designated local criminal court at a designated future time in connection with an alleged designated violation of a city ordinance for which the maximum permissible penalty does not exceed 90 days in jail and/or fine of $500.00. 
    Issue means preparing an appearance ticket by placing on it all known and available information required on the ticket for the alleged violation and person to whom it is directed. 
    Serve means personal delivery or mailing by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, delivery restricted to addressee, receipt of which is acknowledged by signature of the addressee on the return receipt. 
(d)  Authority of certain designated officials. The city manager, building inspector, superintendent of public works, superintendent of water and wastewater, chief of the fire department, chief of the ambulance division, and such other officers, employees, inspectors, or public servants of the City of South Lyon who are authorized or responsible for the enforcement of one or more city ordinances pursuant to state law, city ordinances and codes, resolutions of the city council, or written designation and appointment by the city manager, are hereby authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets, municipal ordinance violation notices, and municipal civil infraction citations when they have reasonable cause to believe that a person has violated a city ordinance, enforcement of which is the responsibility or within the authority of the public servant. 
(e)  Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this section is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holdings shall not effect the validity of any of the remaining provisions hereof. 
(f)  Effective date. The provisions of this section are hereby effective ten days after enactment and publication thereof. 
(Code 1988, §§ 1.301-1.306; Ord. of 11-28-94(2), § 1) 
Sec. 1-14. - Penalties. 
(a)  Misdemeanor penalties. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by this Code for any particular provision or section, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this Code, or any rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each act of violation and every day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any section of this Code, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this Code for which the penalty is designated as a municipal civil infraction shall be subject to the following: 
(1)  Payment of fine. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this Code for which the penalty is designated as a municipal civil infraction, upon admission or a finding of responsibility for such violation, shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction as that term is defined and used in MCL 600.101 et seq., MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended, and shall pay a civil fine as prescribed by ordinance or as determined by the district court, district court judge or district court magistrate. 
(2)  Costs. A person, firm or corporation ordered to pay a fine under subsection (1) shall be ordered by the district court judge or magistrate to pay costs of not less than $9.00 or more than $500.00, which costs may include all expenses, direct and indirect, to which the city has been put in connection with the violation up to the entry of the court's judgment or order to pay fines and costs. 
(3)  Additional writs and orders. A person who admits or is found responsible for violation of this Code shall comply with any order, writ or judgment issued by the district court to enforce this Code pursuant to chapter 83 and chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq., MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended. 
(4)  Default on payment of fine and costs. A default in the payment of a civil fine, costs, or damages or expenses ordered under subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2) or an installment of the fines, costs or damages or expenses as allowed by the court may be collected by the city by a means authorized for the enforcement of a judgment under chapters 40 or 60 of the Revised Judicature Act, MCL 600.101 et seq., MSA 27A.101 et seq., as amended. 
(5)  Failure to comply with judgment or order. If a defendant fails to comply with an order or judgment issued pursuant to this section within the time prescribed by the court, the court may proceed under subsections (b)(7) or (b)(8), as applicable. 
(6)  Failure to appear in court. A defendant who fails to answer a citation or notice to appear in court for a municipal civil infraction violation is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs and/or imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. 
(7)  Civil contempt. 
a.  If a defendant defaults in the payment of a civil fine, costs or other damages or expenses, or installment as ordered by the district court, upon motion of the city or upon its own motion, the court may require the defendant to show cause why the defendant should not beheld in civil contempt and may issue a summons, order to show cause or bench warrant of arrest for the defendant's appearance. 
b.  If a corporation or an association is ordered to pay a civil fine, costs or damages or expenses, the individuals authorized to make disbursements shall pay the fine, costs or damages or expenses, and their failure to do so shall be civil contempt unless they make the showing required in this subsection. 
c.  Unless the defendant shows that the default was not attributable to an intentional refusal to obey the order of the court or to a failure on his or her part to make a good faith effort to obtain the funds required for payment, the court shall find that the default constitutes a civil contempt and may order the defendant committed until all or a specified part of the amount due is paid. 
d.  If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine, costs or damages or expenses does not constitute civil contempt, the court may enter an order allowing the defendant additional time for payment, reducing the amount of payment or of each installment or revoking the fine, costs or damages or expenses. 
e.  The term of imprisonment on civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages or expenses shall be specified in the order of commitment and shall not exceed one day for each $30.00 due. A person committed for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damages or expenses shall be given credit toward payment for each day of imprisonment and each day of detention in default of recognizance before judgment at the rate of $30.00 per day. 
f.  A defendant committed to imprisonment for civil contempt for nonpayment of a civil fine, costs or damage or expenses shall not be discharged from custody until one of the following occurs: 
1.  Defendant is credited with an amount due pursuant to subsection (b)(7)(e). 
2.  The amount due is collected through execution of process or otherwise. 
3.  The amount due is satisfied pursuant to a combination of subsections (b)(7)(f)(1) and (2). 
g.  The civil contempt shall be purged upon discharge of the defendant pursuant to subsection (b)(7)(f). 
(8)  Lien against land, building or structure. If a defendant does not pay a civil fine or costs or installment ordered under subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) within 30 days after the date upon which the payment is due for a violation involving the use or occupation of land or a building or other structure, the city may obtain a lien against the land, building or structure involved in the violation by recording a copy of the court order requiring payment of the fine and costs with the register of deeds for Oakland County. The court order shall not be recorded unless a legal description of the property is incorporated in or attached to the court order. 
a.  The lien is effective immediately upon recording of the court order with the register of deeds. 
b.  The court order recorded with the register of deeds shall constitute the pendency of the lien. In addition, a written notice of the lien shall be sent by the city by first class mail to the owner of record of the land, building or structure at the owner's last known address. 
c.  The lien may be enforced and discharged by the city in the manner prescribed by its Charter, by the General Property Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being sections 211.1-211.157 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, or by an ordinance duly passed by the city. However, property is not subject to sale under Section 60 of Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893, being section 211.60 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, for nonpayment of a civil fine or costs or an installment ordered under subsections (b)(1) or (b)(2) unless the property is also subject to sale under Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of 1893 for delinquent property taxes. 
d.  A lien created under this section has priority over any other lien unless one or more of the following apply: 
1.  The other lien is a lien for taxes or special assessments. 
2.  The other lien is created before the effective date of the amendment that added this section. 
3.  Federal law provides the other lien has priority. 
4.  The other lien is recorded before the lien under this section is recorded. 
e.  The city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction for collection of the fines and costs imposed by a court order for a violation of this chapter. However, an attempt by the city to collect the fine or costs does not invalidate or waive the lien upon the land, building or structure. 
f.  A lien provided for by this subsection shall not continue for a period longer than five years after a copy of the court order imposing a fine or cost is recorded unless within that time an action to enforce the lien is commenced. 
(9)  Separate violation. Each day a violation of the Code continues to exist shall be deemed a separate and additional violation. 
(Code 1988, § 1.12) 
Sec. 1-15. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance Code shall take effect in accordance with the terms of the adopting ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 1.14) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Division of administrative service. 
    The administrative service of the city shall be under the supervision and direction of the city manager, except as otherwise provided by the city Charter, and shall be divided into the following offices and departments, each of which shall be the responsibility of and under the control of a head as listed opposite such office or department: 
Department Official Head Clerk City clerk Treasurer City treasurer Assessor City assessor Police Chief of police Fire Fire chief Ambulance Ambulance director Buildings and safety engineering Building inspector Public works Superintendent of public works Health County health department Law City attorney Water and wastewater department Superintendent of water and wastewater  
(Code 1988, § 1.51) 
Secs. 2-2-2-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-31. - Council meetings. 
    The city council of the City of South Lyon shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Mondays of each month in the Municipal Building at 7:30 p.m. according to the official time currently in effect in the State of Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 1.111) 
Secs. 2-32-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Clerk, assessor, treasurer, health officer and attorney. 
    The clerk, assessor, treasurer, health officer and attorney shall have the duties and responsibilities detailed for such offices in the city Charter, and this Code and the statutes of the State of Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 1.56) 
Secs. 2-52-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CODE OF ETHICS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, adopted Mar. 12, 2018, amended Div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Div. 2, §§ 2-71-2-78, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, § 1.115-1.122. 

Sec. 2-71. - Definitions. 
    City official means a person elected, appointed or otherwise serving in any capacity with the city in any position established by the City Charter or by city ordinance, other than as an employee. 
    Compensation means money, property, or anything of value or benefit. 
    Employee means a person hired by the city, whether on a full-time, part-time, temporary or irregular basis. 
    Financial interest means any of the following: 
(a)  Receipt of, entitlement to, or promise of compensation; 
(b)  An ownership interest in real or personal property; 
(c)  Status as a partner, member, employee, consultant, contractor or agent of or for a partnership or any other unincorporated entity; 
(d)  Status as a beneficiary or trustee in or of a trust; 
(e)  Status as a director, officer, employee, consultant, contractor or agent of or for a corporation; and 
(f)  Legal or beneficial ownership of five percent or more of the total outstanding stock of a corporation. 
A city official and employee shall be deemed to have a financial interest if a relative of any official or employee has a financial interest. 
    Gift means any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not limited to, cash, food and drink, travel, lodging, personal items, and honoraria for speaking engagements. 
    Official duty or official action means a decision, recommendation, approval, disapproval or other action or failure to act by a city official or city employee. 
    Relative means a city official or employee, his or her spouse, domestic partner, sibling, parents, grandparents, children, or step-children. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-72. - Declaration of policy. 
    The proper operation of democratic government requires that elected and appointed city officials and employees be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that governmental decisions and policy be made in the proper channels of the governmental structure; that public office not be used for personal gain; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals there is hereby established a code of ethics for all city officials and employees. The purpose of this Code is to establish ethical standards of conduct for all such officials and employees by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the best interests of the city and by directing disclosure by such officials and employees of a financial interest in matters affecting or involving the city. The provisions and purpose of this Code and such rules and regulations as may be established are hereby declared to be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-73. - Responsibilities of public office and employment. 
(a)  City officials and employees are agents of public purpose and hold office or employment for the benefit of the public. They are bound to uphold the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of this state and to carry out impartially the laws of the nation, state, and municipality and thus to foster respect for all government. They are bound to observe in the performance of their official duties and actions the highest standards of morality and to discharge faithfully the duties of their office or employment regardless of personal considerations, recognizing that the public interest must be their primary concern. Their conduct in both their official and private affairs should be above reproach. 
(b)  All city officials and employees shall safeguard public confidence by being honest, fair and respectful of all persons with whom they have contact, and in the performance of their official duties, and by avoiding conduct which may tend to undermine respect for city officials and employees and for the city as a public body. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-74. - Dedicated service. 
(a)  City officials and employees of the municipality should be loyal to the objectives expressed by the electorate and the programs developed to attain those objectives and should adhere to the rules of conduct and/or work and performance established as the standard for their positions. 
(b)  City officials and employees should not exceed their authority or breach the law or ask others to do so, and they should work in full cooperation with other public officials and employees unless prohibited from so doing by law or by officially recognized confidentiality of their work. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-75. - Fair and equal treatment. 
(a)  Interest in appointments. Canvassing of members of the council, directly or indirectly, in order to obtain preferential consideration in connection with any appointment to the municipal service shall disqualify the candidate for appointment except with reference to positions filled by appointment by the council. 
(b)  Use of public property. No city official or employee shall request or permit the use of city-owned vehicles, equipment, materials, or property for personal convenience or profit, except when such services are available to the public generally or are provided as municipal policy for the use of such official or employee in the conduct of official business. 
(c)  Obligations to citizens. No city official or employee shall grant any special consideration, treatment, or advantage to any citizen beyond that which is available to every other citizen. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-76. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  No city official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall engage in any business or transaction or have a financial interest (as defined in section 2-71), direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties in the public interest or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties. 
(b)  Examples of conflicts of interest are enumerated below for the guidance of officials and employees: 
(1)  Incompatible employment or service. No city official or employee shall engage in or accept private employment or render services in any capacity including, but not limited to as a consultant, contractor or agent, to an individual or entity when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair his or her independence of judgment or action in the performance of his official duties. 
(2)  Disclosure of confidential information. No city official or employee shall, without proper legal authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the city. Nor shall he or she use such information to advance the financial interest of himself or herself or others, including relatives. 
(3)  Gifts and favors. No city official or employee shall accept any gift (as defined in section 2-71), from any person who, or entity which, to his or her knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner whatsoever in business dealings with the city; nor shall any such official or employee: 
a.  Accept any gift, favor, or thing of value that may tend to influence him or her in the discharge of his or her duties; or 
b.  Grant in the discharge of his or her duties any improper favor, service, or thing of value. 
Any individual, institution, corporation, organization or service club wishing to bestow a gift, grant, or service to the city or any of its component departments shall make a request for such bestowal at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. 
(4)  Representing private interest before city agencies or courts. 
a.  Except as provided for in b. below, no city official or employee shall appear on behalf of private interests before any agency of the city. No city official or employee shall represent private interests in any action or proceeding against the interests of the city in any litigation to which the city is a party. 
b.  A city official may appear before city agencies on behalf of constituents in the course of his or her duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of public or civic obligations. However, no city official or other official or employee shall accept a retainer or compensation that is contingent upon a specific action by a city agency. 
(5)  Contracts with the city. 
a.  Except as provided in Sections 3 and 3a of Act 317 of 1968 (Contracts of Public Servants with Public Entities), a city official and a city employee shall not be a party, directly or indirectly, to any contract between himself or herself and the city. 
b.  Except as provided in Section 3 of Act 317 of 1968, a city official and a city employee shall not directly or indirectly solicit any contract: 
1.  Between the city and him or herself; 
2.  Between the city and any firm, meaning a co-partnership or other unincorporated association, of which he or she is a partner, member, or employee; 
3.  Between the city and any private corporation in which he or she is a stockholder owning more than one percent of the total outstanding stock of any class if the stock is not listed on a stock exchange, or stock with a present total market value in excess of $25,000.00 if the stock is listed on a stock exchange or of which he or she is a director, officer or employee; or 
4.  Between the city and any trust in which he or she is a trustee or beneficiary. 
c.  In regard to a contract described in subsections (b)(5)b.1-4 above, a city official and a city employee shall not do either of the following: 
1.  Take any part in the negotiations for such a contract or the renegotiation or amendment of the contract, or in the approval of the contract, or 
2.  Represent either party in the transaction. 
(6)  Official duties; official actions. 
a.  With respect to matters not involving a contract covered by subsection (b)(5) above, a city official shall not vote on or participate in discussions on a matter before the city council which involves an entity, property or an issue in which the official has a financial interest, or if the official has a financial interest in the outcome of the matter before city council. For example, an official should not discuss or vote on whether or not to: 
1.  Condemn, sell, grant a variance, or otherwise affect property; 
2.  Waive a fee or grant a license; or 
3.  Approve legislation, with respect to an entity, property or with respect to an issue in which the official has a financial interest. 
b.  A city employee shall not make a recommendation, take any action or make any decision on any matter within the scope of his/her official duties with respect to which he has a financial interest. 
(7)  Personal opinions. No city official or employee of the city shall represent his or her personal opinion as that of the city. 
(8)  Business transactions. No city official or employee shall engage in any business or transaction in which he or she or a relative may directly or indirectly benefit financially because of his or her official position or because of receipt of confidential information which he or she has obtained by reason of such position or authority. 
(9)  Preferential treatment. No city official or employee shall use, or attempt to use, his or her official position to secure, request or grant any compensation, privilege, exemption, advantage, or treatment for himself, herself, or others, beyond that which is available to every other citizen. No city official or employee shall influence or attempt to influence the hiring by the city of a relative of a city official or employee. 
(10)  City official's own conduct. No city official shall vote on any questions involving the official's own conduct including those of recusal and discipline. 
(c)  Board and committee members. It is recognized that various boards and committees are part of the plan of government for the city. As such, it is further recognized that by virtue of the various requirements for board membership, a member may be placed in the position of participating in a decision that may directly or indirectly affect his or her financial interest. Therefore, those members of the various boards and committees in the city, as they may be established from time to time, shall refrain from participating in any discussion, voting or taking any action with respect to a matter that may, directly or indirectly, affect his or her financial interest. 
(d)  Subsequent conflict of interest. No city official or employee shall acquire any financial interest in or accept any employment with or render any services in any capacity including, but not limited to, as a consultant, contractor or agent, with any entity which, or person who either: 
(1)  Has entered into a contract with the city, or 
(2)  Was the subject of a matter voted on by the city council (for example, as described in subsection (b)(6)a. above), within one year of the officer's or employee's participation in any manner in considering, recommending or voting on the approval or disapproval of said contract or matter. 
(e)  Duty to disclose financial interest. 
(1)  City official. When a matter before the city council involves an entity, property or issue in which a city official has a financial interest, or if a city official has a financial interest in the outcome of a matter before the council which is different from that of the general public, the official shall disclose the full nature and extent of his or her financial interest on the appropriate record of the city prior to discussion or action thereon and shall refrain from participating in any discussion, voting or action thereon, except as allowed under PA 317 of 1968. 
(2)  City employee. When a city employee has a financial interest in a matter involving the employee's official duties or in which the employee would be taking an official action, the employee shall disclose the nature and extent of his or her financial interest to the city manager and shall refrain from participating in any discussion or action thereon. 
(3)  Board member. When a member of any city board, commission or committee has a financial interest in a matter before the board, commission or committee on which the member sits, the member shall disclose the nature and extent of such interest on the record of the board, commission or committee. 
(f)  Referral to board of ethics. If a city official, city employee or member of a board, commission or committee fails to disclose a financial interest, or who has a conflict of interest, as defined herein, in any matter before the city, and who discloses that conflict on the appropriate records but who refuses to refrain from discussion, deliberation or voting thereon, except as allowed by law, the matter under consideration shall be immediately referred to the board of ethics for a final determination as to the conflict in question and whether the official, employee or board member must refrain from discussion, deliberation, action or voting thereon. 
(g)  Required disclosure statement. Within 20 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived, and thereafter, after the election of a city official, and the hiring or appointment of a city employee, or after any change in the facts set forth in the city official's or employee's previously filed disclosure statement, each city official and employee shall file with the city clerk an affidavit and disclosure statement. The city clerk shall provide each city official or employee with the required affidavit and disclosure statement form immediately upon his or her election, employment or appointment. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-77. - Political activity. 
(a)  City employees are prohibited from engaging in campaign activities using city property or engaging in such activity during working hours and shall comply with the Political Activities by Public Employees Act, Public Act 169 of 1976, MCL 15.401 et seq., as amended. 
(b)  Elected city officials are prohibited from soliciting city employees to work on political campaign activities using city property or during working hours and shall comply with the Michigan Campaign Finance Act, Public Act 388 of 1976, MCL 169.201 et seq., as amended. 
(c)  City officials and employees shall not use any city time or property for their own political benefit or for the political benefit of any other person seeking elective office, provided that the foregoing shall not prohibit the use of property or facilities available to the general public on an equal basis for due consideration paid. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-78. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  A board of ethics is hereby established by the city consisting of five members from the general public who are not personally subject to this code of ethics. The members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the council. They shall serve four-year staggered terms. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and the affirmative vote of the majority of those present shall be necessary for any action. Members may not nominate an alternate or representative to cast votes on any matter coming to the attention of the board. Members of the board shall serve without salary but shall be reimbursed for their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(b)  The powers and duties of the board shall be as follows: 
(1)  To recommend from time to time such orders, rules, regulations, and changes as it deems necessary and proper to supplement, administer and implement or amend the provisions of the code of ethics, which recommendations, when approved by the council shall become part of this code of ethics. 
(2)  To investigate and render advisory opinions to city employees and officials or their appointing authorities with respect to any matter or transaction in which said employees and officials are involved concerning the applicability of this code of ethics. The board may publish such advisory opinions with such deletions as may be necessary to prevent disclosure of the identity of the employee who may request such an opinion. 
(3)  To investigate any alleged violation of the code by a city employee or official where the appointing authority for the employee or official involved in the alleged violation shall request the board to make such investigation. A written report of the results of the board's investigation shall be made to the appointing authority and the employee or official involved. 
(4)  To investigate an alleged violation of the code of ethics upon the written request of the council, or the city manager and to submit a written report to the requesting official and the employee or official involved. 
(5)  To conduct informal hearings prior to rendering an opinion or report in any particular matter whenever the board deems it appropriate for a hearing to be held or whenever a city employee or official who may be substantially affected by the opinion or report in the matter requests a hearing. Such hearing may be held by the board itself or by a hearing officer designated by the chairman of the board, whichever the chair deems appropriate in any particular instance. The chair may designate as a hearing officer any member of the board. Whenever a hearing is conducted by a hearing officer instead of the board itself, the hearing officer must submit a written report of the hearing to the board. 
(6)  An opinion or report of the board rendered under subsections (b)(2), (3) and (4) of this section may be utilized as a basis for any administrative action appropriate under the circumstances. 
(7)  The board of ethics is not empowered to take direct administrative action but, rather, its function shall be solely advisory and investigatory as provided for herein. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 2-79. - Sanctions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this Code should raise conscientious questions for the city official or employee concerned as to whether voluntary resignation or other action is indicated to promote the best interests of the city. Violation may constitute a cause for suspension, removal from office or employment, or other disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 02-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Secs. 2-80-2-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-101-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 2-116. - Public works department. 
(a)  The public works department shall be headed by the superintendent of public works. He shall be responsible for all matters relating to the management, maintenance and operation of the city's public works equipment, streets and sidewalks and refuse collection and disposal. 
(b)  This department shall be responsible for the operation and maintenance of city water mains and connections. 
(c)  This department shall have charge of the control and regulation of the planting of trees, and of the planting, development, maintenance, management and operation of parks, boulevards and recreation facilities. 
(d)  This department shall be responsible for the inspection of all work involved in the construction of sewer and water services. 
(e)  This department shall be responsible for the issuance of all permits and the inspection of all work involved in the construction of sidewalks, curb cuts and street openings. 
(Code 1988, § 1.91) 
Secs. 2-117-2-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-131. - General provisions. 
    Such of the boards and commissions provided for in this article as are in existence at the time of the adoption of this Code shall be continued and the members serving thereon shall remain in office for the duration of the term for which they were appointed. Except as otherwise provided for by law, Charter or this Code, the following provisions shall be applicable to all boards and commissions of the city: 
(1)  Vacancy. Any vacancy occurring in the membership of any board or commission shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term in the manner provided for original appointment to such board or commission. 
(2)  Removal. The appointing authority may remove any member of any board or commission for cause. 
(3)  Rules. Each board and commission shall have power to make rules and regulations concerning the administration of its affairs as shall not be inconsistent with laws, the city Charter and this Code. 
(4)  Compensation. All members of boards and commissions shall serve without compensation as members thereof, unless otherwise expressly provided by the city Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 1.141) 
Secs. 2-132-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HISTORICAL COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-151. - Commission members. 
    The South Lyon Historical Commission shall consist of seven members with the addition of the mayor, ex officio; said seven members shall be appointed by the city council of the City of South Lyon. No member of said commission shall receive any compensation for his services, but may be reimbursed for necessary expenses. 
(Code 1988, § 1.175) 
Sec. 2-152. - Term of office. 
    The city council of the City of South Lyon shall appoint the members of said commission for the following terms: two for one year, three for two years, two for three years, and thereafter such members annually for a term of three years to fill expiring terms, to serve until their successors shall have been appointed and qualified. 
(Code 1988, § 1.176) 
Sec. 2-153. - Organization; gifts. 
    As soon as practicable after the annual appointment of members, the historical commission shall meet in the city hall of the City of South Lyon and shall organize by electing one of its members as president, and one as vice-president, and shall appoint a secretary and shall arrange a time and place of holding regular monthly meetings of the commission, and for such special meetings as may be necessary. The said commission is authorized upon council approval, to accept gifts and bequests for the furtherance of its authorized purposes in the name of the City of South Lyon under the control of the South Lyon Historical Commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.177) 
Sec. 2-154. - Records. 
    The City of South Lyon Historical Commission is hereby designated as the official agency of the South Lyon area to receive and safely keep all the old historical records pertaining to the South Lyon area and its early pioneers. 
(Code 1988, § 1.178) 
Sec. 2-155. - Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of said commission to collect, arrange and preserve historical materials, including books, pamphlets, maps, charts, manuscripts, papers, photos, copies of domestic and foreign records and archives, paintings, statuary, and other objects and material illustrative of and relating to the history of the South Lyon area; to procure and preserve narratives of the early pioneers, their exploits, perils, privations and achievements. The commission shall cooperate with and assist other Michigan historical societies of the state and county with a view to gathering historical matters pertaining to the South Lyon area and its early pioneers. The commission shall, in concert with the City of South Lyon and the city manager oversee the operation and maintenance of the historical village and its buildings and grounds. 
(Code 1988, § 1.179; Ord. of 11-28-11) 
Sec. 2-156. - Finances. 
    The City Council of the City of South Lyon may appropriate reasonable sums for the expenses of the South Lyon Historical Commission in connection with the work of said commission. The commission shall, in concert with the City of South Lyon and the city manager, help create, oversee and administer the annual budget of the historical village. The commission shall not obligate itself, or the city, in any financial undertaking unless first authorized by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.180; Ord. of 11-28-11) 
Secs. 2-157-2-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LOCAL OFFICERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-171. - Commission established. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Act 8 of Public Acts of the State of Michigan for the year 1972, a local officers' compensation commission is hereby established. 
(Code 1988, § 1.185) 
Sec. 2-172. - Members; terms. 
    The local officers' compensation commission of the City of South Lyon shall consist of five members who must be registered electors of the City of South Lyon, appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving in the city council. The term of office of members of the South Lyon Local Officers' Compensation Commission shall be five years except that for the members first appointed, one each shall be appointed for terms of one, two, three, four and five years. Members shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term. No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.186) 
Sec. 2-173. - Duties. 
    The South Lyon Local Officers' Compensation commission shall determine the salaries of all elected officials of the City of South Lyon, which determination shall be the salaries unless the city council by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected serving on said city council shall reject them. The determination of the commission shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the city council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.187) 
Sec. 2-174. - Meetings; compensation. 
    The South Lyon Local Officers' Compensation Commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in 1978, and every odd number year thereafter and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect the chairman from among its members. "Session days" means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation but shall be entitled to their actual necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1988, § 1.188) 
Secs. 2-175-2-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-17, Pts. I, II, adopted Sept. 11, 2017, repealed the former Div. 4, §§ 2-191-2-193, and enacted a new Div. 4 as set out herein. The former Div. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, §§ 1.161-1.163. 

Sec. 2-191. - Authority. 
    This division is adopted pursuant to the authority granted the city council under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as amended, and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended, to establish a planning commission with the powers, duties, and limitations provided by those acts and subject to the terms and conditions of this division and any future amendments to this division. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-192. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to provide that the city council hereby retains and confirms the establishment, under the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as amended, the planning commission, formerly established under the Municipal Planning Act, Public Act 285 of 1931, MCL 125.31 et seq. [repealed], to establish the appointments, qualifications and terms of membership of the planning commission; set the minimum number of meetings per year; and to prescribe the powers and duties of the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-193. - Establishment. 
    There shall be a city planning commission pursuant to Public Act 33 of 2008, as amended, being the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3801 et seq., hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission," with the powers and duties as therein set forth and as hereinafter provided. Members of the planning commission as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall continue to serve for the remainder of their existing terms so long as they continue to meet all of the eligibility requirements for planning commission membership set forth within the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as amended, as well as the requirements of the bylaws adopted by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-194. - Membership; qualifications; terms. 
(a)  The planning commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor with the approval of a majority of the city council elected and serving. 
(b)  The membership of the planning commission shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the economic, governmental, education, and social development of the city, in accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city, such as natural resources, recreation, education, public health, government, transportation, residential uses, industry, and commerce. The membership shall also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent practicable. 
(c)  Planning commission members shall be qualified electors of the city, except that one member may be an individual who is not a qualified elector of the city but who is a qualified elector of another local unit of government. 
(d)  There shall not be any ex officio members on the planning commission. 
(e)  The members shall hold no other municipal office, except that one of such members may be a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(f)  The term of each member shall be three years or until his successor takes office. Members shall hold office until their successors are appointed and qualified. 
(g)  Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of term shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointment. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-195. - Compensation. 
    There shall be no compensation for any member of the planning commission, except that reasonable expenses may be allowed on approval of the council. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-196. - Removal. 
    The city council may remove a member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-197. - Powers and duties. 
    The planning commission shall have the powers and duties as set forth in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act, Public Act 33 of 2008, MCL 125.3801 et seq., as amended, and the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public Act 110 of 2006, MCL 125.3101 et seq., as amended, and the rules, regulations, duties and authority of the planning commission, as outlined in the Michigan Planning Enabling Act shall apply in all cases. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-198. - Approval, ratification and reconfirmation. 
    All official actions taken by all city planning commissions preceding the planning commission established by this division are hereby approved, ratified and reconfirmed. Any project, review, or process taking place at the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived shall continue with the planning commission created by this division, subject to the requirements of this division, and shall be deemed a continuation of any previous city planning commission. This division shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption and publication. 
(Ord. No. 05-17, Pt. 2, 9-11-17) 
Secs. 2-199-2-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PUBLIC LIBRARY BOARD 

Sec. 2-206. - Established; duties. 
    There shall be established in the City of South Lyon an appointed board of directors for the South Lyon Public Library. Said board of directors shall be established pursuant to the applicable provisions of P.A. 164 of 1877, as amended, and said board shall have all the rights, duties and obligations outlined in the applicable sections of P.A. 164 of 1877, as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 1.190) 
Secs. 2-207-2-209. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-210. - Establishment. 
    There is hereby established a Cultural Arts Commission for the City of South Lyon which shall serve in an advisory capacity to the city council. The official title of the commission shall be the Cultural Arts Commission of the City of South Lyon and shall be hereinafter referred to as the commission. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 2-211. - Commission members. 
    The commission shall be composed of five members, appointed by the city manager of the City of South Lyon, subject to approval by the city council. Commission members shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 2-212. - Terms of office. 
    The term of office of the members of the commission shall be three years, except that the initial appointment shall be as follows: Two members shall be appointed for a period of three years; two members shall be appointed for a period of two years; and one member shall be appointed for a period of one year respectively, and thereafter each member shall hold office for a three-year term. Members of the commission may be removed by the city manager or city council pursuant to the provisions of the City Charter as may be amended, or at the sole discretion of the city manager, which such discretion shall be reasonable and with good cause. Vacancies occurring in the commission prior to the end of the scheduled term shall be filled by the City Manager of the City of South Lyon subject to approval by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. 
    As soon as practicable after the first appointment of members, the cultural arts commission shall meet in the City Hall of the City of South Lyon and shall organize by electing one of its members as chairperson, vice-chairperson, and secretary and shall arrange a time and place of holding meetings of the commission. The chairperson, vice-chairperson and secretary shall serve for a term of one year, but may serve for succeeding terms if reelected by the commission members. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 2-213. - Goals, objectives and purposes. 
    The goals, objectives and purposes of this commission are to advise and recommend to the city council and city administration appropriate means to encourage, facilitate and promote cultural and art in the city including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To provide promotional and educational activities aimed at increasing public awareness of the necessity and desirability of visual arts, performing arts, music and culture in the community so as to benefit and enrich the City of South Lyon and its residents. 
(2)  To develop a central clearing house in order to make recommendations pertaining to art and cultural projects and events and to facilitate or coordinate the scheduling, promotion and publicity of art and cultural events. 
(3)  To work with community groups, local, state, or federal governments, or other art or cultural organizations in order to enhance the artistic and cultural needs of the South Lyon community. 
(4)  To encourage the support of business, industry, educational institutions, civic organizations and service clubs, as well as the general public, in the promotion of culture and art in the city. 
(5)  To support and facilitate the goals and objectives of the city's present and future development plans including, but not limited to the master plan, parks and recreation master plan and other development plans as to the integration of culture and art into city planning and development. 
(6)  To make recommendations to city council for the purchase or acquisition, permanent or temporary, for as to any work of art, design, exhibit, for placement in city-owned facilities, properties or other public locations or for the hosting of any cultural event, to be funded by the city or other source of private or public funding. 
(7)  To develop and implement a culture and art plan for the City of South Lyon. 
(8)  To perform any other duty or responsibility as required or requested by city council, the city administration or otherwise deemed necessary to effectuate the intent of this division. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 2-214. - Budget and funding. 
    The commission shall annually recommend to the city council a budget with estimates for costs and expenses necessary to fund the objectives and purposes of the cultural arts commission. Any budget shall be reviewed, modified, or approved by the city council. City council may appropriate those sums deemed reasonable and sufficient to support and fund the expenses of the cultural arts commission in connection with the work of the commission. This section of the ordinance shall not be construed to confer upon the commission any right to contract or spend. The commission shall not obligate itself, or the city, in any financial undertaking or contractual obligation unless first authorized by the city manager or the city council by way of resolution. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Sec. 2-215. - Organization; gifts. 
    The commission is authorized upon council approval, to accept gifts and bequests for the furtherance of its authorized purposes in the name of the City of South Lyon under the control of the cultural arts commission. 
(Ord. of 5-14-12) 
Secs. 2-216-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, adopted Sept. 11, 2017, amended Art. VI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. VI, §§ 2-221-2-226, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, § 1.231-1.236. 

Sec. 2-221. - Purchasing agent. 
    The manager, or his or her designee, shall act as purchasing agent of the city. The manager shall adopt any necessary rules respecting requisitions and purchase orders. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-222. - Purchases or contracts under $10,000.00. 
    Purchases of supplies, materials or equipment, the cost of which is less than $10,000.00, may be made in the open market but such purchases shall, except where the manager shall determine that no advantage to the city would result or in the employment of professional services, be based on comparative prices supported by three written quotes and shall be awarded to the lowest competent bidder. The purchasing agent may contact prospective suppliers and vendors and solicit prices and quotes verbally, by telephone, or by written communication. A record shall be kept for six months of all open market orders and the comparative quotes submitted thereon, which records shall be available for public inspection. Purchases or contracts obligating the city in an amount less than $5,000.00 need not have the prior approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-223. - Written contract required. 
    All purchases and sales, regardless of monetary value, shall be made the subject of a written contract. A purchase order shall be a sufficient written contract in cases where the expenditure is in the usual and ordinary course of the city's affairs. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-224. - Approval for purchases or contracts over $5,000.00; competitive bidding for purchases or contracts over $10,000.00. 
    Any expenditure for supplies, materials, equipment, construction project or contract obligating the city, where the amount of the city's obligation is in excess of $5,000.00, shall be first approved by the city council. Where such expenditure or contract exceeds $10,000.00, it shall be subject to competitive bidding as herein prescribed except where the council shall determine that no advantage to the city would result or where the expenditure or contract is for professional services. Where competitive bidding is required, the following procedure will apply. 
(1)  The purchasing agent shall solicit bids from a reasonable number of such qualified prospective bidders as are known to him by sending each a copy of the notice requesting bids and notice thereof shall be posted in the city hall. Bids shall also be solicited by newspaper advertisement when directed by the city council. 
(2)  Unless prescribed by the council, the manager shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid, which deposit shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The amount of such security shall be expressed in terms of percentage of the bid submitted. Unless fixed by the council, the manager shall fix the amount of the performance bond and in the case of construction contracts, the amount of the labor and materials bond to be required of the successful bidders. 
(3)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the notice requesting bids in the presence of the purchasing agent, the city clerk and at least one other city official, preferably the head of the department most closely concerned with the subject of the contract. The bids shall thereupon be carefully examined and tabulated and reported to the council with the recommendation of the purchasing agent at the next council meeting. After tabulation all bids may be inspected by the competing bidders. In lieu of the procedure for opening bids herein specified, the council may direct that bids be opened at a council meeting. 
(4)  When such bids are submitted to the council, if the council shall find any of the bids to be satisfactory, it shall award the contract to the lowest competent bidder meeting specifications, unless the council shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting a higher bid. Such award may be by resolution or ordinance. The council shall have the right to reject any or all bids and to waive irregularities in bidding and to accept bids which do not conform in every respect to the bidding requirements. 
(5)  At the time the contract is executed by him, the contractor shall file a bond executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, to the city, conditioned to pay all laborers, mechanics, subcontractors and material-men as well as all just debts, dues and demands incurred in the performance of such work and shall file a performance bond when one is required. Said contractor shall also file evidence of public liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to the city manager, and agree to save the city harmless from loss or damage caused to any person or property by reason of the contractor's negligence. 
(6)  All bids and deposits of certified or cashier's checks may be retained until the contract is awarded and signed. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded to him within five days after the same has been awarded, or file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying his bid shall be forfeited to the city, and the council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lower competent bidder meeting specifications, or to another competent bidder meeting specifications if the council shall determine that the public interest will be better served by accepting such other bid, or said contract may be readvertised. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-225. - Emergency purchases. 
    In the case of any emergency, the city manager or his or her designee, may purchase any supplies, materials, equipment or services, necessary to the continuation of the operation, business, and work of the city or affected department or that is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare; provided, however, that if such purchase exceeds $5,000.00, it shall be reported to the city council at the next regular council meeting following such purchase. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-226. - Inspection of materials. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies and equipment shall rest with the ordering department. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Sec. 2-227. - Sale of property. 
    Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer needed for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale. Personal property not exceeding $500.00 in value may be sold for cash by the purchasing agent after receiving quotations or competitive bids therefor for the best price obtainable. Property with a value in excess of $500.00 may be sold after advertising and receiving competitive bids, as provided in section 2-224 of this Code and after approval of the sale has been given by the council. 
(Ord. No. 06-17, Pt. I, 9-11-17) 
Secs. 2-228-2-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 2-241. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the municipal ordinance violations bureau ordinance. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 1) 
Sec. 2-242. - Bureau established. 
(a)  Established; duties. The City of South Lyon hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau ("bureau") as authorized under MCL 600.8936 to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in response to municipal civil infraction notices of violation issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this article or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the city hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The city treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified city employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose of only municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction notice of violation has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges, and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions of responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), §§ 2-5) 
Sec. 2-243. - Municipal civil infraction notices of violation. 
    Municipal civil infraction notices of violation shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided by city ordinances. In addition to any other information required by this article or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the method by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 6) 
Sec. 2-244. - Appearance; payments of fines and costs. 
    An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction notice of violation shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and cost at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction notice of violation. Appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 7) 
Sec. 2-245. - Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. 
    If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance notice of violation and if an admission of responsibility is not made, and the civil fine and cost, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, the municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with the court, and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by MCL 600.8705 and MCL 600.8709, but shall consist of a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance notice of violation and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 8) 
Sec. 2-246. - Schedule of civil fines established. 
    A schedule of civil fines payable to the bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices is hereby established. The fines for violations listed below shall be as follows: 
Chapter/ 
Section No. Offense Fine Zoning ordinance violation $100.00 102 First repeat offense  250.00 Second or subsequent repeat offense  500.00 Construction code violations  100.00 18-31 First repeat offense  250.00 Second or subsequent repeat offense  500.00 All other chapters for which penalty is a municipal civil infraction All other ordinance violations  100.00 First repeat offense  250.00 Second or subsequent repeat offense  500.00  
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 9; Ord. of 10-8-07) 
Sec. 2-247. - Posting of schedule. 
    A copy of the schedule of civil fines as amended from time to time shall be posted at the bureau. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 10) 
Sec. 2-248. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of the article shall not be effected. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 11) 
Sec. 2-249. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective after publication as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(1), § 12) 
Secs. 2-250-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - REVIEW FEE ESCROW DEPOSITS 

Sec. 2-301. - Intent. 
(a)  Whereas, the cost to the city in reviewing and processing applications and requests for various actions and approvals may differ greatly between different applications and requests, can be significant especially when the city would incur additional and extraordinary out-of-pocket expenses (e.g., for engineering, planning, legal and/or other professional reviews) above and beyond what is associated with the typical review of minor projects. These costs and expenses cannot always be accurately predicted at the time an application or request is made; and 
(b)  Whereas, the city council believes that it is reasonable and appropriate that the actual costs and expenses associated with reviewing such applications, except for routine expenses, should be properly borne by the applicant or requestor rather than by the taxpayers of the city; and 
(c)  Whereas, the city council desires to set review fees for applications and requests for typical actions and approvals where the costs and expenses are more predictable and more easily estimated and to provide for procedures for requiring applicants and requestors to deposit amounts in escrow and guidelines for setting initial escrow deposit amounts where the action or approval is not typical and the costs and expenses of processing and reviewing it are not easily determined and may be extraordinary; and 
(d)  Whereas, the city council intends that review fees and escrow deposit amounts be reasonably proportionate to the costs and expenses incurred by the city for the particular application or request, and that such review fees and escrow amounts be used to defray the costs and expenses of processing and reviewing the application or request and of administering the review process and the city's Code of Ordinances and carrying out the city's business; and 
(e)  Whereas, the city council intends to set forth requirements and guidelines for review fee escrow deposits and reimbursement of costs and expenses incurred by the city from such escrow funds. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 2-302. - Requirements and guidelines. 
(a)  In addition to the other applicable zoning and review fees established and set by other city council resolutions, when the city manager, or his or her designee, determines that an application or request for city approval or action will require reviews, analysis, input and other information from consultants (engineers, planners, traffic engineers, environmental consultants, architects, attorneys, etc.) which have the potential to cause the city to incur unusual, exceptional, or extraordinary costs and expenses directly associated with the application or request, the city manager, or his or her designee, may require that the applicant or requester deposit funds to establish an escrow account against which such costs and expenses will be charged. 
(b)  The city may require that an escrow deposit be established for all applications and requests for which the city will incur expenses as determined by the city manager or his or her designee. 
(c)  The city manager, or his or her designee, shall determine the amount of the initial review fee escrow deposit estimated to be sufficient to cover the expected costs and expenses likely to be incurred by the city as a result of the application or request. The initial deposit shall not be less than $1,500.00. Factors for determining the initial escrow deposit amount shall include, but not be limited to, such variables as the size of the project, the characteristics and complexity of the project, the types of consultants needed to evaluate the application or request, time constraints, the need for specialized knowledge or expertise, and other relevant factors. If it is determined that a review fee escrow deposit is required, no application or request shall be processed until the initial escrow deposit is submitted to the City and all other applicable fees are paid. 
(d)  At no time prior to the city's completion of its review and processing of the application or request shall the escrow balance be allowed to drop below $500.00. If an escrow balance drops below $500.00, the city manager, or his or her designee, shall notify the applicant or requestor of the need to deposit additional escrow funds and the specific amount to be deposited. The applicant or requestor must deposit an additional amount as determined by the city manager, or his or her designee, to be reasonably necessary to cover the anticipated remaining and/or future costs and expenses to be incurred by the city and to be paid from the escrow. Any additional required deposits must be deposited promptly to the city in order to continue processing the application or request. All review and processing of the application or request, including being placed on meeting agendas, will be suspended until the additional escrow deposit is received by the city or an appeal of the matter has been decided in favor of the applicant or requestor. 
(e)  The city may draw funds from the applicant's escrow deposit to reimburse the city for costs and expenses incurred by the city directly related to the review and processing of the application, or to redistribute the funds to pay its consultants and agents upon verification of the costs and expenses incurred. The city shall maintain records regarding escrow deposits and balances and shall authorize the disbursement of escrow funds in writing. Such escrow funds shall be accounted for separately. Any remaining or excess escrow funds will be refunded by the city to the applicant without interest. If remaining or excess escrow funds are returned to the applicant or requestor by mail to the address specified on the escrow receipt or application, and is returned undelivered, the city shall hold such amount and return it to applicant or requestor on demand; however, if such demand is not made within one year after the remaining or excess escrow funds were returned undeliverable, such funds shall be deemed forfeited and shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(f)  No approval, building permit, certificate of use or occupancy permit, or other similar approval will be granted or issued by the city unless all required escrow fees have been deposited except as otherwise determined by the city for good cause. 
(g)  In the event an applicant or requestor objects to the reasonableness or amount of a required escrow deposit, including but not limited to the amount of the initial required escrow deposit, the amount of additional deposits required, or how the city has applied the escrow funds, an applicant or requestor may appeal the matter to the city council. All such appeals shall be in writing and shall be made not later than 30 days after the disputed action or billing. The city council shall establish a date and time to hear the appeal and shall permit the applicant or requestor, or its agent, to appear before the city council to object to and appeal the decision of the city manager, or his or her designee. The city council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the city manager, or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 10-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Chapter 6 - ADVERTISING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HANDBILL DISTRIBUTORS 

Sec. 6-31. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful to distribute, disseminate, post, place or otherwise cause to be distributed, disseminated, posted or placed any flyers, leaflets, posters, handbills, placards and any other such written or printed materials which advertise, display or otherwise inform or advocate within the City of South Lyon except in accordance herewith. 
(Code 1988, § 7.281) 
Sec. 6-32. - Permit required. 
    Any person desiring to distribute, disseminate, post, place or otherwise cause to be distributed any of the above described materials, in or upon any publicly owned or controlled property, including but not limited to rights-of-way and easements shall first have secured a permit therefor from the city clerk and shall have paid any prescribed fee therefor and furnished any bond pursuant thereto as determined by resolution of the city council. Any person thus securing a permit as aforesaid shall abide by and be bound by any special and general condition imposed therein at the peril of forfeiting any and all bond monies posted. Violation of any special or general terms and conditions shall also constitute a violation of this Code and subject the violator to prosecution hereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 7.282) 
Sec. 6-33. - Removal after event. 
    Any posters, placards, handbills or otherwise which shall be posted in or upon a public utility structure or otherwise within the City of South Lyon advertising an event or a candidate for election or otherwise informing of a particular date, shall be removed by the person posting or causing to be posted the said poster, placard or handbill within seven days after such event or meet has occurred. 
(Code 1988, § 7.283) 
Sec. 6-34. - Posting time limit. 
    Any placards, handbills or posters not advertising a specific date, but being merely informational in nature, shall not remain posted for more than 60 days and shall be removed by the person so posting or who has caused such item to be posted. 
(Code 1988, § 7.284) 
Sec. 6-35. - Method of distributing. 
    No person shall distribute posters, flyers, leaflets, handbills, etc., so as to cause the said posters, flyers, leaflets, handbills to become litter in and about any public or private property located within the City of South Lyon. For this purpose, it shall be unlawful for any person to scatter any such posters, flyers, leaflets, handbills, in any particular area or portion of the city. The dissemination of such material or items by any person shall be designed to either: 
(1)  Be given to the person or persons sought to be communicated with; or 
(2)  Reasonably affixed, attached or otherwise secured to door, doorknob, doorhandle or such other structure as may be reasonably calculated to prevent the blowing away of such material, and that the same shall be received by the owner or occupant or person otherwise designed to be communicated with. 
(Code 1988, § 7.285) 
Sec. 6-36. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(19), § 1(7.286)) 
Chapter 8 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL 

Secs. 8-1-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING 

Sec. 8-31. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as "The City of South Lyon Liquor License Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-32. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish the city's policies and procedures for regulating liquor licenses including application and review procedures for the issuance of new on-premises licenses, transfers of on-premises licenses into and within the city and among owners and/or applicants, and for the renewal and revocation of liquor licenses. The process is intended to ensure that the individuals and entities seeking licenses or who propose to operate licensed on-premises liquor establishments within the city, meet certain minimum requirements as to background, experience, financial resources, business operations and management and that the proposed establishment meets the needs of the community. It requires the city council to review application information in light of certain criteria to identify the kinds of applicants and establishments that best qualify for a license and best meet the needs of the city and its residents. It reserves to the city any and all discretion afforded to it under applicable laws relating to the issuance of on-premises licenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-33. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
    Act means the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq., as amended. 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt, or fermented liquor, powder, liquids, and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume that are fit for use for food purposes or beverage purposes as defined and classified by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
    Applicant means and includes all persons and entities proposed to be owners of the license and/or of the licensed premises, all key personnel involved in the management and operation of the licensed business, and all persons and entities proposed to be involved in the finance of the license and/or licensed premises. Applicant includes all owners, shareholders, officers, partners, members, and managers of an entity applying for a license. 
    Brewpub means a license issued in conjunction with a class C, tavern, class A hotel, or class B hotel license that authorizes the person licensed with the class C, tavern, class A hotel, or class B hotel to manufacture and brew not more than 18,000 barrels of beer per calendar year in Michigan and sell at those licensed premises the beer produced for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises in the manner provided for in sections 405 and 407 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998. A brewpub is considered a hybrid on- and off-premises liquor license. 
    Class C license means a place licensed to sell at retail beer, wine, mixed spirit drink, and spirits for consumption on the premises. 
    Club license means a liquor license issued to a club as defined by section 107 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1107). 
    Establishment means a business or premises whose primary function is the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-premises. 
    Hotel license means a liquor license issued to a hotel as defined in section 107 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1107). 
    License means a contract between the commission and the licensee granting authority to that licensee to manufacture and sell, or sell, or warehouse alcoholic liquor in the manner provided by the Act. 
    Licensee means an individual or entity holding a license issued under this chapter or by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission. 
    Michigan Liquor Control Commission and MLCC mean the liquor control commission provided for and created in section 209 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998 (MCL 436.1209). 
    Micro brewer means a brewer that produces in total less than 60,000 barrels of beer per year and that may sell the beer produced to consumers at the licensed brewery premises for consumption on or off the licensed brewery premises and to retailers as provided in MCL 436.1203. In determining the 60,000-barrel threshold, all brands and labels of a brewer, whether brewed in this state or outside this state, shall be combined and all facilities for the production of beer that are owned or controlled by the same person shall be treated as a single facility. 
    Minor means an individual less than 21 years of age. 
    Off-premises license means a liquor license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off the licensed premises, including SDD, SDM, and other licenses designated as such in the Act. 
    On-premises license shall mean a liquor license to sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the licensed premises, including class C, tavern, resort, club, hotel, brewpub and micro brewer licenses. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, limited liability company, or corporation. 
    Resort license means a liquor license issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission in a resort area, without regard to other liquor control commission quota requirements, in accordance with the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998. 
    Sale includes the exchange, barter, traffic, furnishing, or giving away of alcoholic liquor. 
    Special license means a contract between the commission and the special licensee granting authority to that licensee to sell beer, wine, mixed spirit drink, or spirits. The license shall be granted only to such persons and such organization and for such period of time as the commission shall determine so long as the person or organization is able to demonstrate an existence separate from an affiliated umbrella organization. If such an existence is demonstrated, the commission shall not deny a special license solely by the applicant's affiliation with an organization that is also eligible for a special license. 
    Special permit includes, but is not limited to, outdoor service permits, one-day licenses, after hours permits, temporary dance, entertainment, or add bar permits, specific purpose permits, and special licenses, as those terms are defined and utilized in the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998. 
    Specially designated distributor (SDD) means a person engaged in an established business licensed by the commission to distribute spirits and mixed spirit drink in the original package for the commission for consumption off the premises. 
    Specially designated merchant (SDM) means a person to whom the commission grants a license to sell beer or wine, or both, at retail for consumption off the licensed premises. 
    Tavern means any place licensed to sell retail beer and wine for consumption on the premises only. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-34. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of selling alcoholic liquor for consumption on premises in the City of South Lyon, transfer such a license into the city, transfer ownership or location of such a license within of the city, without first obtaining an approval for same by the city council as provided for in this chapter and also obtaining a license or approval therefor as required by the Act and MLCC. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-35. - Plan of operation required. 
(a)  Plan of operation. All on premises licensees shall operate in accordance with a plan of operation approved by the city council. 
(b)  Contents of plan. A plan of operation shall contain an operational statement outlining the proposed manner in which the establishment will be continuously operated consistent with the requirements of this chapter and the City Code of Ordinances, including, but not limited to, the opening date, the business concept, the anticipated food-to-alcohol ratio, a schedule of the days and hours of operation, method of alcohol management, crowd control/security, use of building facilities, parking facilities and arrangements, plan for interior use and layout, exterior design, layout of any ancillary facilities on the site, dance/entertainment permits needed or requested, estimated cost of building and site improvements, and any other pertinent information as requested by the city. 
(c)  Use of liquor license. It is the intent of the city that approved licenses shall be put into use immediately following approval. Non-use, inactivity, escrowing, or warehousing of licenses is prohibited in the plan of operation. 
(d)  Compliance. Licensees shall comply with all applicable state and city regulations, this chapter, and a plan of operation as approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-36. - Application and review procedures. 
(a)  Application. In addition to such application(s) as may be required by the Act and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for licensing by the State of Michigan, each applicant for a new on-premises license, transfer of an on-premises license into the city, or relocation or transfer of an existing on-premises license within the city or among owners and applicants, shall submit to the city clerk's office a fully completed "City of South Lyon Liquor License Application" on a form furnished by the clerk's office signed by the applicant or a duly authorized agent, along with the required fee(s) and all additional documents and materials referred to in the application form or otherwise required under this article. 
(b)  Required information. The applicant shall include, with the application, at least the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be provided, and a copy of any partnership agreement attached. If the applicant is a privately-held corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers, members of the board of directors, and stockholders shall be provided, and a copy of the articles of incorporation attached. If the applicant is a publicly-held corporation, the names and addresses of all corporate officers, members of the board of directors, and stockholders who own ten percent or more of the corporate stock shall be provided. If the applicant is a limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members, managers and assignees of membership interests shall be provided, and a copy of the articles of organization attached. 
(2)  The type of license and/or related permit(s) requested. 
(3)  The address, legal description, and zoning district of the property where the licensed establishment is to be located. 
(4)  The name and address of the record fee owner of the premises, and, if the applicant is not the owner, proof of its interest in or right to occupy the premises. 
(5)  Building and site plans showing the site and existing structures for the proposed establishment demonstrating compliance with zoning requirements, adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, and where appropriate, adequate plans for sound barriers and noise control. If the establishment is to be located in a proposed building for which site plan approval has not yet been obtained, or in an existing building that is to be remodeled, a conceptual plan showing the relationship of the building to the surrounding properties and uses, and proposed building elevations. 
(6)  A plan of operation as referenced in section 8-35. 
(7)  A written statement as to the applicant's character, experience, and financial ability to meet the obligations and business undertakings for which the license is to be issued, including the length of time the applicant has been in business of that character; or in the case of a partnership or other business entity, the date when it was created, established or organized. 
(8)  Three written references as to the applicant's character, experience, and financial ability to meet the obligations and business undertakings for which the license is desired. 
(9)  A written statement identifying the source of all funds which will be relied upon for the establishment and operation of the proposed establishment sought to be licensed including the name and address of the financial institution where such funds are deposited. 
(10)  A statement whether the applicant has operated or made application for a similar or another license on any premises other than described in this application, and the status or disposition of such license or application. 
(11)  Whether a manager or person other than the applicant will manage the operations of the proposed establishment, and if so, the identity(ies) of such managers or persons. 
(12)  A criminal background report of the applicant's criminal history through the Internet Criminal History Access Tool (ICHAT). The applicant is responsible for all charges incurred in requesting and receiving the ICHAT report and the report must be dated within 30 days of the date of the application. 
(13)  A statement that the applicant is not disqualified to receive a license for any reason under this chapter or state law. 
(14)  An accurate record and history of any liquor license or Liquor Control Act violations by the applicant, and any entity the applicant has worked for or had a substantial interest in, or by a parent or subsidiary entity of the applicant for the immediate preceding five years. 
(15)  A written statement explaining in detail how the application and applicant meet the review criteria listed in subsection (f). 
(16)  Any other information pertinent to the applicant, premises, and operation of the proposed establishment as may be required by this chapter, including information regarding each of the criteria listed in subsection (f). 
(c)  Investigation. Following receipt of a complete application, fees and other information as may be requested by the city, the city manager will refer the application to the police department, fire department, planning department, building department, economic development department, public works department, and such other departments as deemed appropriate, which departments shall cause a thorough review and investigation of the applicant(s) and premises to be completed, including, but not limited to, an investigation regarding the background of the applicant(s) and owners, a complete history of past business and experience and liquor law violations, the proposed premises, code compliance, payment of taxes and utility charges, availability of utilities. The findings and results of the investigations, including where applicable, recommendations, shall be provided to the city manager, who shall then report same to the city council. In making its reviews and investigations, the city, and its departments, may request other pertinent information from the applicant. 
(d)  Placement upon city council agenda. Upon receipt by the city manager of the findings, results, and recommendations of the department investigations, the city manager shall place the application on a city council agenda for consideration. Due notice will be provided to the applicant, and the applicant will be required to appear before the city council and make an oral and/or written presentation and address any questions concerning the application. 
(e)  City council action required. All applications are subject to action by the city council. The city council may approve with or without conditions, postpone consideration for a reasonable period, or deny the license. If the license is either approved or denied, the city council shall cause its decision to be transmitted to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission and promptly give notice of the decision to the applicant, in writing. Unless otherwise indicated by the city council, all approvals are conditioned upon the applicant obtaining any required building permits and any other necessary permits, licenses, or approvals from the city, including special land use approval, or approvals from other regulatory agencies within 60 days or such other time period specified by the city council from the date of such conditional approval. The construction of new buildings and alterations of existing buildings shall commence within six months after the date of the conditional approval, with a completion date of no more than one year after the issuance of the relevant building permit. Extensions of time for completion of construction or alteration or to meet conditions may be granted by the city council for good cause as determined in its sole discretion. Failure to comply with such conditions shall render the license, and any approval, subject to revocation. 
(f)  Review criteria. In making its determination pursuant to subsection 8-36(e), the city council may consider and/or weigh, in its discretion, the following factors: 
(1)  Surrounding land uses and proximity to residences, schools, and churches, and any potential adverse effect the surrounding area and land uses, including vehicular and pedestrian traffic and movement, parking, noise and input from residents and businesses. 
(2)  The investigations, findings and recommendations of the city departments regarding the applicant, application, and proposed premises and establishment. 
(3)  The applicant's history and experience, if any, in conducting a business holding a liquor license, including history of MLCC violations and other business and operations and management experience. 
(4)  The applicant's financial status and its ability to build and/or operate the proposed establishment. 
(5)  Past criminal convictions of the applicant for felonies and crimes involving moral turpitude, violence, or alcoholic liquors, including, but not limited to: gambling, prostitution, weapons, tax evasion, fraudulent activity, controlled substances, crimes or violations of such a nature that it may impair the ability of the applicant to operate a licensed establishment in a safe and competent manner. 
(6)  Non-payment or late payment of taxes and utility bills. 
(7)  The availability of utilities to serve the proposed establishment. 
(8)  Compliance with applicable building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes, zoning ordinance, or other applicable ordinances, laws, codes, and regulations. 
(9)  The nature and extent of preservation or restoration of existing or historic buildings. 
(10)  The number, proximity and capacity of similar licensed establishments in the city and surrounding area 
(11)  The amount to be invested in the proposed premises/establishment and the effect on the economic development of the city or the surrounding area. 
(12)  Whether the proposed establishment is part of a multi-use project with substantial new retail, office or residential components; the size of the proposed establishment relative to the overall project or development. 
(13)  Whether the applicant has demonstrated a public need or convenience for the issuance of the liquor license for the business establishment at the location proposed. 
(14)  The plan of operation including the type or character of proposed establishment and services, menu and entertainment to be offered, the overall theme, atmosphere, or ambiance of the proposed business, the proposed hours and days of operation, the proposed ratio of sales of food to alcohol, the size and percent of floor area devoted to kitchen, dining, dance floor, bar, outdoor service areas. 
(15)  The impact of the establishment on city policing and code enforcement activities, and the possibility of consequent costs to the city. 
(16)  The overall benefits and/or detriments of the proposed establishment to the city. 
(17)  Any other factors that may affect the health, safety and/or welfare of the general public. 
(g)  Restrictions on licenses. No license shall be issued to the following unless such applicable restriction is waived by city council: 
(1)  Any person whose liquor license has been revoked or not renewed for cause under this article, or a comparable local ordinance or state law, whether in Michigan or otherwise. 
(2)  Any person who, at the time of application or renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application. 
(3)  Any applicant, including any owner, shareholder, officer, partner, member, manager, or assignee thereof, owing a ten percent interest or more would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder or the Act for any reason. 
(4)  Any person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease or other right to possess or occupy the premises for the full period for which the license is issued. 
(5)  Any law enforcement official or any member of the council, or to any such official having interest in any way, either directly or indirectly, in manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor. 
(6)  Any applicant who omits or falsifies any information required by this article. 
(7)  Any premises where there exists a violation of the applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations or any other applicable city ordinance without approved arrangements for correction or achieving compliance. 
(8)  Any premises that does not, or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, noise or nuisance control, or such new construction or remodeling as proposed would not be completed. 
(h)  Changes in plans, drawings, etc. After receipt of a conditional approval by the city council, no site plan, floor plan, building elevation, seating arrangement, kitchen layout, or other pertinent facts, drawings, or documents submitted to the city may be changed without the applicant first receiving approval from the city planning, engineering, and building departments and city council. 
(i)  Recommendation for approval of liquor license. Upon completion of the building and/or improvements and satisfaction of all other conditions and in accordance with the prior conditional approval of the city council and resolution, if applicable, the city council shall then recommend, above all others, the applicant for approval of the liquor license to the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Michigan. 
(j)  Reservation of authority. No applicant for a liquor license has a right to the issuance of such license, and the city council reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-37. - Substantial changes in licensed operations. 
(a)  Substantial changes in the licensee's operations or plan of operation within three years of the license being issued must be approved by the city council. Substantial changes shall include, but are not limited to: changes in space, percentage of food or other sales not related to liquor, changes in hours of operations, capacity, or parking of 25 percent or more. Changes in the theme, style or character of an establishment, alone, shall not constitute a substantial change. No fee shall be charged for this process. The licensee is responsible for compliance with this section within 14 days of the change of information or circumstances. 
(b)  Variance from or failure to comply with an approved plan of operation or obtain approval of a substantial change in operations of a licensed establishment is a violation of this article and may result in the city objecting to the renewal or recommending revocation of the license, or other action. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-38. - Transfers of existing on-premises licenses. 
(a)  The city council has determined that profiteering by on-premises liquor licensees is contrary to the best interests of the city. Accordingly, to prevent profiteering, to the full extent authorized by law, the city council shall not approve the transfer of an on-premises liquor license issued as a new license under this chapter within three years of the date of the original issuance of the license except that the city council may, but is not required to, waive this restriction in the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the licensee is a natural person, he or she dies or becomes incapacitated. 
(2)  If the licensee is a business entity (e.g., limited liability company, corporation, partnership), the majority interest holder or owner dies or becomes incapacitate, or the business entity dissolves for reasons other than to transfer the license. 
(3)  The licensee and the proposed transferee establish that the transfer shall not result in profiteering. 
(4)  The application of this section will subject the licensee to financial hardship due to no fault of its own, such as a change in the business climate, illness or death, labor or supply problems, and/or other factors outside the licensee's control. 
(b)  The transfer of any existing on-premises liquor license into, within, out of the city or to a different owner(s) shall require approval of the city council. An applicant for approval of a license transfer and the use and occupancy of such a license shall: 
(1)  Submit an application with all of the information required under subsection 8-36(b) above for a new on-premises liquor license, including a plan of operation; 
(2)  Pay the applicable fees. 
(3)  Furnish any necessary authorization allowing the city access to any and all files which may be in the Michigan Liquor Control Commission's possession regarding the transferee as a present licensee, or as a previous licensee, or in which transferee has or has had a partial interest in. 
(c)  In reviewing an application for license transfer, the city council may consider the criteria listed in subsection 8-36(f). 
(d)  Requests for approvals of transfers of licenses shall be approved or denied in the sole discretion of the city council. 
(e)  Transfers that involve the following circumstances may be placed on a city council agenda for consideration, without payment of a fee and without the necessity of furnishing the information required for new licenses: 
(1)  The exchange of the assets of a licensed sole proprietorship, licensed general partnership, or licensed limited partnership for all outstanding shares of stock in a corporation in which the sole proprietor, all members of the general partnership, or all members of the limited partnership are the only stockholders of that corporation. 
(2)  The removal of a member of a firm, a stockholder, a member of a general partnership or limited partnership, or association of licensees from a license. 
(3)  The occurrence of any of the following events: i) a corporate stock split, ii) issuing previously unissued stock shares to an existing shareholder, iii) redemption of stock shares by a licensed corporation; and iv) a public offering of stock. 
(f)  Existing permits ancillary to liquor licenses are transferred with the liquor license unless cancelled in writing. Transferees must present plans regarding the operation they intend to conduct using a permit. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-39. - Objections to renewal and requests for revocation. 
(a)  Generally. The city council may, at any time, review a license and object to a renewal or request the revocation of a liquor license with the MLCC. 
(b)  Procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal or requesting revocation of a license with the MLCC, the city shall serve the licensee a notice of hearing, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the hearing, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Reason(s) for the hearing and proposed action. 
(2)  Date, time and place of the hearing. 
(3)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony, and may confront witnesses and may be represented by a licensed attorney. 
(c)  Hearing and final decision. The hearing may be conducted by city council as a whole, or by a hearing officer appointed by the city council for such purposes. If a hearing officer is appointed, it shall be the officer's duty to conduct the hearing and hear and take evidence and testimony. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the city council for its ultimate final review and decision. The city council shall submit to the licensee and the MLCC, a written statement of its ultimate findings and determination. 
(d)  Criteria for non-renewal or revocation. The city council may recommend non-renewal or request revocation of a license upon a determination by it that, based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at a hearing, any of the following exists: 
(1)  A violation of any section of this chapter, the Act, or the rules and regulations of the MLCC, including sales of alcoholic liquor to minors. 
(2)  A violation of any applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire code; applicable zoning regulations; applicable public health regulations; applicable rules and regulations of the county health department; or any other applicable city code provision. 
(3)  Maintenance of a nuisance on the premises. 
(4)  A license being or remaining unused or inactive for one year after being issued without further approval from the city council. 
(5)  A license being placed in and remaining in escrow for five years or more. 
(6)  A material change in those conditions, statements or representations contained in the written application by the licensee, including a plan of operation, upon which the city council based its recommendation for approval, when, in the judgment of the city council, that change is found to be contrary to the best interest of the city and/or its residents. 
(7)  A licensee has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
(8)  The premises does not, or will not reasonably soon, have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise or nuisance control where a nuisance does or will exist. 
(9)  Non-payment of taxes relating to the premises related to the license. 
(10)  Other factors negatively impacting the general health, safety and welfare of the community and the public. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-40. - Fees. 
    Each applicant for a new on-premises license or license transfer shall pay a nonrefundable application investigation fee in an amount set by city council resolution. Such fee will be in addition to any fee(s) required by the MLCC. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Sec. 8-41. - Nudity. 
    No person, while appearing in a state of public nudity as defined in section 5h of Act 279 of 1909, being MCL 117.5h, shall frequent, loiter, work for or perform in any establishment licensed or subject to licensing by the state liquor control commission. No proprietor or operator of any such establishment shall allow the presence in such establishment of any person who violates the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 03-18, Pt. I, 5-14-18) 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Prohibited amusements. 
(a)  The following listed amusements are each and all, and every component part thereof, hereby declared to constitute public nuisances contrary to the safety, health, morals and welfare of the public, which said amusements are commonly known as: 
(1)  Shooting galleries. 
(2)  Endurance contests or marathons. 
(3)  Freak shows, where artificial or natural curiosities are exhibited. 
(b)  No person shall conduct, participate in, attend or sell or purchase tickets for any such affair in the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.224) 
Secs. 10-2-10-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BOWLING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 10-31. - Definition. 
    Bowling establishment shall mean any place open to the public for bowling. 
(Code 1988, § 7.171) 
Sec. 10-32. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of operating a bowling establishment without first obtaining a license therefor. No license shall be granted except upon certification of the director of public safety and unless a complete set of fingerprints of the applicant therefor are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the police department. Each license shall designate the number of bowling lanes permitted thereunder, and no licensee shall keep or maintain more lanes than permitted by such license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.172) 
Sec. 10-33. - Hours. 
    No person shall keep open any bowling establishment on any day between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
(Code 1988, § 7.173) 
Sec. 10-34. - Public institutions excepted. 
    This article shall not be applicable to bowling establishments operated and owned by public institutions. 
(Code 1988, § 7.174) 
Sec. 10-35. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(15), § 1(7.175)) 
Secs. 10-36-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DANCES AND DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 10-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Public dance means any dance to which the general public is invited, expressly or impliedly, except dances sponsored by the city. 
    Teenage dance means any public dance where minors under 17 years of age are permitted to attend. 
(Code 1988, § 7.181) 
Sec. 10-52. - Sanitary facilities. 
    Every dance hall or place where public dances are held shall make proper provisions for ventilation, either natural or mechanical, so that each person in the hall will be supplied with 1,200 cubic feet of air per hour, and sufficient toilet conveniences shall be provided so that there will be at least one women's toilet in good sanitary condition per 2,000 square feet of floor space, or fraction thereof; at least one men's toilet and urinal in good sanitary condition per 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof, and provision made for privacy therein; at least one wash stand in each toilet provided with soap and sanitary towels; at least one sanitary drinking fountain, either on the dance floor or reasonably accessible thereto for each 4,000 square feet of floor space or fraction thereof. Every dance hall shall have sufficient fire exits free from all rubbish and inflammable material as required by the regulations of the state fire marshal, and at least one free and unobstructed means of exit from the premises in addition to the main entrance thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 7.182) 
Sec. 10-53. - Building code requirements. 
    Any place in which public dances are held shall comply with all building code requirements of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.183) 
Sec. 10-54. - Registration of teenage dances. 
    No person shall conduct or permit any teenage dance to be conducted on premises under his control unless each such teenage dance is registered with the director of public safety not less than 24 hours prior to the holding thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7.184) 
Sec. 10-55. - General regulations. 
    The following general regulations shall apply to the conduct of all teenage dances: 
(1)  No minor admitted to a teenage dance shall be permitted to leave and thereafter enter the dancing premises during the course of the event and no pass-out checks shall be issued except in emergencies and when authorized specifically by the adult person responsible for conducting the dance or a special police officer in charge of the premises as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  No alcoholic liquor shall be sold, consumed or be available on the premises in or about which any teenage dance is held. Admission to a teenage dance shall be denied any person showing any evidence of drinking any alcoholic liquor or who has any alcoholic liquor on his person. 
(3)  Sufficient supervisors shall be provided at every teenage dance in order to keep law and order and properly supervise and obtain acceptable standards of social behavior at all times. At all times during the course of every teenage dance there shall be on the premises at least one supervisor who is a special police officer in uniform, provided at the expense of the adult person registering such teenage dance, which officer may be either an off-duty police officer of the city or a deputy sheriff. 
(4)  No person of the age of 20 years or more shall attend or be permitted to attend any teenage dance as a participant; provided, however, that this regulation shall not prevent or interfere with the attendance of supervisors, parents or sponsors who do not participate in the dance, nor shall it prohibit persons employed as entertainers, musicians, waitresses or other attendants at such dances. No person under the age of 14 years shall attend or be permitted to attend any teenage dance. 
(5)  No dance which must be registered as a teenage dance shall be conducted in any place other than a dance hall conforming with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.185) 
Sec. 10-56. - Police regulations. 
    The location, conduct and performance of teenage dances shall be subject to such additional reasonable and proper rules, regulations and orders as shall be imposed by the police department. If, for any stated reason, the police department shall find and determine that a dance hall is not a fit and proper place for the holding of a teenage dance, no such teenage dance shall be held therein until the situation or circumstances making such location improper have been corrected. If the police department shall determine that the supervisors provided are not satisfactory or adequate, such supervisors shall be replaced or supplemented as required. It shall be the obligation of the persons sponsoring and registering the teenage dance and all persons participating in such dance to obey and comply with the rules, regulations and orders of the police department in the conduct of such dance. Any such person failing or refusing to obey and comply with any such rule, regulation or order shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.186) 
Sec. 10-57. - Violations and penalties. 
    Any person who violates subsection 10-55(2) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 and/or 90 days in jail. A violation of any other provision of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(16), § 1(7.187)) 
Secs. 10-58-10-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Arcade means any place of business or establishment wherein are located five or more commercial amusement devices or the principal business purpose of the establishment is the offering of amusement devices to the public. 
    Commercial amusement device means an instrument, machine or contrivance which may be operated or set in motion upon the insertion of a coin or token or the use of which may be permitted by the payment of a fee and which provides amusement, information or entertainment. Specifically excluded from the purview of this article are devices which only furnish music and which are commonly referred to as "juke boxes," scales for the express purpose of giving weights, medical devices such as those providing blood pressure information, pool and billiard tables and bowling lanes. 
    Owner means any person who owns, operates or conducts any place or establishment in which commercial amusement devices may be operated and the owner or owners of any such commercial amusement device. 
    Principal business purpose means or refers to that occupation or use of the premises to which the enterprise in possession directs its efforts and from which it receives its major source of revenue. In determining principal business purpose, for use in this article, signage, advertising, and other evidence of economic activity encouraging or soliciting use of mechanical amusement devices shall be evidence of "principal business purpose" as used in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.241) 
Sec. 10-72. - Repeal. 
    All ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this article are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
(Code 1988, § 7.254) 
Sec. 10-73. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections, sentences, clauses and phrases of this article as an entirety, it being the legislative intent that this article shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any such section, sentence, clause or phrase. 
(Code 1988, § 7.255) 
Sec. 10-74. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby effective ten days after enactment and publication thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7.256) 
Sec. 10-75. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(18), § 1(7.257)) 
Secs. 10-76-10-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-91. - Required. 
(a)  No arcade shall be established, maintained or conducted in the City of South Lyon by any owner without first obtaining a license to operate such place from the City of South Lyon. 
(b)  No commercial amusement device shall be operated in the City of South Lyon without the owner or his agent first obtaining a commercial amusement device license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.242) 
Sec. 10-92. - Application for license; fee; term. 
(a)  Applications for both an arcade and commercial device license shall be made to the city clerk on a form provided by the clerk's office, and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this section. The application for license shall state, among other things, the number and type of machines or devices intended to be operated; the proposed locations for such machines or devices; the proposed business address; the full name of the business; and the full name, present address and date of birth of each and every owner of such business. 
(b)  The application for license shall be accompanied by the license fee; such fee shall be that fee incorporated in this article. 
(c)  The application for arcade license shall also be accompanied by a drawing showing the floor plan of the proposed business, all exits, the proposed location of each commercial amusement device, and its floor space requirements as required under the building code of the City of South Lyon. 
(d)  An application for a commercial amusement device license shall be accompanied by a drawing showing the proposed location of said device. Any change in the location of same must be reported to and approved by the city. 
(e)  No license shall be issued until such time as the fire chief, or his designated representative, has determined that the proposed location of each commercial amusement device will not interfere with egress from the building in case of fire, and that all fire regulations have been satisfied. 
(f)  No such licenses shall be issued until such time as the building official has determined that all electrical, pneumatic and hydraulic connections to each commercial amusement device comply with the city Code, and that all building and zoning regulations have been satisfied. 
(g)  No license shall be issued until such time as the police chief has verified the accuracy of the information set forth in the application. Should said application be incomplete or contain material inaccuracies, same shall be grounds for denial of the license. In addition, the police chief shall investigate as to any possible criminal record of the applicant or the officers and directors, if the applicant is a corporation. Should it be determined that any of said parties have, within two years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or involving the operation of an arcade, or of any felony, said conviction shall be grounds for denial of the license. 
(h)  If, after the issuance of any license, the licensee desires to operate additional commercial amusement devices or to relocate those machines already in place, the applicant shall submit an amended application, in a form similar to the original application, showing the additions, changes or modifications desired. Any drawings or other information filed with the original license application and not affected by the additions, changes or modifications requested may be incorporated by reference in the amended application. 
(i)  The term of any license granted shall begin February 1 of the license year and shall terminate on January 31 of the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and processed and licenses issued for a period of 30 days prior to the annual expiration date. 
(Code 1988, § 7.243) 
Sec. 10-93. - Right of issuance. 
    The fire chief, police chief, and the building official shall either recommend approval or disapproval of the application for license within 15 days of receipt by them, and forward such recommendation to the city clerk. Should an application be disapproved, the reason therefor shall be endorsed upon the application and the applicant shall be notified thereof. The applicant shall be entitled to request a hearing before the city council in the event of disapproval of application. 
(Code 1988, § 7.244) 
Sec. 10-94. - Exempt persons; fee. 
    No license fee shall be required for any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this section. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to said exemption and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7.245) 
Sec. 10-95. - Prohibitions and restrictions on licenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any arcade licensee to permit or suffer: 
(1)  The operating or playing of any commercial amusement device between the hours of 12:00 midnight (12:00 a.m.) and 8:00 a.m. in the morning of any day. This restriction shall not be in effect where the commercial amusement devices are located in premises licensed of the Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. 
(2)  The attendance of any person under 16 years of age in any arcade during the normal school hours of the South Lyon School System. This shall not apply when the schools are not in operation. 
(3)  The attendance of any person under 16 years of age to remain in or frequent an arcade if the parent or legal guardian of such minor shall notify the person operating the said arcade of their objection to said minor person's presence in the arcade. Such notification shall be in writing and must be accompanied by a recent photograph of said minor. This written notification shall be given to the person operating the arcade either in person or by U.S. mail. 
(4)  The operation of a commercial amusement device without the presence of a uniform security guard, licensed as such by the State of Michigan, clothed, with full authority from the owner to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  The installation of any commercial amusement device which offers for viewing photographs, motion pictures or displays of any actual or simulated sexual act, act of sexual perversion, masturbation or frontal nudity displaying genital organs of males or females. 
(Code 1988, § 7.246) 
Sec. 10-96. - Prohibitions and restrictions on commercial amusement device license. 
    It shall be unlawful for any commercial amusement device licensee to permit or suffer: 
(1)  The operation of a commercial amusement device without the presence of the owner or his adult (18 years or older) designee. 
(2)  The installation of any commercial amusement device which offers for viewing photographs, motion pictures or displays of any actual or simulated sexual act, act of sexual perversion, masturbation or frontal nudity displaying genital organs of males or females. 
(Code 1988, § 7.247) 
Sec. 10-97. - Display of license. 
    The license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in the place of business. It shall be unlawful for any person to display any expired, revoked or fictitious license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.248) 
Sec. 10-98. - Conduct on premises. 
    No licensee, by himself, directly or indirectly, or by any servant, agent or employee shall: 
(1)  Permit any indecent, immoral or profane language. 
(2)  Permit the licensed premises to become a resort; or permit disorderly persons of any type. 
(3)  Permit immoral, vulgar, lewd, obscene conduct. 
(4)  Permit gambling or the use, possession or presence of gambling paraphernalia on the premises. The winning of anything of value, excluding free games, as a result of the operation of a commercial amusement device shall constitute gambling. 
(5)  Permit intoxicated persons to loiter on the premises. 
(6)  Permit the possession or use of any alcoholic liquor on the premises; nor shall the licensed premises be accessible in any way to any place where alcoholic liquor is kept, sold, distributed or given away. This restriction shall not be in effect where the commercial amusement devices are located in premises licensed by Michigan Liquor Control Commission to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption. 
(7)  Permit the possession or use of any drug or narcotic, including marijuana, or any drug paraphernalia on the premises. 
(8)  Permit noise or music to emerge from licensed premises which is disturbing to the surrounding area. 
(9)  Permit any violations of the city Code of the City of South Lyon or the laws of the State of Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 7.249) 
Sec. 10-99. - Renewal and transferability. 
    Any license issued in accordance with this act may be renewed for an additional year upon the same terms and subject to the same requirements as provided herein for an original license. Whenever the holder of such license desires to effect a change of place of doing business he shall notify the city council and make application for a license for such new place in the same manner as in the first instance, excepting that proof of good character may be dispensed with by such city council. No license pursuant to this article shall be assignable or transferable nor shall any person excepting the person to which it was issued be permitted to do business thereunder either directly or indirectly. 
(Code 1988, § 7.250) 
Sec. 10-100. - Revocation. 
    The city council shall have the right to revoke any license granted or deny annual renewal when it appears to their satisfaction that any licensee has violated this article or any other ordinance of the City of South Lyon or the statutes of the State of Michigan. The revocation of any license or the denial of renewal thereof shall not be made without a hearing. Notice must first be given to the applicant or licensee setting forth the time and place of hearing and the reasons for such revocation or denial of renewal of said license. Should it be determined that any of said parties have, within two years prior to the date of the application, been convicted of any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or involving the operation of an arcade, or of any felony, said conviction shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.251) 
Sec. 10-101. - Fees. 
(a)  A fee equal to $25.00 per commercial amusement device plus the normal fees charged for city inspections shall be provided at the time of applying for a commercial amusement device or arcade license. The fees are the same for a new or renewing license. If the license is denied, the portion of the fee on deposit relating to the $25.00 per machine shall be refunded. 
(b)  Licensees wishing to add to the number of commercial amusement devices shall upon approval of the request pay a fee of $25.00 for each additional commercial amusement device added to their license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.252) 
Secs. 10-102-10-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - THEATERS, SHOWS AND EXHIBITIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement park means any lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or in part for a period of two weeks or more as a site for one or more concession. 
    Carnival means any lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or in part for a period of less than two weeks as a site for one or more concessions. 
    Circus mean any lot, tract, or parcel of land used in whole or in part for public or private display or performance of animals, wild or domesticated, whether or not containing one or more concessions. 
    Concession means: 
(1)  A mechanical device designed to give an amusement ride; 
(2)  A game of skill in which a reward for ability is offered; 
(3)  A game of chance in which a prize or reward is offered; 
(4)  A theatrical exhibition or public show; 
(5)  A place where any specialized type of service is offered to the public for a fee; 
(6)  Any mechanical amusement device including such devices as marble machines, skee ball, mechanical grab machines, TV display devices or machines, video games, and all other games, operations, or transactions thereto whether operated principally by mechanical means or electrical means or a combination thereof under whatever name they may be indicated or called; or 
(7)  A stand or booth where food and beverages are sold. 
    Person means and includes both singular and plural and shall mean and embrace any individual, firm, cooperation, association, partnership, or society and their agents, servants, or employees. 
(Code 1988, § 7.200) 
Sec. 10-132. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(17), § 1(7.225)) 
Secs. 10-133-10-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 10-146. - Animal shows and exhibitions. 
    No person shall conduct any dog or pony show or menagerie, without first obtaining a license therefor. Such license shall be known as an animal show license. No person shall conduct any panorama, exhibition of statuary or painting, or any other exhibition, not otherwise licensed under this article, and for which an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as an exhibition license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.222) 
Sec. 10-147. - Theaters. 
    No person shall conduct a moving picture show, vaudeville, opera house, theater or other place for the giving of plays and other theatrical exhibitions where an admission fee is charged, without first obtaining a license therefor to be known as a theater license. The requirements of this section shall not be applicable to exhibitions or shows given for charity or for the benefit of schools or benevolent, educational, fraternal or religious societies. 
(Code 1988, § 7.223) 
Sec. 10-148. - Operations. 
    No person shall manage, operate, or maintain an amusement park, carnival, or circus within the city limits until he has first obtained from the city a license authorizing him to carry on such business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.201) 
Sec. 10-149. - Application for license. 
    Application for a license shall be made in writing and under oath to the city clerk on a form to be provided by the city and shall set forth among other things a proposed location of the business, the zoning designation of the proposed premises, the name of the owner or owners, the type of ownership, the number of concessions and their nature and description, the type and location of available sanitary facilities (including restrooms or port-a-johns) a diagram drawn to scale showing the location of each concession on the proposed premises, the location of all structures within 500 feet of the perimeter of the proposed location and plans and specifications for all electrical sources, installations, and uses, if any. The application for license shall be accompanied by a deposit, in cash or certified check, of the required license fee. In the event the license is denied, 50 percent of such deposit will be refunded to the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 7.202) 
Sec. 10-150. - Other requirements for license. 
(a)  All concessions involving mechanical rides must have a state license or temporary permit as provided by Public Act 225 of 1966, as amended. This license or permit must be attached to the concession or available at the concession for inspection. 
(b)  All food concessions must display a current Oakland County Health Department Temporary Food Service Permit. 
(c)  A competent operator must be in charge of each concession or other amusement. Sufficient numbers of persons to supervise the entire carnival, amusement park, or circus and maintain order therein must be supplied by the owner or operator thereof. 
(d)  The applicant shall have at least two persons to provide security service on the premises of each amusement park or carnival during all hours of operation; the chief of police or the city council shall, as a condition of the issuance of a license, have the ability to require the applicant to provide additional security service if the type, size, or location of the activity requires additional security service for the protection of patrons and nearby areas; all security personnel shall be off-duty law enforcement officers or persons licensed under state law. 
(e)  The operator and sponsor of the proposed activity shall each be wholly responsible for maintaining order and/or keeping the site clean, free of trash, papers, and other debris. Trash containers in adequate number shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(f)  Adequate safeguards shall be placed to protect both the operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards. 
(g)  An applicant seeking a license under this division to operate a circus must certify to the city that all animals to be used or accompany the circus are in good health, free of disease, and in compliance with all state laws governing keeping and maintaining animals within this state. 
(Code 1988, § 7.203) 
Sec. 10-151. - Inspection and insurance requirements. 
(a)  No license shall be issued until the applicant submits a certificate of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Michigan insuring the applicant for public liability in a minimum amount of $1,000,000.00 for each injury and $3,000,000.00 for each incident. 
(b)  All electrical sources and installation shall be inspected by the city electrical inspector to determine if said items are properly installed and safe; no license shall be issued until such determination has been made. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to inspect the premises of the amusement park, carnival, or circus at any time during its existence so long as the person managing, operating, or maintaining the activity is given reasonable notice of the inspection. If the licensee fails to satisfy the requirements of the inspection set forth by the city, the city may revoke the license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.204) 
Sec. 10-152. - Issuance of license. 
    Upon receipt of all inspection reports required to be made hereunder, the city manager or designee shall review the application for compliance and notify applicant of any deficiencies in said application or issue said license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.205) 
Sec. 10-153. - Refusal of license; conditional license. 
(a)  The city manager shall refuse to issue any license required hereunder whenever it shall appear that the public health, safety, or general welfare shall be adversely affected by the issuance of said license. 
(b)  The city manager shall have full authority to attach conditions and restrictions to any license granted hereunder where said conditions and restrictions bear a rational relationship to the preservation of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(Code 1988, § 7.206) 
Sec. 10-154. - Form of license. 
    If the city manager shall approve the application, a license shall be granted to the applicant on a form approved by the city council which license shall be issued by the clerk. Upon receipt of said license by the applicant, it shall be displayed prominently at the entrance to the place of business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.207) 
Sec. 10-155. - License fees. 
    License fees are hereby determined as follows; 
(1)  License for an amusement park or circus with ten concessions or less: $200.00. 
(2)  License for an amusement park or circus with more than ten concessions and not more than 19: $300.00. 
(3)  License for an amusement park or circus with 20 concessions or more: $500.00. 
(4)  License for a carnival with ten concessions or less: $100.00. 
(5)  License for carnival with ten concessions and not to exceed 19: $150.00. 
(6)  License for carnival with 20 concessions or more: $200.00. 
(Code 1988, § 7.208) 
Sec. 10-156. - License period. 
    All licenses shall be valid only for the period of time stated on said license and shall expire on the last day indicated on said license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.209) 
Sec. 10-157. - Cancellation of license. 
    In the event that the licensee shall make a false statement in his application or shall fail to obey and perform any of the requirements of this article or the license, the city may thereupon revoke the license issued and retain the fees taken from the licensee. 
(Code 1988, § 7.210) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Cruelty to animals. 
    No person shall cruelly treat or abuse any animal or bird. 
(Code 1988, § 9.71) 
Sec. 14-2. - Poisoning animals. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any poisonous substance on any exposed public or private place where it endangers, or is likely to endanger, any animal or bird. 
(Code 1988, § 9.72) 
Sec. 14-3. - Birds and birds' nests. 
    No person, except a public officer acting in his official capacity, shall molest, injure, kill or capture any wild bird, or molest or disturb any wild bird's nest or the contents thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.73) 
Sec. 14-4. - Domestic animals and fowl. 
    No person shall keep or house any animals or domestic fowl within the city except dogs, cats, birds, fowl or animals commonly classified as pets. 
(Code 1988, § 9.74) 
Sec. 14-5. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this act shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine not less than $10.00 nor more than $100.00, or shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Secs. 14-6-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Not under reasonable control: A dog shall be deemed to be not under reasonable control when such dog, not being upon the premises of its owner, is not with or under the control of its owner, his agent or some member of the owner's family, or when such dog commits damage to the person or property of anyone other than its owner, except when in the defense of its owner, his family or property. 
    Own means to have a right of property in a dog; to keep or harbor a dog or to have a dog in one's care or possession; and to permit a dog to remain in or about any premises of a person for a period of five days or more. 
    Reasonable control: A dog shall be deemed to be under reasonable control when such dog is on the premises of its owner or when such dog, not being on the premises of its owner, is with and under the control of its owner, his agent or some member of the owner's family. 
    Running at large means any dog not on the private property of its owner that is not restrained by a leash. 
(Code 1988, § 9.81; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-32. - Running at large of dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dog to permit the dog to go beyond the premises of such owner unless restrained by a chain or leash and under the reasonable control of some person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.82; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-33. - Dog to be licensed and inoculated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own or possess any dog over the age of four months, within the City of South Lyon, that does not at all times wear a suitable, adequate collar with a license tag attached thereto as provided for by the laws of the State of Michigan. Application for such license shall be accompanied by proof of vaccination of the dog for rabies within the year preceding the date of application, and such application shall be otherwise made in accordance of the laws of the State of Michigan in conjunction with the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder by the Oakland County Treasurer or designated official, to which such applications shall be made. 
(b)  Any dog found not under the reasonable control of some person, uninoculated, running at large, unlicensed and/or violating this chapter in any other way, within the City of South Lyon, shall be declared a nuisance and shall be seized and placed in the city pound, Oakland County Animal Control Facility, or other suitable place, where it shall be properly kept, fed and sheltered. The owner or keeper may redeem said dog from the city pound at any time within three full days from the time said dog was impounded or seized, by paying all charges for impounding, keeping, feeding and sheltering said dog, and obtaining a license therefor as provided by law; provided, that the owner or keeper of said dog shall not be required to obtain a license if a license has been issued for the current period and is produced by the owner or keeper of said dog. For every dog impounded or seized the owner or keeper thereof, upon redeeming the said dog, shall pay to the person in charge of the pound or facility, such charges or assessments as shall be prescribed by city council resolution or the facility holding such dog. Such fees and assessments shall be levied in addition to any fine and/or costs imposed for a violation of this article. 
(c)  The city may provide a pound in which to keep all dogs impounded or seized. 
(d)  In the event the owner or keeper of any dog impounded under the provisions of this article does not redeem the same within a period of three days after said dog is impounded, the officer in charge of said pound shall destroy or dispose of said dog in a humane manner, or, at his option, may sell the same to any person in satisfaction of the charges due for the impounding, keeping, feeding and sheltering said dog, and upon making application for and obtaining a license for said dog. Any known owner or keeper of a dog impounded and/or disposed of shall be responsible for, and shall pay to the officer in charge, the balance of any charges due on account of such impounding and/or disposal. 
(e)  The requirements contained herein, only govern those procedures to be taken by a city pound created by the City of South Lyon. This ordinance in no way restricts or enlarges the discretion of any other entity with respect to their own rules and regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 9.83; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-34. - Barking dogs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own a dog in the City of South Lyon which by loud and frequent barking, howling, yelping, growling or any other noise causes serious annoyance to any of the people of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.84) 
Sec. 14-35. - Dangerous, vicious, or grievously injured dogs. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in the City of South Lyon to own a fierce or vicious dog, or a dog that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted with rabies. Any person who shall have in his possession a dog which has contracted rabies or has been subject to the same or which is suspected of having rabies, or which has bitten any person, shall, upon demand of the animal warden or any law enforcement officer of the City of South Lyon, produce and surrender up such dog to such officer to be held for observation as hereinafter provided. It shall be the duty of any person owning a dog which has been attacked or bitten by another dog or animal showing symptoms of rabies, to immediately notify the animal warden or law enforcement officer that such person has such a dog in his possession. 
(b)  Whenever a dog is reported to have bitten any person or animal it shall thereupon be the duty of any animal warden or law enforcement officer of the City of South Lyon to seize such dog. Such animal warden or law enforcement officer shall notify the persons owning or possessing such dog forthwith, if known. Such dog shall be taken to the Oakland County Animal Control Facility, and such dog shall be subject to the rules, regulations and guidelines of said facility. Any quarantining, release and/or destruction of such dog shall be governed by the authorities of said facility. It shall be the duty of such owner to bear the actual expense of such confinement in accordance with the fees set by said facility, and to forthwith make arrangement for payment of such fees together with the reasonable and necessary expense that may be incurred. 
(c)  The animal warden or law enforcement officer shall impound any dog running at large, or otherwise, in the City of South Lyon who appears to be or gives indications of being mad, so as to constitute a danger to other persons or animals in the vicinity and if unable to so impound or otherwise capture such dog, if it should appear to such officer that such a dog is an actual threat to persons or animals in the near vicinity then he shall immediately dispose of or destroy such dog in any manner prudent or possible under the circumstances. Any officer so disposing or destroying a dog under this subsection shall not be liable in civil damages or otherwise to any owner(s) or possessor(s) of the said dog while the said officer is acting in good faith with a view towards protecting and preserving the lives and properties of others, nor shall the City of South Lyon be liable in civil damages upon the showing that action thus taken was reasonable and prudent under the circumstances. 
(d)  It shall also be the duty of the animal warden or law enforcement officer hereunder to dispose of in a humane manner or destroy any dog which is mortally or grievously injured with in the City of South Lyon. Such officers shall first notify the owner or possessor of such mortally or grievously injured dogs and if he is ascertainable and reasonably available shall consult with any licensed veterinarian concerning the destruction and disposal of such a dog if such be immediately available. Any officer acting hereunder in a reasonable and prudent manner shall not be liable to the owner(s) or possessor(s) of such dog, nor shall the City of South Lyon be liable in civil damages upon the showing that action thus taken was reasonable and prudent under the circumstances. 
(Code 1988, § 9.85; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-36. - Dog officer. 
    The city manager, in his or her discretion, may appoint an animal warden with all the powers and duties of a special police officer to enforce the ordinances contained in this chapter, or, in lieu thereof, the chief of police or designate shall so act. 
(Code 1988, § 9.86; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-37. - Duties of the dog officer. 
    The chief of police or designate or animal warden shall keep a record of the breed, sex, age, color, and markings of every dog impounded pursuant to this chapter together with the date and hour of said impounding and the name of its owner, if known. 
(Code 1988, § 9.87; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-38. - Kennels. 
    No person shall establish or maintain any boarding kennel, or any breeding kennel, or permit any such kennel to be maintained on any premises owned, leased or occupied by him within the limits of the City of South Lyon, without first obtaining a license therefor from the licensing authority in Oakland County. It shall be prima facie presumed that a kennel is being maintained when more than three dogs over the age of four months of age are maintained on the owned, leased or occupied premises. 
(Code 1988, § 9.88) 
Sec. 14-39. - Provisions and regulations of state dog law. 
    The provisions and regulations of the State Dog Law, being Public Act 339 of 1919, as amended, being MCL 287.26 et seq., not in conflict with the foregoing provisions are hereby adopted and declared to be a part of this article and may be enforced in a like manner as any other provision hereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.89) 
Sec. 14-40. - Animal waste. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in control of an animal traveling outside the owner's property to fail to pick up, remove and properly dispose of from any other property such animal's feces, manure or solid waste. 
(Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Secs. 14-41-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CATS 

Sec. 14-61. - Definition. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned cat means any cat found running at large, wearing no collar, tag, or other evidence of ownership, the ownership of which the animal warden or law enforcement officer shall be unable to ascertain after diligent inquiry about the immediate neighborhood in which the cat is found. 
    Cat means a carnivorous quadruped belonging to the feline family held as a domesticated cat. 
(Code 1988, § 9.101; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-62. - Registration. 
    On not later than February 28 in any year, any person residing in the City of South Lyon owning or possessing a cat shall register the same with the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 9.102) 
Sec. 14-63. - Inoculation. 
    The city clerk shall not accept such registration unless the owner or owner's agent shall present a certificate to the effect that the animal has been inoculated against rabies. 
(Code 1988, § 9.103) 
Sec. 14-64. - License fee. 
    The city clerk shall, upon presentation of a proper certificate, and on application signed by the owner or agent of the owner containing the name, kind, color, sex, age, and description of any distinguishing feature or marking, issue to the owner a license, in the form of a tag or other suitable device. The fee for such license shall be equal to current dog licensing fee. 
(Code 1988, § 9.104) 
Sec. 14-65. - Liability of owner. 
    Every owner and every person possessing or harboring a cat, in the City of South Lyon, shall be liable for damages for any and all injuries to persons or property that may be caused by such cat on any public highway or other public place, to be determined and collected in appropriate legal proceedings therefor, in which proceedings any failure or refusal by such owner to comply with the requirements of this article shall constitute prima facie evidence of negligence. 
(Code 1988, § 9.105) 
Sec. 14-66. - Running loose prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any cat, to run at large upon the public streets, walks, parks, or other public places within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9.106) 
Sec. 14-67. - Impounding cats; disposition. 
    It shall be the duty of the animal warden or law enforcement officer to seize, receive possession of, and impound any cat found anywhere in the city contrary to the provisions of this article. Any cat so impounded shall be taken to the appropriate animal facility. 
(Code 1988, § 9.107; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-68. - Animal warden: records required. 
    The animal warden or law enforcement officer shall maintain a complete record of all cats impounded under the provisions of this article and the disposition of same. 
(Code 1988, § 9.108; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-69. - Report to animal warden. 
    If any person is bitten by a cat, it shall be the duty of that person or the owner or custodian of the cat, and having knowledge of said incident, to report same to the animal warden or law enforcement officer within 12 hours thereafter. If the owner or custodian of any cat has any reason to believe or suspect that such cat has become infected with "rabies," it shall be the duty of that person to report the same to the animal warden or law enforcement officer within 12 hours thereafter. 
(Code 1988, § 9.109; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-70. - Quarantine. 
    In the event of any report to the animal warden or law enforcement officer as set forth in the preceding section, the animal warden or law enforcement officer shall take such cat into its possession and deliver it to the Oakland County Animal Control Facility. Such cat shall be subject to the rules, regulations and guidelines of said facility. Any quarantining, release, and/or destruction of such cat shall be governed by the authorities of said facility. It shall be the responsible of said owner to forthwith pay all fees associated with such confinement. 
(Code 1988, § 9.110; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-71. - Number permitted to be kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, shelter, keep or harbor more than three cats over six months of age at any one time in one residential building, or in one garage, or in a residential building and garage, or in any business building or any other building, or on a residential, business or other lot in the City of South Lyon. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to cats that are being kept by a veterinarian or in a veterinary hospital or by an established commercial pet shop, or by any other institution in the city that might be carrying on experiments with cats in the interest of public health or any other proper use to which live cats might be put for experimental purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 9.111) 
Sec. 14-72. - Exhibit cat to officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show or exhibit, at any reasonable times, any cat or cats which he is harboring, sheltering or keeping in his possession or custody to any duly authorized animal warden or law enforcement officer or the health officer of the City of South Lyon, his duly authorized assistants and employees. 
(Code 1988, § 9.112; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Sec. 14-73. - Nuisance conditions. 
    It shall also be unlawful to own, possess, shelter, keep, harbor or maintain any cat or cats under such conditions or in such a manner as to create a nuisance by way of noise, odor, menace to health or otherwise. The animal warden or law enforcement officer shall impound, or if unable to apprehend the same, may destroy any sick, diseased or abandoned cat or cats which shall be running at large and shall be creating a nuisance by way of noise, odor, menace to health or otherwise. 
(Code 1988, § 9.113; Ord. of 7-28-03) 
Secs. 14-74-14-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HORSES 

Sec. 14-91. - Riding on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead, or otherwise place or cause to be placed any horse or horses upon any public sidewalk, walkway or other passageways designated for the use of the public within the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.121) 
Sec. 14-92. - Riding in streets. 
    A horse or horses may be ridden within and upon all public roadways within the City of South Lyon, provided however, that all such riding shall be done in compliance with all applicable laws, statutes and ordinances governing vehicular traffic upon those same streets and roads, and that such riding shall be done by a person of suitable age and discretion, in a manner so as to be able to properly control such animals so as not to cause a danger to other persons or traffic upon the said highways and streets. This section shall also apply to the leading or placing of such horse or horses upon the public streets and roadways in the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.122) 
Sec. 14-93. - Designated areas. 
    The riding or walking or leading or placing any horse or horses upon any other properties within the City of South Lyon shall be unlawful unless such areas are clearly designated for such activities by the city council for the City of South Lyon, or otherwise specifically permitted by the owner of such property. 
(Code 1988, § 9.123) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 18-1-18-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapters 93, 94 and 96 through 98 of the 1988 Code were described as having been saved from repeal, kept on file and available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. The city submitted copies of chapters 93, 94 and 96 through 98 to be included in this publication. Chapters 93, 94 and 96 through 98 were codified as chapter 18, article II, divisions 1 through 5, of this publication. References to these chapters have been history noted as though they appeared in the 1988 Code. 

DIVISION 1. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE AND FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT PROVISIONS 

Sec. 18-31. - Title. 
    The provisions of this article shall be known and may be referred to as the City of South Lyon State Construction Code Ordinance. 
(Code 1988, § 8.1; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-32. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents of the City of South Lyon by accepting and assuming the responsibility pursuant to Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, being MCL 125.1501, et seq., for administration and enforcement of the State Construction Code throughout the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 8.2; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-33. - Exemption rescinded. 
    By the adoption of this article, it is the intention of the City of South Lyon to rescind its previous exemption from provisions of the State Construction Code Act of 1972, Act 230 of the Public Acts of 1972. 
(Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000 amended section 18-33 in its entirety and renamed said section. The former section 18-33, exemption election, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, § 8.3. 
Sec. 18-34. - References in codes. 
    Jurisdictional references in the State Construction Code Act shall hereafter refer to the City of South Lyon, County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
(Code 1988, § 8.4; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-35. - Fees. 
    References to fees and fee schedules in the State Construction Code shall refer to the schedule of fees as adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 8.5; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-36. - Penalties. 
(a)  Municipal civil infraction. A violation of a provision of the State Construction Code shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Stop work order violations. The violation of a stop work order issued under the codes hereafter adopted shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00, with each day that work is continued in violation of the order being a separate offense. 
(Code 1988, § 8.6; Ord. of 11-28-94(20), § 1; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-37. - Repealer and severability. 
(a)  Any previously enacted ordinances or portions thereof, inconsistent or conflicting with the provisions of this article are, to the extent of the conflict or inconsistency and upon this article taking effect, repealed. 
(b)  If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions hereof. 
(Code 1988, § 8.7) 
Sec. 18-38. - Construction board of appeals. 
(a)  Membership of board. The local board of appeals referenced in the State Construction Code Act shall mean a board consisting of five members appointed by the chief appointing authority for the City of South Lyon for terms of two years. 
(b)  Qualifications of board members. A person may be appointed to the board of appeals if they are qualified by experience, education, or training to perform the duties of the board of appeals. 
(Code 1988, § 8.8; Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-39. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the following sections is to comply with Federal Emergency Management Agency's (FEMA) requirements in reliance on the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality so that the citizens of the City of South Lyon may obtain flood insurance. FEMA requires that the City of South Lyon, in order to establish eligibility for the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), must adopt flood plan management regulations that meet the standards of section 60.3(b) of the NFIP regulations being 44 CFR 59, etc. The Michigan DEQ has established that the Stille-Derossett-Hall Single State Construction Code Act, 1972 PA 230, as amended is compliant with minimum NFIP criteria. 
(Ord. of 9-11-06) 
Sec. 18-40. - Agency designated. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with the Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, the Building Official of the City of South Lyon is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of South Lyon under Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, State of Michigan. The City of South Lyon assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act through its corporate limits. 
(Ord. of 9-11-06) 
Sec. 18-41. - Code appendix enforced. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230, of the Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code shall be enforced by the enforcing agency within the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 9-11-06) 
Sec. 18-42. - Designation of regulated flood prone hazard areas. 
    The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) Entitled Oakland County, Michigan and Incorporated Areas and dated September 29, 2006 and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMS) panel number(s) of 26125C0585F and 26125C0595F and dated September 29, 2006 are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code. 
(Ord. of 9-11-06) 
Secs. 18-43-18-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE 

Sec. 18-51. - Adoption of code. 
    The City of South Lyon, pursuant to Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, MCL 125.1501, et seq., hereby accepts, adopts by reference, and assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Building Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.9; Ord. of 12-13-93; Ord. of 6-23-97(1); Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000 repealed in its entirety section 18-52, supplemental information and amendments. Said section pertained to the BOCA National Building Code of 1996 and derived from Code 1988, § 8.10, Ord. of 12-13-93, and Ord. of 6-23-97(1). 
Secs. 18-53-18-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ELECTRICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-61. - Adoption of code. 
    The City of South Lyon, pursuant to Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, MCL 125.1501, et seq., hereby accepts, adopts by reference, and assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Electrical Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.17; Ord. of 12-13-93; Ord. of 6-23-97(1); Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-62. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000 repealed in its entirety section 18-62, amendments to code. Said section pertained to the National Electical Code, 1996 edition, and derived from Code 1988, § 8.18, Ord. of 12-13-93, and Ord. of 6-23-97(1). 
Secs. 18-63-18-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - MECHANICAL CODE 

Sec. 18-71. - Adoption of code. 
    The City of South Lyon, pursuant to Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, MCL 125.1501, et seq., hereby accepts, adopts by reference, and assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Mechanical Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.13; Ord. of 12-13-93; Ord. of 6-23-97(1); Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-72. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000 repealed in its entirety section 18-72, supplemental information and amendments. Said section pertained to the International Mechanical Code, 1996 edition, and derived from Code 1988, § 8.14, Ord. of 12-13-93, and Ord. of 6-23-97(1). 
Secs. 18-73-18-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - PLUMBING CODE 

Sec. 18-81. - Adoption of code. 
    The City of South Lyon pursuant to Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of 1972, MCL 125.1501, et seq., hereby accepts, adopts by reference, and assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of the State Plumbing Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.15; Ord. of 12-13-93; Ord. of 6-23-97(1); Ord. of 2-28-00, § 1) 
Sec. 18-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. of Feb. 28, 2000 repealed in its entirety section 18-82, supplemental information and amendments. Said section pertained to the 1995 International Plumbing Code and derived from Code 1988, § 8.16, Ord. of 12-13-93, and Ord. of 6-23-97(1). 
Secs. 18-83-18-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 18-111. - Adoption of property maintenance code. 
    That a certain document, three copies of which are on file at the City of South Lyon, 335 S. Warren, Michigan, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of South Lyon, in the State of Michigan, for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said property maintenance code on file in the office of the City of South Lyon are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this division, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 18-112. 
(Ord. of 5-24-93, § 8.200; Ord. of 1-23-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-28-97, § 1; Ord. No. 02-16, Pt. II, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-112. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
    The following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, are hereby revised as follows: 
Section  101.1. Title. These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of the City of South Lyon, hereinafter referred to as "this code". 
    Section 103.5. Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the following schedule: City of South Lyon Schedule of Fees, as amended from time to time. 
    Section 111.2. Membership of Board. The construction board of appeals of the jurisdiction for purposes of the state construction code shall serve as the board of appeals for purposes of this code. 
    Section 112.4. Failure to Comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. 
    Section 302.4. Weeds. All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight (8) inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. 
    Section 304.14. Insect Screens. During the period from June 15 to September 1, every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of rehabitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly-fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellant fans, are employed. 
    Section 602.3. Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 to June 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature of the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. 
(2)  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
    Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 1 to June 15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
(2)  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
(Ord. of 5-24-93, § 8.202; Ord. of 11-28-94(24), § 1; Ord. of 1-23-95, § 1; Ord. of 6-23-97(2), § 1; Ord. No. 02-16, Pt. II, 2-8-16) 
Secs. 18-113-18-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FENCES 

Sec. 18-131. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building line means a line formed by the main or principal face of a building. 
    Fence means a structure of definite height and location intended to be a barrier or screen that serves to enclose land in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
    Lot, corner means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this article if the arc is of less than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, interior means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein. 
(1)  Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, is that line separating said lot from either street. In the case of a corner lot, the shorter street line shall be considered the front lot line, except in the case of both street lines being equal, the choice may be made at the discretion of the property owner. However, once declared, the designated front yard shall remain as such. 
(2)  Rear lot line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. Except that for the purposes of location, a fence may follow the established rear lot line regardless of the shape of the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street in an exterior side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot, through means any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for permitted accessory structures including fence as permitted herein. The various yards are defined as follows: 
(1)  Front yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. 
(2)  Rear yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard may be opposite either street frontage. 
(3)  Side yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 

(Code 1988, § 8.21) 
Sec. 18-132. - Permits. 
(a)  No fence shall be constructed until a permit for such construction has been obtained from the building department. Application for said permit shall contain such information as is necessary to determine if the proposed fence meets the requirements of this article and chapter 102 (zoning). 
(b)  No permit shall be issued for any fence construction prior to the approval of the final lot grading for said lot where the fence is proposed. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued for any fence construction within a public easement in which public utilities are located or are proposed to be located without first receiving the approval of the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
(Code 1988, § 8.22) 
Sec. 18-133. - Construction material. 
(a)  No electronically charged fence shall be permitted in any areas of the city, nor shall barbed wire or other sharp pointed material be used in the construction of a fence in any residentially zoned district of the city. 
(b)  Fences may be constructed of woven wire, metal, wood, vinyl resin, composite or masonry. Masonry walls shall require a foundation equal to the depth of the frost line, or 42 inches. Posts or anchoring devices for all other fences shall be placed at a depth of not less than 30 inches. 
(Code 1988, § 8.23; Ord. of 7-23-12) 
Sec. 18-134. - Fence construction in residential areas. 
(a)  The owner of any subdivided lot or parcel may construct and maintain fences between his own and the next adjoining lots, parcels, or public rights-of-way as regulated and set forth in this chapter and elsewhere in the city Code. 
(b)  All owners of lots and parcels shall be responsible for the building, rebuilding, care and any other maintenance necessary to keep fences and walls neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Code 1988, § 8.24) 
Sec. 18-135. - Fence location and height. 
(a)  Fences may be erected along rear lot lines and along interior side lot lines to the primary front or side wall of the principal structure. 
(b)  Fences as defined herein shall not extend into any required front or exterior side yard setback. 
(c)  Fences may be erected to a height of six feet along rear lot lines and along interior side lot lines, except that fences extending along interior side lot lines between the rear and front of the principal structure shall not exceed four feet in height. 
(d)  Private swimming pools and any container so used and capable of holding water to a depth of 24 inches or more when filled to capacity shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet or more than six feet in height of chainlink type or other type approved by the building inspector. A four-foot fence which encloses that portion of the yard containing the pool may be considered as complying with this requirement. All fence gates must have locks and must be locked when residents are away from the home, or when the pool is filled and not in use. 
(e)  Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a resident from erecting within any front or exterior side yard an architectural feature that may include partial fencing, screen plantings or lawn furnishings such as but not limited to light fixtures and address posts, provided such features are located in such a manner that they do not violate the minimum requirements of section 102-435 of the South Lyon City Code, and provided further that no such feature is created to an extent that it serves the purpose of an enclosing fence or barrier. 

(Code 1988, § 8.25) 
Sec. 18-136. - Temporary fences. 
    In any zoned district, temporary construction fences and fences required for protection around excavations shall comply with article 13 of the Basic Building Code. Such fences shall not be maintained for a period greater than year without approval of the zoning board of appeals. 
(Code 1988, § 8.26) 
Sec. 18-137. - Violations. 
(a)  Generally. Any person, partnership, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article, including the erection of any illegal fence without proper authorization by permit from the City of South Lyon shall remove the fence, or that portion of the fence in violation of this article, within 60 days from date of notification of a violation of this article by a duly authorized agent of the city. Removal of the fence or portions of the fence shall be at the owner's expense. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction penalties. Any person, firm or corporation who fails to remove an illegally erected fence within the above-specified time limit shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.27; Ord. of 11-28-94(21), § 1) 
Secs. 18-138-18-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PROPERTY IDENTIFICATION 

Sec. 18-151. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the property identification ordinance. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 1) 
Sec. 18-152. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to secure the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and property owners of the City of South Lyon by providing for the ready identification of buildings by police, fire, health, welfare, and emergency services, public or private, in the event of an emergency. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 2) 
Sec. 18-153. - Definition. 
    The property identification number for any developed or improved property within the City of South Lyon shall be the street address, if available, or the sidwell number until the address is assigned. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 3) 
Sec. 18-154. - Requirements. 
(a)  All property upon which structures are constructed or businesses are located within the city shall be considered developed property and shall display a property identification number. The property identification number shall be displayed and maintained on the face or other appropriate side of the structure in a manner and location so that the identification number is clearly readable to a person of normal vision from the centerline of the adjacent roadway. 
(b)  If the structure is located on the property so that due to distance or intervening sight barriers (such as shrubbery, terra-features, or structures) the posted numbers are not clearly readable from the roadway, the identification number shall also be posted separate from the main structure (i.e., on a yard light post, entrance gate, driveway marker, mailbox, etc.) in a fashion that is clearly readable from the roadway. Such additional identification numbers shall be either located centrally between the side boundaries of the property or located immediately adjacent to the driveway providing ingress to the property, and shall be located on the same side of the roadway as the property they identify. 
(c)  All signage for addresses in multiple residential shall be approved by the building/zoning department. 
(d)  The property identification number shall be numerals rather than script words and shall not be less than three inches in height. 
(e)  The color of the numbers shall be in contrast with the immediate background on which they are mounted. 
(f)  In the case of multiple units, either business or residential, the property identification number(s) of those apartments or businesses accessible through each entrance shall be clearly indicated at such entrances. 
(g)  If any structure used for commercial office and/or industrial purposes is connected to or located so close to other buildings so as to prevent access between such buildings, requiring a different access route to the rear of the building than to the front of the building, the business name and property identification number shall be displayed on the rear entrance door, or immediately adjacent thereto. Such names and numbers shall be not less than three inches nor more than six inches in height, and may consist of standard manufactured letters and/or numbers. If painted on the building or door, such names and numbers shall be applied with standard numeric and letter stencil. The name and number shall be displayed and maintained so as to be plainly visible and readable from the alley, service drive, easement, parking lot, or any other rear access. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 4) 
Sec. 18-155. - Existing structures. 
    All existing developed property shall be identified as required by this article within 60 days after the effective date of this article or be considered in violation thereof. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 5) 
Sec. 18-156. - New construction. 
    All applicants for building permits for new construction or alterations of residences or businesses or other such structures shall be required to properly provide a property identification number on their premises prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 6) 
Sec. 18-157. - Address assignment. 
    The City of South Lyon shall have the authority and be responsible for the uniform assignment of addresses for any property, lot, or building within the city according to assignment standards and procedures as may be established by the city manager. This authority includes the right to assign new or different property identification numbers to existing structures. Property identification numbers shall be assigned sequentially with odd numbers on the left side of the road when traveling from low to high numbers. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 7) 
Sec. 18-158. - Responsibility for compliance. 
    The owner, occupant, lessee, or other person in control of any developed property shall be responsible for identifying the property in compliance with the article. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 8) 
Sec. 18-159. - Enforcement. 
    Either the police department, building and zoning administrator, fire chief, or ordinance enforcement officers may enforce this article. Formal court proceedings shall not be instituted until at least 30 days notice of the violation has been given by first class mail. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 9) 
Sec. 18-160. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 4-12-93, § 10; Ord. 11-28-94(36), § 1) 
Secs. 18-161-18-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - REFRIGERATION 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 18-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accident means an unusual occurrence, excepting a mere shutdown of the equipment, resulting in injury to persons or structural damage to or by equipment covered by this article. 
    Additional definitions. The definitions, as set forth in Section 2 of the American National Standard Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, ANSI B 9.1, adopted for the purpose of this article in subsection 18-182(b) shall be applicable to this article. 
    Alter means the addition to or removal of any equipment or refrigerant in a refrigerating system by which the refrigerant, refrigerant capacity, refrigerating capacity, pressure allowed or location of any part of the system is changed. Major replacements, as defined herein, shall be considered as alterations. 
    Approved means that which the building inspector designates acceptable as a device, apparatus or method which by demonstration and/or test has proved workable and safe for its intended use. 
    Board of appeals. The body authorized to hear and decide cases of appeal from decisions rendered by the division of building and safety engineering personnel shall constitute a board of appeals which shall be composed of the members of the South Lyon Zoning Board of Appeals. Said board shall have power to hear all appeals and the decisions of said board shall be final. 
    Department. The enforcing agency of the city shall be the division of building safety and engineering. 
    Enforcing officer means a the building inspector or his authorized representative. 
    Existing installation means a refrigerating system or part of a refrigerating system installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Horsepower rating. The horsepower of an electric motor shall be shown on the motor rating nameplate. The horsepower of electric motors that do not specify horsepower rating on the required motor rating nameplate shall be determined in accordance with the applicable nameplate current and voltage ratings as shown in Table No. I. When current ratings exceed the limits set forth in the table, the full load current tables in the National Electrical Code will be used to determine the horsepower rating. The department shall determine the horsepower rating of engines and turbines. 
    Install means and shall include the running of refrigerant piping or tubing, the joining of refrigerant components, and/or the initial starting and putting into operation of refrigeration equipment. 
    Major replacements means replacements of compressors, receivers, condensers, evaporators, pressure vessels and any length of piping in excess of 11/2 inch nominal diameter, and piping up to and including 11/2 inch nominal diameter when more than a 20-foot run of such piping is replaced. 
    Person means every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or corporation and their legal successors. 
    Refrigeration contractor means any person duly licensed by the City of South Lyon under the provisions of this article to install, alter or service refrigerating systems, or to arrange for and supervise the performance of such work on a contractual basis. 
    Refrigeration journeyman means any person who is qualified and licensed by the City of South Lyon to perform the work of installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems. 
    Service means work involving the opening into, or up of, any refrigerant containing component of a refrigerating system. The addition or removal of refrigerant or the purging of a refrigerating system shall be considered as service. 
    Supervising employee means an officer, partner, owner or regular employee of a corporation, partnership or firm who is qualified by written and oral examinations to assure responsible charge of work covered by this article for the licensed refrigeration contractor with whom associated. 
(Code 1988, § 8.95) 
Sec. 18-182. - Code adopted. 
(a)  Adoption of ordinance; terms. The Recommended Refrigeration Systems Ordinance for the Reciprocal Refrigeration Council, Inc., as approved by said council on March 22, 1972, is hereby adopted for the City of South Lyon and its provisions shall be effective in this City of South Lyon, except as hereinafter provided as is set out at length herein, and the provisions of said refrigerating systems ordinance shall be controlling within the limits of the City of South Lyon. Any references in the above ordinance to "city, village or township", "commissioner" and the word "department" shall be construed to mean "City of South Lyon," "building inspector," and "division of building and safety engineering," respectively. 
(b)  Adoption of code by reference. The Code of the American National Standards Institute ANSI B 9.1-1971, Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, containing definitions, inspection and operation of refrigeration equipment is hereby adopted by reference. Notice is hereby given that complete copies thereof are available for public use and inspection at the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, §§ 8.81, 8.193) 
Sec. 18-183. - Scope. 
    This article shall apply to new refrigerating systems hereafter installed, to the reinstallation of used equipment, to existing refrigerating systems, and to the servicing, alterations or additions to existing refrigerating systems subsequent to its adoption. This article does not apply to refrigerating systems using water as the refrigerant, nor to refrigerating systems installed in aircraft, railway cars, water-borne craft, motor vehicles and motor drawn vehicles using refrigerants designated as group refrigerants in the American National Standard Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, ANSI B 9.1, adopted for the purpose of this article in subsection 18-182(b). 
(Code 1988, § 8.85) 
Sec. 18-184. - ANSI standard. 
(a)  All refrigerating systems shall be constructed, installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the American National Standard Safety Code for Mechanical Refrigeration, ANSI B 9.1, adopted for the purpose of this article in subsection 18-182(b), and with the rules adopted herein. 
(b)  This article provides reasonable safeguards to life, limb, health and property; defines certain practices which are inconsistent with safety; and prescribes standards of safety which will properly influence future progress and developments in refrigerating systems. 
(Code 1988, § 8.86) 
Sec. 18-185. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide reasonable safety for life, limb and property. Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship or involve practical difficulties, the board of appeals shall have power upon appeal in specific cases to authorize such variation, or modification of the terms of this article as will not be contrary to public interest and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(Code 1988, § 8.87) 
Sec. 18-186. - Existing installations. 
    Existing installations, if in good repair, may be continued in their present form provided such installations present no apparent hazard through methods of installation or operation or in their design. Where alterations or changes are proposed or made, the department shall have the power to prohibit such alteration or to require such other additions and alterations or changes as it deems necessary for the safe operation of such altered equipment. If, in the opinion of the department, such existing installations are found to be in a dangerous condition, or if the design or method of operation in combination with devices used is considered inherently dangerous or if there is an immediate hazard to those operating or using such equipment, it shall be the duty of the department to make or order such tests or inspections as are deemed necessary to determine the condition or the equipment and to order such alterations or additions as are deemed necessary to eliminate the dangerous condition existing. 
(Code 1988, § 8.88) 
Sec. 18-187. - Appeal from rulings. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision, ruling or order of the building inspector or department personnel may appeal for relief to the board of appeals. Such appeal shall be made within ten days after the decision, ruling or order complained of by filing with the building inspector a notice of appeal directed to the board of appeals, specifying the grounds thereof and the relief prayed for. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board of appeals all papers constituting the record upon which the decision, ruling or order is appealed. 
(Code 1988, § 8.89) 
Sec. 18-188. - Hearing before board of appeals. 
    The board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to the parties in interest and decide the question within a reasonable time. When it is clearly evident that reasonable safety is assured, such appeal shall act as a stay of any decision, ruling or order until either approved, modified or set aside by the board of appeals. A fee as specified in section 18-342 shall be deposited with the department at the time the appeal is filed, and if paid by check or money order, it shall be made payable to the treasurer of the City of South Lyon. The board of appeals, upon hearing such appeal, shall either affirm, modify or set aside any such decision, ruling or order. The department shall refund the fee if a decision is rendered in favor of the appellant. 
(Code 1988, § 8.90) 
Sec. 18-189. - Table No. I, motor ratings for refrigerating equipment. 
TABLE NO. I 
MOTOR RATINGS FOR REFRIGERATING EQUIPMENT 
SINGLE PHASE A.C. 
H.P. 115 V 
Nameplate 
Current Rating 230 V 
Nameplate 
Current Rating    1/6  4.4 to  5.1  2.2 to  2.6   1/4  5.2 to  6.5  2.7 to  3.3    1/3  6.6 to  8.0  3.4 to  4.3   1/2  8.1 to 11.8  4.4 to  5.9   3/4 11.9 to 14.9  6.0 to  7.5  1 15.0 to 18.0  7.6 to  9.0  11/2 18.1 to 22.0  9.1 to 11.0  2 22.1 to 24.0 11.1 to 14.5  3 14.6 to 19.8  4 19.9 to 25.3  5 25.4 to 30.4  6 30.5 to 35.2  7 35.3 to 38.8  71/2 38.9 to 41.0  8 41.1 to 44.0  9 44.1 to 48.0 10 48.1 to 50.0  
THREE PHASE A.C. 
H.P. 220 V 
Nameplate 
Current Rating 440 V 
Nameplate 
Current Rating   1/2  2.0 to  2.4  1.0 to  1.2   3/4  2.5 to  3.2  1.3 to  1.6  1  3.3 to  4.3  1.7 to  2.2  11/2  4.4 to  5.8  2.3 to  2.9  2  5.9 to  7.8  3.0 to  3.9  3  7.9 to 10.5  4.0 to  5.3  4 10.6 to 13.5  5.4 to  6.8  5 13.6 to 16.4  6.9 to  8.2  6 16.5 to 19.2  8.3 to  9.6  7 19.3 to 21.3  9.7 to 10.7  71/2 21.4 to 22.5 10.8 to 11.3  8 22.6 to 24.0 11.4 to 12.2  9 24.1 to 26.0 12.3 to 13.4 10 26.1 to 28.3 13.5 to 14.6 11 28.4 to 30.9 14.7 to 15.8 12 31.0 to 33.5 15.9 to 17.0 13 33.6 to 36.1 17.1 to 18.2 14 36.2 to 38.7 18.3 to 19.4 15 38.8 to 41.2 19.5 to 20.6 16 41.3 to 43.6 20.7 to 21.8 17 43.7 to 46.0 21.9 to 23.0 18 46.1 to 48.4 23.1 to 24.2 19 48.5 to 50.8 24.3 to 25.4 20 50.9 to 53.2 25.5 to 26.6 21 53.3 to 55.6 26.7 to 27.8 22 55.7 to 58.0 27.9 to 29.0 23 58.1 to 60.4 29.1 to 30.2 24 60.5 to 62.8 30.3 to 31.4 25 62.9 to 65.4 31.5 to 32.7 26 65.5 to 68.2 32.8 to 34.1 27 68.3 to 71.0 34.2 to 35.5 28 71.1 to 73.8 35.6 to 36.9 29 73.9 to 76.6 37.0 to 38.3 30 76.7 to 79.3 38.4 to 39.7  
(Code 1988, § 8.96) 
Sec. 18-190. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 8.191; Ord. of 11-28-94(23), § 1) 
Secs. 18-191-18-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONTRACTORS AND JOURNEYMEN 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 18-211. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
(a)  Refrigeration contractor or refrigeration journeyman licenses may be suspended or revoked by the building inspector upon recommendation of the refrigeration board of examiners. The causes for which such license may be suspended or revoked shall be gross incompetence, gross neglect, deliberate misrepresentation or willful failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Such suspension or revocation shall be made in the following manner: The licensee shall be given seven days notice that his license will be suspended or revoked, and the reason or reasons therefor, unless good cause is shown to the contrary at a hearing provided before the refrigeration board of examiners. Pending the hearing the building inspector may forthwith suspend such license if the circumstances, in his opinion, justify such action. After the hearing, a recommendation shall be made to the building inspector who may suspend or revoke the license if such action, in his opinion, is in the best interest of the people of the City of South Lyon. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has been suspended or revoked to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any refrigerating system, or to arrange for the performance of such work on a contractual basis, until such suspended or revoked license has been reinstated, except as provided in section 18-226. 
(Code 1988, § 8.192) 
Secs. 18-212-18-225. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Licensing of Contractors 

Sec. 18-226. - Contractor license required. 
    No person shall install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any refrigerating system without first securing a refrigeration contractor license therefore. Such licenses shall be issued by the building inspector to qualified applicants, after the payment of a fee, in accordance with the recommendation of the board of examiners. Persons not licensed as contractors under the provisions of this article shall not arrange to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any refrigerating system on a contractual basis; except that this may be done where a clause is made part of the contract with the purchaser designating the licensed refrigeration contractor who will obtain the necessary permits and perform the contracted-for work. 
(Code 1988, § 8.101) 
Sec. 18-227. - Board of examiners. 
    The City of South Lyon designates the board of examiners of the City of Detroit to serve as its board of examiners and the applicant shall pay to the City of Detroit any fees or charges imposed by the City of Detroit for such service. 
(Code 1988, § 8.102) 
Sec. 18-228. - Authority of board of examiners. 
    The board of examiners is hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations necessary to make effective the contractor licensing provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.103) 
Sec. 18-229. - Application for contractor license. 
    Application for refrigeration contractor license shall be made on forms furnished for such purpose by the department. The application, in affidavit form shall, as a minimum, provide the following information: 
(1)  Name, age and address of applicant. 
(2)  Refrigeration experience of applicant, including refrigerants and sizes of equipment. 
(3)  If applicant is a corporation: 
a.  Full and accurate corporate name; 
b.  When and where incorporated; 
c.  Name and refrigeration experience of officer or supervising employee designated to take the examination for the corporation. 
(4)  If the applicant is a partnership: Names and addresses of members thereof and the name and refrigeration experience of the partner or supervising employee designated to take the examination for the partnership. 
(5)  If the applicant conducts business under a trade or assumed name, the following additional information shall be given: 
a.  Complete and full trade name; 
b.  Name of the person or persons doing business under such trade or assumed name. 
(Code 1988, § 8.104) 
Sec. 18-230. - Experience required for contractor license. 
    No refrigeration contractor license shall be issued until the applicant, or the applicant's designated supervising employee, has shown to the board of examiners by sworn affidavit that he meets the experience requirements stipulated herein; provided that credit varying up to a maximum of four years of the required experience may be extended to any applicant who is a registered professional engineer, or who possesses at least a Bachelor of Science degree in mechanical, electrical, civil or chemical engineering, or who is a graduate of a refrigeration trade school; and provided further that a minimum of two years of actual experience as stipulated herein shall be required of all applicants. A supervising employee shall be employed on a full-time basis and shall be actively in charge at all times when installations, alterations and servicing of refrigerating systems are being performed by the licensed refrigeration contractor. 
(1)  Class A refrigeration contractor. 
a.  The applicant shall have been actively engaged in the installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems for at least three years; or 
b.  The applicant shall possess at least a limited refrigeration journeyman license and shall have been actively engaged as such for at least one year while possessing said license. 
(2)  Class B refrigeration contractor. 
a.  The applicant shall have been actively engaged in the installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems for at least five years; or 
b.  The applicant shall possess an unlimited refrigeration journeyman license and shall have been actively engaged as such for at least one year while possessing said license. 
(3)  Class C refrigeration contractor. 
a.  The applicant shall have been actively engaged in the installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems for at least six years; 
b.  The applicant shall possess an unlimited refrigeration journeyman license and shall have been actively engaged as such for at least two years while possessing said license; or 
c.  The applicant shall possess a class B refrigeration contractor license and shall have been actively engaged as such for at least one year while possessing said license. 
(Code 1988, § 8.105) 
Sec. 18-231. - Age. 
    Applicants for refrigeration contractor license shall have attained a minimum of 21 years of age. 
(Code 1988, § 8.106) 
Sec. 18-232. - Examination required for contractor license. 
    The board of examiners shall determine, by written and oral examinations, the qualifications of an applicant for refrigeration contractor license in accordance with the sworn affidavit submitted. The board of examiners shall determine the time and place for such examinations. There shall be at least three members of the board of examiners present at the oral examination of any applicant. No license shall be issued to an applicant until he has passed the required examinations. 
(Code 1988, § 8.107) 
Sec. 18-233. - Classification and limitation of contractor license. 
(a)  A refrigeration contractor license shall be classified and limited as to definite refrigerants and size of refrigerating systems with which the applicant is familiar in installing, altering or servicing, and the applicant shall be licensed for that particular refrigerant or refrigerants and size of systems; provided, however, that any person may make application for and receive a license to engage in the installation, alteration and servicing of all sizes of refrigerating systems containing any, or all, approved refrigerants. 
(b)  Contractor licenses shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Class A license: Limited to install, alter and service completely self-contained room air conditioners or domestic boxes not exceeding 11/2 horsepower. 
(2)  Class B license: Limited to install, alter and service refrigerating systems actuated by motors not in excess of 71/2 horsepower. Where the motor nameplate does not designate horsepower, then the motor limitation shall not exceed 36.1 amperes at 220 volts, or 18.2 amperes at 440 volts. In the case of engine driven compressors, the department shall determine equivalent power limitations for class B licenses. 
(3)  Class C license: Unlimited as to horsepower or installation, alteration and servicing. 
(Code 1988, § 8.108) 
Sec. 18-234. - Expiration of contractor license. 
    Refrigeration contractor licenses shall expire on the December 31 of the current year, and unless renewed by the last day of February of the following year, shall be considered revoked until the holder thereof has submitted the required applications and appeared before the board of examiners for certification. It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has expired to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any refrigerating system, or to arrange for the performance of such work on a contractual basis, except as provided in section 18-226. 
(Code 1988, § 8.109) 
Sec. 18-235. - Termination of services. 
    Should the qualified supervising employee's services terminate, the installation, alteration and service operations of the employer shall cease, and it shall be unlawful to continue such operations until another qualified supervising employee is certified for the employer by the board of examiners, provided that a 30-day period may be allowed for the employer, with the approval of the department, to replace him by a qualified supervising employee. This department shall be notified in writing by both the employee and the employer when such termination of services takes place. The proposed new supervising employee shall submit the required application and appear before the board of examiners for certification. 
(Code 1988, § 8.110) 
Sec. 18-236. - Home owner installations. 
    Nothing herein contained shall prohibit a bona fide owner of a one-family dwelling as provided in chapter 102 (zoning) which is, or will be on completion, the owner's place of residence, from personally installing therein refrigerating systems regulated hereunder. Provided that the said owner shall: 
(1)  Sign an affidavit on a form furnished by the department showing the applicant to be the bona fide owner and occupant, or will be the occupant on completion of the residence; and that the applicant will personally install the equipment therein for which the permit is requested. 
(2)  Pass an examination showing that the applicant is possessed of the necessary qualifications for installing such equipment in accordance with the applicable provisions thereof. Such examination may be oral or written and may include practical demonstrations. 
(3)  Apply for and secure the required permit or permits. 
(4)  Obtain the required inspection within 72 hours after the installation has been completed and the equipment placed in operation. 
(Code 1988, § 8.111) 
Secs. 18-237-18-250. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Licensing of Journeymen 

Sec. 18-251. - Journeyman license required. 
    The actual work necessary to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing components of a refrigeration system covered by this article shall hereafter be done by such persons licensed as refrigeration journeyman, by the City of South Lyon, or by any reciprocal municipality participating in accordance with the provisions of this article as specified in subdivision IV of this division. The foregoing shall not apply to a helper, apprentice or specialized craftsman if his work is performed in the presence of a licensed refrigeration contractor or journeyman. A refrigeration contractor licensed by the City of South Lyon is not required to hold a refrigeration journeyman license to install, alter or service refrigeration equipment covered by this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.116) 
Sec. 18-252. - Application for journeyman license. 
    Application for refrigeration journeyman license shall be made on blank forms furnished for such purposes by the department of buildings and safety engineering of the City of Detroit. Applications shall be typewritten or in ink, shall contain such information as may be deemed pertinent in determining the eligibility of the applicant for examination and shall be in affidavit form. Each application submitted shall bear the signatures of two persons who are acquainted with the character and habits of the applicant. Documentary evidence of professed experience shall be submitted at the time application for journeyman license is made. 
(Code 1988, § 8.117) 
Sec. 18-253. - Grades of journeyman licenses. 
    There shall be two grades of refrigeration journeyman licenses, designated as limited and unlimited, the applicable term to be indicated on the face of the license. The holder of the limited refrigeration journeyman license shall install, alter or service only completely self-contained room air conditioners or domestic boxes not exceeding 11/2 horsepower. The holder of the unlimited refrigeration journeyman license may install, alter or service any refrigeration equipment covered by the license of the refrigeration contractor by whom employed. 
(Code 1988, § 8.118) 
Sec. 18-254. - Experience required for journeyman license. 
    No refrigeration journeyman license shall be issued until the applicant has shown to the department by sworn affidavit that he meets one of the following experience requirements, except as provided in section 18-256. 
(1)  An applicant for unlimited refrigeration journeyman license shall have at least four years experience, and an applicant for limited refrigeration journeyman license shall have at least two years of experience, in the actual installation, alteration or servicing of refrigeration systems; or 
(2)  He shall be a registered professional engineer, or possess a bachelor of science degree in mechanical, electrical, civil or chemical engineering, or be a graduate of an approved refrigeration trade school; in addition to which he shall have at least two years of experience for unlimited refrigeration journeyman license, or one year of experience for limited refrigeration journeyman license, in the actual installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems. 
(Code 1988, § 8.119) 
Sec. 18-255. - Age. 
    Applicants for refrigeration journeyman license shall have attained a minimum of 18 years of age. 
(Code 1988, § 8.120) 
Sec. 18-256. - Examination required for journeyman licenses. 
    Written examinations for refrigeration journeyman licenses to be issued by the City of South Lyon or by any municipality participating in the reciprocal provisions of this article specified in subdivision IV of this division shall be administered by the commissioner of the department of buildings and safety engineering of the City of Detroit or his authorized assistants. The enforcing official of the reciprocating municipality for whose applicant the examinations are being conducted may be present at any phase of the administration of the examinations. No license shall be issued to an applicant until he has passed the required examinations; except that refrigeration journeyman licenses may be issued without written examination to persons who have had at least two years of experience in the actual installation, alteration or servicing of refrigerating systems provided that application therefor is made to the department of buildings and safety engineering of the City of Detroit within one year of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
(Code 1988, § 8.121) 
Sec. 18-257. - Journeyman examination content. 
(a)  Examinations shall be practical in character and shall relate to those matters which fairly test the ability of the applicant to install, alter or service refrigerating systems in a safe and proper manner. The applicant shall attain a predetermined score in the written examination (as set by the department of buildings and safety engineering of the City of Detroit) to qualify for license. Applicants who fail the written examination shall wait at least 90 days before again applying for examination. 
(b)  The department of buildings and safety engineering of the City of Detroit shall have the authority in specific cases to make such modification of the waiting period between examinations as will not be contrary to the public interest and so that the spirit of this article shall be observed. 
(Code 1988, § 8.122) 
Sec. 18-258. - Expiration of journeyman license. 
    Refrigeration journeyman licenses shall expire one year from the date of issue, and unless renewed within 60 days thereafter, shall be considered revoked until the holder thereof has submitted the required application and been certified as specified hereinbefore. It shall be unlawful for any person whose license has expired to install, alter or service any refrigerant containing part of any refrigerating system. 
(Code 1988, § 8.123) 
Secs. 18-259-18-270. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Reciprocal Regulations 

Sec. 18-271. - Contractors. 
    The City of South Lyon may license refrigeration contractors legally licensed by other municipalities of the State of Michigan to install, alter or service or to contract to install, alter or service refrigerating equipment covered by this article, parts or accessories thereof, or appurtenances thereto, within the corporate limits of the City of South Lyon upon registration with the department and payment of a nominal fee; provided that such municipalities reciprocate in recognizing refrigeration contractors duly licensed under the provisions of this article by granting them the same privileges and charging the same uniform license fees. 
(Code 1988, § 8.138) 
Sec. 18-272. - Journeyman. 
    Refrigeration journeymen legally licensed as such by other municipalities participating in the reciprocal provisions of this article may perform work in the City of South Lyon, without securing a refrigeration journeyman license in said City of South Lyon; provided that such municipalities reciprocate in recognizing refrigeration journeymen duly licensed in the City of South Lyon by granting them the same privilege. 
(Code 1988, § 8.139) 
Sec. 18-273. - Conditions of participating in reciprocal licensing. 
    The licensing ordinance, examinations and examination procedures of such municipalities having a desire to participate in reciprocal licensing shall be substantially similar to the requirements set forth in this article, and their regulations governing the installation and maintenance of refrigerating systems shall be in substantial conformance with the provisions of this article. No refrigeration contractor license shall be recognized by the City of South Lyon which has been issued by a municipality which has failed to approve by affirmative action of its legislative body, the reciprocal provisions contained in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.140) 
Sec. 18-274. - Right to participate in reciprocal licensing. 
    The right of any municipality to participate in the reciprocal provisions of this article shall be determined by the building inspector, based upon qualifications outlined in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.141) 
Secs. 18-275-18-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMIT FOR SALE OF REFRIGERANT 

Sec. 18-291. - Permits required. 
    No person shall install, alter or make major replacements in any part of a refrigerating system without first securing a permit from the department, except as exempted from such requirement by section 18-292. In cases of emergency the permit shall be obtained within 72 hours from the time that the installation, alteration or major replacement was started. Permits shall be issued only to persons licensed by the department as refrigeration contractors, except as provided in section 18-236. 
(Code 1988, § 8.128) 
Sec. 18-292. - Permits not required. 
    Permits are not required for the installation of refrigerating systems in the following capacities and occupancies, provided that such unit systems and/or units and systems comply with all other requirements of this article. 
(1)  Single- or two-family residence. Systems containing ten pounds or less of refrigerant and/or actuated by motors or engines of one horsepower or less. 
(2)  Other residential occupancies. Self-contained unit systems containing not more than six pounds of refrigerant when actuated by motors or engines of one horsepower or less, with the exception of all systems of any rating which are so installed as to project over public thoroughfares or sidewalks accessible to the public. 
(3)  Commercial, public assembly and institutional occupancies. New self-contained unit systems containing not more than six pounds of a Group I refrigerant when actuated by motors or engines of one horsepower or less, with the exception of all systems of any rating which are so installed as to project over public thoroughfares or sidewalks accessible to the public. 
(4)  Industrial occupancies. New self-contained unit systems containing not more than 20 pounds of a Group I refrigerant when actuated by motors or engines of one horsepower or less, with the exception of all systems of any rating which are so installed as to project over public thoroughfares or sidewalks accessible to the public. 
(Code 1988, § 8.129) 
Sec. 18-293. - Application for permit. 
    Permit applications shall be made on forms provided by the department and shall contain sufficient information for a proper description of the equipment which is being installed, altered or undergoing major replacement. Pertinent data relating to the work to be done which cannot be adequately described on the application for permit shall be shown on plans accompanying same. 
(Code 1988, § 8.130) 
Sec. 18-294. - Illegal procurement of permit. 
    No person shall use the name of another person to obtain a permit required by this article, unless authorized to do so by the department, provided that the latter is a licensed refrigeration contractor. 
(Code 1988, § 8.131) 
Sec. 18-295. - Sale and purchase of refrigerants. 
    The sale or purchase of gases or liquids which are intended for use as refrigerants in the City of South Lyon shall not be made other than to or by the following: distributors, jobbers, manufacturers, holders of class A, B or C refrigeration contractor licenses, and then only those refrigerants specified on their licenses, or persons having written permission from the department. 
(Code 1988, § 8.132) 
Sec. 18-296. - Unlawful to use without permit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having control or management of any building, structure or premises, to use or permit to be used therein or thereon any refrigerating system without a permit having been obtained therefor as provided in this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.133) 
Secs. 18-297-18-310. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 18-311. - Right of entry. 
    The building inspector and his authorized representatives shall have the power during reasonable hours to enter any building within the City of South Lyon for the purpose of examining equipment covered by this article. The holder of the use license shall provide such assistance as is required by the inspector in making the inspection. 
(Code 1988, § 8.146) 
Sec. 18-312. - Interference with department personnel. 
    Any person or persons who shall refuse to comply with or who shall assist in the violation of any of the provisions of this article, or who in any manner hinders, obstructs, delays, resists, prevents or in any manner interferes with the inspection personnel of the department in the performance of any duty herein imposed, or shall refuse to permit such inspectors to perform their duty by refusing them entrance at reasonable hours to buildings or places for the purpose of enforcement of this article shall be subject to the penalties provided in chapter 1. 
(Code 1988, § 8.147) 
Sec. 18-313. - Frequency of inspections. 
(a)  The building inspector and his authorized assistants are hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Make an inspection of all refrigerating systems and equipment which require an installation, alteration or major replacement permit. 
(2)  Make biennial inspections of all multiple domestic systems serving more than three families. 
(3)  Make annual inspections in other than single- and two-family residences of the following refrigerating systems used for air conditioning for human comfort: 
a.  Self-contained unit systems having a refrigerant containing capacity of over ten pounds or actuated by motors or engines having a standard rating of more than two horsepower. 
b.  Systems other than the self-contained type when actuated by motors or engines having a standard rating of more than one horsepower. 
(4)  Make annual inspections in other than single- and two-family residences of refrigerating systems used for purposes other than air conditioning for human comfort when actuated by motors or engines having standard rating of more than one horsepower. 
(5)  Issue order for alterations, repairs and the correction of unsafe conditions and violations of this article. 
(b)  Units of systems installed in single- and two-family residences shall be exempt from the periodic inspection requirements of this section. 
(Code 1988, § 8.148) 
Sec. 18-314. - Power to test and inspect. 
    The building inspector and his authorized assistants are hereby empowered to make or cause to be made such tests and inspections as are deemed necessary for the purpose of safety and health and the enforcement of this article to ascertain the condition of the piping, tubing, fittings, apparatus and machinery used in any refrigerating system. 
(Code 1988, § 8.149) 
Sec. 18-315. - Reports of inspectors. 
    The inspectors of the department shall make a written report of each inspection and file same in the records of the department. When requested, a copy of such report shall be mailed to the owner or holder of the use license. 
(Code 1988, § 8.150) 
Sec. 18-316. - Equipment found unsafe. 
    If, upon inspection of any refrigeration equipment, it is found that the use thereof would be dangerous to life or property, the department shall thereupon serve a written notice of the findings upon the owner, holder of the installation permit or holder of the use license stating a time when repairs must be completed, except that where the work or repairs required is in the nature of an emergency whereby human life is endangered, such work or repairs may be ordered to be done at once and the equipment sealed out of service as provided in section 18-317. After the service of such notice, it shall be the duty of the owner, holder of the installation permit or holder of the use license to proceed within the time allowed to make such repairs or changes as are necessary to place said equipment in a safe condition, and it shall be unlawful to operate such equipment after the date stated in such notice except where an extension of time, in writing, has been secured from the department, unless such repairs or changes have been made and the equipment accepted by the department. 
(Code 1988, § 8.151) 
Sec. 18-317. - Power to seal equipment out of service. 
    The department, in addition to the penalties provided in chapter 1, shall have the power to close down any refrigerating equipment for the following reasons: 
(1)  For failure to secure a use license or to renew such license. 
(2)  When in case of emergency, in the opinion of the inspector, any refrigeration equipment is in such condition as to render it unsafe for operation. 
(3)  For willful failure to comply with recommendations issued by the department for the correction of violations. 
(Code 1988, § 8.152) 
Sec. 18-318. - Notice of sealing out of service. 
    Before sealing any refrigerating equipment out of service, the department, except in cases of emergency, shall serve written notice upon the holder of the use license, stating its intention to seal the equipment out of service and the reasons therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 8.153) 
Sec. 18-319. - Unlawful to remove seal. 
    Any device sealed out of service by the department shall be plainly marked with a sign or tag indicating the reasons for such closing down, and any defacing or removal of such sign or tag, or any tampering with or removal of such seal without the approval of the department, shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.154) 
Sec. 18-320. - Advertising, signs and statements. 
    No person shall use any word or words in any sign, display, business form or document, or advertising medium which indicates, or tends to indicate, that he is qualified to install, alter or service refrigerating systems covered by this article, unless such person is licensed as a refrigeration contractor in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.155) 
Secs. 18-321-18-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - USE LICENSE 

Sec. 18-336. - Use license required. 
    No person shall use or cause to be used any refrigerating systems or compressor unit which is subject to annual or biennial inspections under the provisions of this article without first securing a license for such use from the department. This license, in the case of equipment installed under current installation permit requirements and not previously inspected by the department, will be issued by the department without charge after inspection and approval of the equipment. Failure to secure such license shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.160) 
Sec. 18-337. - Annual use license. 
    A use license shall be renewed annually upon payment of a fee as provided in section 18-342 on the date established by the department for each refrigerating system or compressor unit subject to annual inspections under the provisions of this article. Failure to renew the annual use license shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.161) 
Sec. 18-338. - Biennial use license. 
    A use license shall be renewed biennially upon payment of a fee as provided in section 18-342 on the date established by the department for each building equipped with a multiple domestic system and subject to biennial inspections under the provisions of this article. Failure to renew the biennial use license shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 8.162) 
Sec. 18-339. - Certificate of overtime inspection. 
    A certificate of overtime inspection must be obtained for all services provided by the department during periods other than regular working hours. 
(Code 1988, § 8.163) 
Sec. 18-340. - Notification of accident by licensee. 
    The holder of the use license of any refrigerating system or compressor unit covered by this article shall immediately notify the department of every accident involving personal injury or damage to any refrigerant-containing part of the system, and shall afford the department every facility for investigating such accident. 
(Code 1988, § 8.164) 
Sec. 18-341. - Unlawful to use system following accident. 
    Where an accident involves damage to any refrigerant-containing part of the system, it shall be unlawful to use such refrigerating system until after an investigation is made and approval for continued use is granted by a representative of the department. 
(Code 1988, § 8.165) 
Sec. 18-342. - Fees. 
    The fees for permits, licenses, examination, and appeal shall be as prescribed in sections 22-57 through 22-59. 
(Code 1988, § 8.166) 
Sec. 18-343. - Classification of systems and compressor units. 
    For the purpose of classification and establishing license fees, refrigerating systems and compressor units shall be divided into the following groups: 
(1)  Refrigerating systems or compressor units other than multiple domestic systems: 
a.  Group A - 11/2 to five horsepower, inclusive; 
b.  Group B - Over five to 50 horsepower, inclusive; 
c.  Group C - Over 50 horsepower capacity. 
(2)  Buildings equipped with multiple domestic systems: 
a.  Group D - Systems serving four to ten apartments, inclusive; 
b.  Group E - Systems serving 11 to 20 apartments, inclusive; 
c.  Group F - Systems serving 21 to 30 apartments, inclusive; 
d.  Group G - Systems serving 31 or more apartments. 
(Code 1988, § 8.167) 
Secs. 18-344-18-355. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - INSTALLATION 

Sec. 18-356. - General. 
    In addition to the requirements as provided in the American National Standard Code for Mechanical Refrigeration ANSI B 9.1, adopted for the purpose of this article in subsection 18-182(b), the requirements as provided in the following sections of this article shall also apply. 
(Code 1988, § 8.171) 
Sec. 18-357. - Check valves. 
    A discharge check valve shall be provided in the discharge line from each compressor used on a refrigerating system containing more than 40 pounds of a group 2 or group 3 refrigerant. 
(Code 1988, § 8.172) 
Sec. 18-358. - Valves on water connections. 
    When city water is connected to any refrigerant-containing component of a refrigerating system (e.g., shell-and-tube condensers, double-pipe condensers, water-jacketed compressor cylinders, etc.) in such a way that there would be direct contact between city water and the refrigerant upon leakage through the wall separating the two fluids, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  The water control valve, either manually or automatically operated, shall be located on the inlet side of the refrigerant-containing component; and 
(2)  There shall be no automatically or manually operated water shutoff valve in the discharge piping from the refrigerant-containing component; except where two or more components are served in parallel from a common water supply line, provided a check valve is installed upstream from all supply connections. 
(Code 1988, § 8.173) 
Sec. 18-359. - Installation in windows or other wall openings. 
    Refrigerating systems or units installed in windows, transoms, or other such wall openings shall rest upon building members of sufficient strength to safely support their weight. Such units or systems shall be adequately supported by metal brackets securely anchored or attached to the building. The brackets exposed to weather shall be of suitable design, thickness, etc., to withstand corrosion for a prolonged period. Bracket attachments or anchors shall be so located as to be readily accessible for inspection, terminating within the building if necessary to meet this requirement. No refrigerating system or unit shall extend beyond the building in such a manner as to create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, nor shall encroach into a required yard. 
(Code 1988, § 8.174) 
Sec. 18-360. - Air duct systems. 
(a)  Air duct systems shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with chapter 18. 
(b)  When a refrigerating system is located within a class T machinery room in order to comply with the requirements pertaining to type or quantity of refrigerant or building occupancy, the presence of an opening in the air duct system within such room shall void its designation as a class T machinery room, and the requirements pertaining to refrigerating systems not located in a class T machinery room shall apply. 
(Code 1988, § 8.175) 
Sec. 18-361. - Concealed equipment. 
    Soft annealed copper tubing which is concealed shall be encased in rigid conduit, except that such tubing completely buried in concrete may be encased in flexible conduit. Hard copper tubing which is buried underground or under the lowest floor of a building shall be encased in rigid conduit. Hard copper tubing which is completely buried in concrete shall be encased in either rigid or flexible conduit. Permanent inspection openings shall be provided in the covering of concealed tubing joints. It shall be unlawful for owners, contractors or workmen to lath over or in any way conceal any piping, outlet boxes, or other part of a refrigerating system until an inspection has been made thereof and due notice given that the work has been passed upon by the department. In case any obstruction has been placed so as to conceal any piping or part of the installation before the department has made an inspection thereof, the department may remove or cause to be removed any such lath or obstruction which may conceal the work so that proper inspection may be made. Under urgent conditions, upon proper notification, it shall be the duty of the department to make a proper inspection within 72 hours from the time it is notified. 
(Code 1988, § 8.176) 
Sec. 18-362. - Roof-mounted equipment. 
(a)  Refrigerating systems or units, not exceeding 400 pounds in total weight and installed on the roofs of buildings, shall be supported by at least two structural members of sufficient strength spanning at least four wood joists, or three steel joists, or two trusses of a roof system properly designed to support its own dead weight and a live load of not less than 30 pounds per square foot. Such equipment and supporting members shall be adequately secured to the joists, or trusses of the roof system; and the roof deck shall be made watertight after such anchorage system is completed. The location of the equipment shall be limited to the first one-fourth distance from any bearing wall. 
(b)  Equipment installed so as to exceed the weight, placement or roof strength requirements specified in this section shall meet the requirements of the department, including the obtaining of the necessary building permits. 
(Code 1988, § 8.177) 
Sec. 18-363. - Accessibility of equipment. 
(a)  Where refrigeration equipment is installed in relatively inaccessible locations, such as roofs, crawl spaces, attics, furred spaces and similar areas, means shall be provided for gaining safe approach and access to such equipment for servicing and inspection. Portable ladders shall be not over 20 feet long with at least three rungs projecting above the roof, parapet, platform, etc. Buildings of more than one story in height shall have an inside means of access to the roof. Stationary ladders over 20 feet high shall be provided with proper loops or guards above the 20-foot level. Stairways shall be provided with handrails. All ladders and stairways shall be of substantial construction. 
(b)  Openings in building construction to the equipment shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size. Trap doors shall be properly hinged and counterweighted. An unobstructed passageway, not less than three feet high, with solid flooring at least two feet in width, shall be provided to the equipment. All parts of the equipment shall be accessible for inspection and servicing. Solid flooring, measuring at least 30 inches out from the equipment, with at least three feet of headroom provided, shall be furnished around the equipment. 
(c)  Adequate lighting shall be provided at the equipment. The switch controlling the electric light and the disconnect switch for the equipment shall be installed in a readily accessible location, remote from the equipment area or the approach area if necessary to meet this requirement. 
(d)  The licensed contractor who secures the permit for the installation of refrigeration equipment shall be relieved of the requirements of this section, provided his written contractual agreement indicates that the purchaser will assume this responsibility, and further provided that the licensed contractor will appropriately annotate his permit application under "Remarks" indicating such contractual agreement. 
(Code 1988, § 8.178) 
Sec. 18-364. - Lubricating oil protection control. 
    Pressure lubricated positive displacement compressors having a displacement exceeding 50 cubic feet per minute shall be equipped with an approved control device, requiring manual resetting, which will stop the action of the compressor in the event of loss of adequate lubricating oil pressure. 
(Code 1988, § 8.179) 
Sec. 18-365. - Workmanship. 
    Piping, tubing and all other refrigerant-containing components of a refrigerating system shall be securely installed in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the approved instructions of the manufacturer and the provisions of this article. All such equipment shall be protected from mechanical damage where necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 8.180) 
Sec. 18-366. - Certificate of inspection. 
    When any new work, whether installation, alteration or major replacement, for which a permit is required under the provisions of this article, has been completed to the satisfaction of the department, there shall be issued upon request of the holder of the use license, a certificate of inspection certifying that the installation is in accordance with the provisions of this article and that the refrigerating system may be operated. Such certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the proximity of the compressor. 
(Code 1988, § 8.181) 
Sec. 18-367. - Other refrigerants. 
    No refrigerating system shall be maintained or operated employing a refrigerant other than is specified in this article without a permit issued by the department, upon such conditions consistent with the provisions of this article as are deemed necessary in the interest of public safety by the building inspector. 
(Code 1988, § 8.182) 
Sec. 18-368. - Charging or removing refrigerants. 
    Charging a system with a refrigerant or removing same therefrom shall be done by a licensed refrigeration contractor; provided, that in case of fire or emergency, the system may be discharged by the fire department. 
(Code 1988, § 8.183) 
Sec. 18-369. - Installation in one- or two-family dwellings. 
(a)  Refrigeration equipment used as part of a central air conditioning unit installed outside of one- or two-family dwellings shall be located at a point on the premises with a minimum of five feet within an imaginary line drawn from the sides of the structure to the rear of the lot. For the purpose of this section, open patios shall not be considered a portion of the structure. 
(b)  In the event some practical difficulty shall preclude location of outside air conditioning equipment as required by this section, the city building department may approve installation of said equipment at some other point on the premises, provided: 
(1)  The installer submits a plan showing the proposed location and the location of all adjacent structures, applicant's lot and appurtenant lots. 
(2)  The plan review fee is paid. 
(3)  The proposed location reduces noise nuisance, in the opinion of the inspector. 
(4)  The proposed location does not create an obstruction to visibility on corner lots and offers adequate screening. 
(Code 1988, § 8.184) 
Sec. 18-370. - Authority of other departments. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the authority of this department or other departments in making inspections under their respective regulations. All applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of South Lyon shall be adhered to. 
(Code 1988, § 8.185) 
Secs. 18-371-18-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS 

Sec. 18-401. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dangerous building means any building or structure that has one or more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following conditions: 
(1)  A door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means of exit does not conform to the city fire code or building code. 
(2)  A portion of the building or structure is damaged by fire, wind, flood or other cause so that the structural strength or stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before the catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirements of the housing law of the state, Public Act 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the city building code for a new building or structure, purpose or location. 
(3)  A part of the building or structure is likely to fail, become detached or dislodged, or collapse, and injure persons or damage property. 
(4)  A portion of the building or structure has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the case of new construction by the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the city building code. 
(5)  The building or structure, or part thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the building or structure is likely to fail or give way. 
(6)  The building or structure, or part thereof, is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used. 
(7)  The building or structure is damaged by fire, wind or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or enables persons to resort to the building or structure for causing a nuisance or committing an unlawful or immoral act. 
(8)  A building or structure used, or intended to be used, for dwelling purposes, including the adjoining grounds, because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition that the health officer of the city or county determines is likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health, safety or general welfare of people living in the dwelling. 
(9)  A building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and open at a door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers. 
(10)  A building or structure remains unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being available for sale, lease or rent with a real estate broker licensed under article 25 of the occupational code, Public Act No. 299 of 1930 (MCL 339.2501 et seq.), or is not publicly offered for sale by the owner. Such definition does not apply to either of the following: 
a.  A building or structure as to which the owner or agent does both of the following: 
i.  Notifies the city police department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days. The notice shall be given by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or structure becomes unoccupied. 
ii.  Maintains the exterior of the building or structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with this article and the housing law of the state, Public Act No. 167 of 1917 (MCL 125.401 et seq.), or the city building code. 
b.  A secondary dwelling of the owner that is regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the owner notifies the city police department that the dwelling will remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. An owner who has given the notice prescribed by this subsection shall notify the city police department not more than 30 days after the dwelling no longer qualifies for such exception. As used in this subsection, the term "secondary dwelling" means a dwelling, such as a vacation home, hunting cabin or summer home, that is occupied by the owner or a member of his family during part of the year. 
    Enforcing agency means the city, through the city building official and/or such other official or agency as may be designated by the city manager to enforce this article. 
    City building code means the building code administered and enforced in the city pursuant to the Stille-Derossett-Hale Single State Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-402. - Dangerous building prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or agent thereof to keep or maintain or occupy any building or structure, or part thereof, which is or becomes a dangerous building as defined in in section 18-401. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-403. - Owner and occupants responsible for building. 
    All persons or entities who own, manage, lease, rent, or occupy any building or structure shall be equally responsible for keeping the building or structure in a clean and habitable condition and shall take all necessary precautions to prevent it from becoming a dangerous building and to prevent any nuisance or other condition detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare from arising thereon. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-404. - Notice of dangerous building. 
(a)  Issuance. Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, if a building or structure is found to be a dangerous building, the enforcing agency shall issue a notice that the building or structure is a dangerous building. 
(b)  Parties to be notified. The notice shall be served on each owner of, or party in interest in, the building or structure in whose name the property appears in the city's tax assessment records. 
(c)  Contents. The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing on whether the building or structure is a dangerous building and state that the person to whom the notice is directed shall have the opportunity at the hearing to show cause why the hearing officer should not order the building or structure to be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained. 
(d)  Service. The notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the person to whom the notice is directed, either personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the owner or party in interest at the address shown on the city's tax assessment records. If a notice is served upon a person by certified mail, a copy of the notice shall also be posted upon a conspicuous part of the building or structure. The notice shall be served upon the owner or party in interest at least ten days before the date of the hearing included in the notice. When service cannot be made by either of the above methods, the notice may be served by publishing the notice in a local newspaper of general circulation once a week for three consecutive weeks and by posting a copy of the notice upon a conspicuous part of the structure. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-6) 
Sec. 18-405. - Emergency measures. 
    Where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to life or safety of any person unless immediate action is taken with respect to a dangerous building or structure, the building department shall report such facts to the city manager or his or her designee, and the city manager or his or her designee, shall order the building or structure to be vacated and cause the building or structure to be boarded up, fenced or otherwise made safe pending final action of the hearing officer and city council as applicable. The cost of such emergency measures shall be collected in the same manner as provided for in section 18-409. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-406. - Hearing officer; filing of notice with hearing officer. 
(a)  Appointment. The hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor and be approved by the council and shall then serve at the mayor's pleasure. The hearing officer shall be a person who has expertise in housing matters including, but not limited to, an engineer, architect, building contractor, building inspector, member of a community housing organization, or any person with similar qualifications. An employee of the city shall not be appointed as hearing officer. 
(b)  Filing of notice. The enforcing agency shall file a copy of the notice that a building or structure is a dangerous building with the hearing officer. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-407. - Hearing; testimony; decision; order; compliance. 
(a)  Hearing, testimony and decision. At a hearing prescribed by this article, the hearing officer shall take testimony and may receive evidence of the enforcing agency, the owner of the property and any interested party. Not more than five days after completion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision either closing the proceedings or ordering the building or structure demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained. 
(b)  Compliance with hearing officer order. If the hearing officer determines that the building or structure should be demolished, otherwise made safe or properly maintained, he shall so order, fixing a time in the order for the owner, agent or lessee to comply with the order. Any repairs or maintenance ordered shall comply with applicable codes, regulations and ordinances. If the building or structure is a dangerous building under subsection (10) of the definition of dangerous building in section 18-401, the order may require the owner and/or agent to maintain the exterior of the building and adjoining grounds owned by the owner of the building or structure including, but not limited to, the maintenance of lawns, trees, and shrubs. 
(c)  Unreasonable repairs. If it is determined that a building or structure is dangerous and the hearing officer has determined that the cost of the repairs would exceed 100 percent of the true cash value of the building or structure as reflected on the city tax assessment rolls in effect prior to the building or structure becoming an dangerous building, such repairs shall be presumed unreasonable, and it shall be presumed for the purpose of this article that such building or structure is a public nuisance which may be ordered demolished without option on the part of the owner to repair. This section is not meant to apply to those situations where a building or structure is a dangerous building as a result of an event beyond the control of the owner, such as fire, windstorm, tornado, flood or other Act of God. If a building or structure has become a dangerous building because of an event beyond the control of the owner, the owner shall be given by the city manager, or his designee, reasonable time within which to make repairs and the building or structure shall not be ordered demolished without option on the part of the owner to repair. If the owner does not make the repairs within the designated time period, then the building or structure may be ordered demolished without option on the part of the owner to repair. The cost of demolishing the building or structure shall be a lien against the real property and shall be reported to the city assessor, who shall assess the cost against the property on which the building or structure is located. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-408. - Noncompliance; enforcement hearing. 
(a)  Failure to appear; noncompliance with hearing officer order; request to enforce order. If the owner, agent or lessee fails to appear, or neglects or refuses to comply with the hearing officer's order, the hearing officer shall file a report of the findings and a copy of the order with the city council not more than five days after noncompliance by the owner and request that necessary action be taken to enforce the order. A copy of the findings and order of the hearing officer shall be served on the owner, agent or lessee in the manner prescribed in section 18-404. 
(b)  Enforcement hearing. The city council shall fix a date not less than 30 days after the hearing prescribed in subsection 18-407(a) for a hearing on the findings and order of the hearing officer and shall give notice to: 1) the owner, agent, or owner/agent; and 2) all interested parties, in the manner prescribed in section 18-404 of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner and/or agent and any interested party shall be given the opportunity to show cause why the order should not be enforced. The city council shall either approve, disapprove, or modify the order. If the city council approves or modifies the order, the city council shall take all necessary action to enforce the order. If the order is approved or modified, the owner, agent, or owner/agent shall comply with the order within 60 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. In the case of an order of demolition, if the city council determines that the building or structure has been substantially destroyed by fire, wind, flood, or other natural disaster, and the cost of repair of the building or structure will be greater than the state equalized value of the building or structure, the owner, agent, or owner/agent shall comply with the order of demolition within 21 days after the date of the hearing under this subsection. If the estimated cost of repair exceeds the state equalized value of the building or structure to be repaired, a rebuttable presumption that the building or structure requires immediate demolition exists. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-409. - Implementation and enforcement of remedies. 
(a)  Implementation of city council order. In the event of the failure or refusal of the owner or agent or party in interest to comply with the decision of the city council, the city council may, in its discretion, contract for the demolition, making safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure. 
(b)  Reimbursement of costs. The costs of the demolition, making the building or structure safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure, incurred by the city to bring the building or structure into conformance with this article including fees paid to hearing officers, costs of title searches or commitments used to determine the parties in interest, recording fees for notices and liens filed with the county register of deeds, demolition and dumping charges, court reporting attendance fees, cost of consulting services, investigation, publication charges, attorney fees, court costs, and other administrative expenses, shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the city's last tax assessment records. 
(c)  Notice of costs. The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the city's last tax assessment records shall be notified by the city manager of the amount of the costs of the demolition, making the building or structure safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure, by first class mail at the address shown on the city tax assessment records. 
(d)  Lien for unpaid costs. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the costs within 30 days after mailing by the city manager of the notice of the amount of the costs, the city shall have a lien for the costs incurred by the city to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien shall not take effect until notice of the lien has been filed or recorded as provided by law. A lien provided for in this subsection does not have priority over previously filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. The lien for the costs shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, Public Act No. 206 of 1892 (MCL 211.1 et seq.) or the applicable sections of the City of South Lyon Charter and Code. 
(e)  Action against owner; lien on property. In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, making the building or structure safe or maintaining the exterior of the building or structure, or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this subsection. The lien provided for in this subsection shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed and recorded as provided for by law. The lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(f)  Enforcement of judgment A judgment in an action brought pursuant to subsection (e) of this section may be enforced against assets of the owner, other than the building or structure. 
(g)  Lien for judgment amount. The city shall have a lien for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to subsection (e) of this section against the owner's interest in all real property located in the state that is owned, in whole or in part, by the owner of the building or structure against which the judgment is obtained. A lien provided for in this subsection does not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law, and the lien does not have priority over prior filed or recorded liens and encumbrances. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-410. - Appeal to circuit court. 
    An owner or party in interest aggrieved by any final decision or a decision or order of the city council may appeal the decision to the county circuit court by filing a petition for an order of superintending control within 20 calendar days from the date of the decision or order. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Sec. 18-411. - Failure or refusal to comply with order; penalties; public nuisance. 
(a)  Misdemeanor. Any person who fails or refuses to comply with an order approved or modified by the city council under section 18-408 within the time prescribed by that section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs, which may include all direct or indirect expenses and costs incurred by the city in connection with the violation, or both. 
(b)  Additional remedies. A violator of this article shall also be subject to such additional actions, remedies, sanctions, and judicial orders as are authorized under Michigan law. 
(c)  Separate and continuing violation. Each day a violation of any provision of this article continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. 
(d)  Public nuisance. Any building or structure in violation of any provision of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 03-16, Pt. I, 2-8-16) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - BUSINESS REGISTRATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 16-16, Pt. I, adopted Oct. 10, 2016, changed the title of Art. I from In General to Business Registration. 

Sec. 22-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote the general health, safety, and welfare of persons in the city by identifying business locations and operations within the city to enhance the efficient delivery of police and fire protection; ensure compliance with building and fire safety codes; provide better efficiency and economy in furnishing public utility services within the city; and to promote compliance with all land use ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, Pt. I, 10-10-16) 
Sec. 22-2. - Registration required. 
(a)  No person shall, directly or indirectly, engage in any business, trade, profession or occupation as a proprietor, owner, part owner or manager, whether or not a license is required by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city, state or federal government, without first registering and continuing to maintain such registration with the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the clerk. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every registered business to report any changes in the information furnished with the current registration including location within five business days of such event occurring. 
(c)  The granting of a business registration shall not exempt such business from the necessity of securing a city license for those businesses requiring a license by the city. 
(d)  The issuance of a business or other license by the state or other governmental agency shall not exempt such business from the necessity of registering the business with the city in accordance with this article. 
(e)  Registration of a business shall not exempt such business from compliance with all applicable requirements of this Code. 
(f)  Registration shall not be transferable from one business to another. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, Pt. I, 10-10-16) 
Sec. 22-3. - Registration application. 
    Prior to initiating business operations, each business shall register with the city by submitting a business registration application to the city clerk in the form and manner prescribed by the city clerk, which shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  The legal name and form of the business entity (sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or other) and any assumed name under which the business will be conducted. 
(b)  The full names, business and residence addresses, business telephone numbers, and emergency contact information of the owners, proprietors, officers, partners, or members as applicable to the form of business entity, and other persons involved in the on-site supervision, management, or control of the business. 
(c)  The address, telephone number, and email address or other contact information of the business being registered. 
(d)  The nature and character of the business. 
(e)  Contact information of person(s) to notify in the event of an emergency. 
(f)  A list by name and quantity of all hazardous materials expected to be used, stored, or generated on-site, and each application shall have attached a current fire safety audit worksheet or a document substituted by the city containing the same information. This form must be approved and signed by the city fire marshal or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, Pt. I, 10-10-16) 
Sec. 22-4. - Issuance. 
    No business registration shall be issued until all required information is submitted. Written proof of registration for each business address will be issued by the city clerk to and in the legal name of the owner or operator of the business. 
(Ord. No. 16-16, Pt. I, 10-10-16) 
Secs. 22-5-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 22-31. - Licenses required. 
    No person shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business, or privilege for which any license is required by any provision of this Code without first obtaining a license from the city in the manner provided for in this article. Any person duly licensed on the effective date of this Code shall be deemed licensed hereunder for the balance of the current license year. 
(Code 1988, § 7.1) 
Sec. 22-32. - Multiple businesses. 
    The granting of a license or permit to any person operating, conducting or carrying on any trade, profession, business or privilege which contains within itself, or is composed of, trades, professions, businesses or privileges which are required by this Code to be licensed, shall not relieve the person to whom such license or permit is granted from the necessity of securing individual licenses or permits for each such trade, profession, business or privilege. 
(Code 1988, § 7.2) 
Sec. 22-33. - State licensed businesses. 
    The fact that a license or permit has been granted to any person by the State of Michigan to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall not exempt such person from the necessity of securing a license or permit from the city if such license or permit is required by this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.3) 
Sec. 22-34. - License application. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided in this Code, every person required to obtain a license from the city to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege shall make application for said license to the city clerk upon forms provided by the city clerk and shall state under oath or affirmation such facts, as may be required for, or applicable to, the granting of such license. 
(b)  No person shall make any false statement or representation in connection with any application for a license under this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.4) 
Sec. 22-35. - License year. 
    Except as otherwise herein provided as to certain licenses, the license year shall begin July 1 of each year and shall terminate at midnight on June 30 of the following year. Original licenses shall be issued for the balance of the license year at the full license fee. License applications for license renewals shall be accepted and licenses issued for a period of 15 days prior to the annual expiration date. In all cases where the provisions of this Code permit the issuance of licenses for periods of less than one year, the effective date of such licenses shall commence with the date of the issuance thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 7.5) 
Sec. 22-36. - Conditions for issuance. 
    No license or permit required by this Code shall be issued to any person who is required to have a license or permit from the State of Michigan, until such person shall submit evidence of such state license or permit and proof that all fees appertaining thereto have been paid. No license shall be granted to any applicant therefor until such applicant has complied with all of the provisions of this Code applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which application for license is made. 
(Code 1988, § 7.6) 
Sec. 22-37. - Where certification required and consent to inspections. 
(a)  No license shall be granted where the certification of any officer of the city is required prior to the issuance thereof, until such certification is made. 
(b)  Owners and occupants of any premises for which a license has been requested or is required by this Code for the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession or business shall be considered to have consented to inspections of the premises as provided in sections 22-38, 22-39, 22-40 and 22-41 and chapter 18. 
(Code 1988, § 7.7) 
Sec. 22-38. - Health officer's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the health officer is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the person making application and the premises in which he proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the sanitary requirements of the State of Michigan and of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.8) 
Sec. 22-39. - Fire chief's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the fire chief is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon an actual inspection and a finding that the premises in which the person making application for such license proposes to conduct or is conducting the trade, profession, business or privilege comply with all the fire regulations of the State of Michigan and of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.9) 
Sec. 22-40. - Public safety director's certificate. 
    In all cases where the certification of the director of public safety is required prior to the issuance of any license by the city clerk, such certification shall be based upon a finding that the person making application for such license is of good moral character. 
(Code 1988, § 7.10) 
Sec. 22-41. - Building inspector's certificate. 
    In all cases where the carrying on of the trade, profession, business or privilege involves the use of any structure or land, a license therefor shall not be issued until the building inspector shall certify that the proposed use is not prohibited by article III of chapter 34 and chapters 70, 86 and 102, or other zoning regulations of the city, and complies with the building, plumbing, mechanical and electrical codes on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Code 1988, § 7.11) 
Sec. 22-42. - Bonds. 
    Where the provisions of this Code require that the applicant for any license or permit furnish a bond, such bond shall be furnished in an amount deemed adequate by the proper city officer, or, where the amount thereof is specified in the schedule of fees and bonds set out in sections 22-57 through 22-59 or elsewhere in this Code, in the amount so required; the form of such bond shall be acceptable to the city attorney. In lieu of a bond, an applicant for a license or permit may furnish one or more policies of insurance in the same amounts and providing the same protection as called for in any such bond; any such policies of insurance shall be approved as to substance by the city official issuing said license or permit and as to form by the city attorney. 
(Code 1988, § 7.12) 
Sec. 22-43. - Late renewals. 
    All fees for the renewal of any license which are not paid at the time said fees shall be due, shall be paid as "late fees" with an additional 25 percent of the license fee required for such licenses under the provisions of sections 22-57 through 22-59 for the first 15 days that such license fee remains unpaid and thereafter the license fee shall be that stipulated for such licenses under sections 22-57 through 22-59, plus 50 percent of such fee. 
(Code 1988, § 7.13) 
Sec. 22-44. - Right to issuance. 
    If the application for any license is approved by the proper officers of the city, as provided in this Code, said license shall be granted and shall serve as a receipt for payment of the fee prescribed for such license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.14) 
Sec. 22-45. - Fees, when paid. 
    The fee required by this Code for any license or permit shall be paid at the office of the issuing authority prescribed in this Code upon or before the granting of said license or permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7.15) 
Sec. 22-46. - Exempt persons. 
    No license fee shall be required from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law. Such persons shall comply with all other provisions of this article. The city clerk shall, in all such cases, issue to such persons licenses which are clearly marked as to said exemption and the reason therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7.16) 
Sec. 22-47. - Suspension or revocation. 
    Any license issued by the city may be suspended by the city manager for cause, and any permit issued by the city may be suspended or revoked by the issuing authority for cause. The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the city council on any such action of the city manager, provided a written request therefor is filed with the city clerk within five days after receipt of said notice of such suspension. The council may confirm such suspension or revoke or reinstate any such license. The action taken by the council shall be final. Upon suspension or revocation of any license or permit, the fee therefor shall not be refunded. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any licensee whose license has been revoked shall not be eligible to apply for a new license for the trade, profession, business or privilege for a period of one year after such revocation. 
(Code 1988, § 7.17) 
Sec. 22-48. - "Cause" defined. 
    The term cause , as used in this article, shall include the doing or omitting of any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license or permit is granted under the provisions of this Code, or upon any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is: 
(1)  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public. 
(2)  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature. 
(3)  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license or permit granted. 
(4)  Forbidden by the provisions of this Code or any duly established rule or regulation of the city applicable to the trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license or permit has been granted. 
(Code 1988, § 7.18) 
Sec. 22-49. - License renewal. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Code 1988, § 7.19) 
Sec. 22-50. - Exhibition of license. 
    No licensee shall fail to carry any license issued in accordance with the provisions of this article upon his person at all times when engaged in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which the license was granted; except that where such trade, profession, business or privilege is operated, conducted or carried on at a fixed place or establishment, said license shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in his place of business. Every licensee shall produce his license for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any city police officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Code 1988, § 7.20) 
Sec. 22-51. - Exhibition on vehicle and machine. 
    No licensee shall fail to display conspicuously on each vehicle or mechanical device or machine required to be licensed by this Code such tags or stickers as are furnished by the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 7.21) 
Sec. 22-52. - Displaying invalid license. 
    No person shall display any expired license or any license for which a duplicate has been issued. 
(Code 1988, § 7.22) 
Sec. 22-53. - Transferability; misuse. 
    No license or permit issued under the provisions of this Code shall be transferable unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code. No licensee or permittee shall, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, transfer or attempt to transfer his license or permit to another nor shall he make any improper use of the same. 
(Code 1988, § 7.23) 
Sec. 22-54. - Misuse; automatic revocation. 
    In addition to the general penalty provision for violation thereof, any attempt by a licensee or permittee to transfer his license or permit to another, unless specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, or to use the same improperly, shall be void and result in the automatic revocation of such license or permit. 
(Code 1988, § 7.24) 
Sec. 22-55. - General business license. 
    In order to encourage and promote the growth of business presently within the community and to facilitate the entry of new business ventures within the community and to establish a line of communication between business and government, every person who shall engage, or be engaged, in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession, or business shall first obtain a license from the city in the manner provided for in this article, to be known as a general business license. Any person engaging in a business required to be licensed by another provision of this Code shall not be required to obtain a license hereunder for the operation of such licensed business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.25) 
Sec. 22-56. - Applicability. 
    Section 22-55 shall be prospective in nature only and applicable only to those persons who begin to engage in the operation, conduct or carrying on of any trade, profession or business after March 1, 1977. 
(Code 1988, § 7.26) 
Sec. 22-57. - Schedule established. 
    The fee required to be paid and the amount of any bond required to be posted, or insurance required to be carried, to obtain any license to engage in the operation, conduct, or carrying on of any trade, profession, business or privilege for which a license is required by the provisions of this Code shall be as hereinafter provided in this article. No license shall be issued to any applicant unless he first pays to the city clerk the fee and posts a bond or evidence of insurance coverage in the amount required for the type of license desired. 
(Code 1988, § 7.31) 
Sec. 22-58. - Fees for licenses. 
(a)  License fee schedule. Fees for licenses shall be as prescribed in a schedule as adopted from time to time by city council. Bonds or insurance coverage, where required, shall be in the amounts listed in such fee schedules. 
(b)  License fee for general business license. There shall be no fee required to be paid for a general business license. 
(Code 1988, §§ 7.26, 7.32) 
Sec. 22-59. - Licenses required. 
    A license is required to own, operate or participate in the following: 
Amusement device (section 10-92) 
Attic sale (see Garage sale) 
Bicycle (section 90-132) 
Bill posters (section 6-32) 
Billiard room (see Pool room) 
Bowling establishment (section 10-32) 
Carnival (see Show) 
Circus (see Show) 
Drive-in restaurant (section 50-35) 
Electrical contractor (section 18-31 et seq.) 
Electrician (section 18-31 et seq.) 
Exhibition (10.146) 
Fire sale (section 22-96) 
Garage sale (section 66-32) 
Going-out-of-business sale (section 22-96) 
Handbill distributor (section 6-32) 
Initial merchants (section 22-122) 
Lawn sale (see Garage sale) 
Parade (section 82-121) 
Peddler (section 22-142) 
Pinball machine (see Amusement device) 
Pool room (section 10-32[sic]) 
Refrigeration systems 
Contractor (section 18-226) 
Journeyman (section 18-251) 
Use license (section 18-336) 
Restaurant (section 50-35) 
Rummage sale (see Garage sale) 
Show (section 10-146) 
Solicitors (section 22-162) 
Theater (section 10-147) 
Transient merchants (section 22-181) 
(Code 1988, §§ 7.33-7.36) 
Sec. 22-60. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(10), § 1(7.28)) 
Secs. 22-61-22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 22-81-22-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES 

Sec. 22-96. - License required. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 39 of 1961, State of Michigan, a license issued by the city clerk shall be obtained by any person before selling or offering to sell any goods at a sale to be advertised or held out by any means to be one of the following: 
(1)  Going-out-of-business sale or liquidation sale; 
(2)  Removal-of-business sale; 
(3)  Sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or otherwise. 
(Code 1988, § 7.111) 
Sec. 22-97. - Application requirements. 
    A person desiring to conduct a sale regulated by this article shall make a written application to the city clerk setting forth and containing the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of all persons who have a security interest in the goods to be sold, and if such security interest is evidenced by a financing statement, the place or places where such is on file; 
(2)  A description of the place where such sale is to be held; 
(3)  The dates of the period of time in which the sale is to be conducted; 
(4)  A full and complete statement of the facts in regard to the sale, including the reason for the urgent and expeditious disposal of goods thereby and the manner in which the sale will be conducted; 
(5)  A full and complete inventory of the goods that are to be sold which inventory shall: 
a.  Itemize the goods to be sold and contain sufficient information concerning each item, including the brand name, if any, to clearly identify it; 
b.  List separately any goods which were purchased during a 60-day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the license; 
c.  Show the cost price of each item in the inventory together with the name and address of the seller of the items to the applicant, the date of purchase and the date of delivery of each item to the applicant. 
(6)  The name and address of the person who will be in charge and responsible for the conducting of the sale. 
(Code 1988, § 7.112) 
Sec. 22-98. - License fee. 
    Any applicant hereunder shall submit to the city clerk with his application a license fee as prescribed in sections 22-57 through 22-59. 
(Code 1988, § 7.113) 
Sec. 22-99. - Effect of license. 
(a)  A license shall be issued hereunder on the following terms: 
(1)  The license shall authorize the sale described in the application for a period of not more than 30 days from the start of said sale; the license may be renewed not more than twice for a period of time not to exceed 30 days for each renewal upon affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not been disposed of and that no new goods have been added to the inventory. The application for renewal shall contain a new inventory conforming to the requirements hereof; 
(2)  The license shall authorize only the one type of sale described in the application at the location named therein; 
(3)  The license shall authorize only the sale of goods and merchandise described in the inventory attached to the application; no person shall order any goods for the purpose of selling and disposing of the same under any sale authorized by this article. Any unusual purchase or additions to the stock within 60 days prior to the filing of the application hereunder shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions were in contemplation of the sale authorized by this article; 
(4)  Any license herein provided for shall not be assignable or transferable. 
(b)  No license under this article shall be issued to any person: 
(1)  To conduct a sale in the trade name or style of a person in whose goods the applicant for the license has acquired a right or title thereto within six months prior to the time of making application for such a license; 
(2)  To conduct a sale, other than sale of goods damaged by fire, smoke or otherwise on the same premises within one year from the conclusion of a prior sale of the nature covered by this article. 
(3)  Subsections (b)(1) and (2) of this section shall not apply to any person who acquired right or title in goods as an heir, devisee or legatee or pursuant to a court order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 7.114) 
Sec. 22-100. - Posting. 
    A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the sales room where the goods are to be sold; provided, however, the copy of the inventory attached to said application need not show the purchase price of said goods; a duplicate copy of the license shall be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted; any advertisement published in connection with the sale shall conspicuously show the license number and the date of expiration. 
(Code 1988, § 7.115) 
Sec. 22-101. - Penalties. 
(a)  No goods shall be sold on the premises at or during a sale authorized hereunder, except in conformance with the requirements hereof; no goods shall be sold or offered for sale excepting the goods described in and inventoried in the original application; no goods shall be sold or offered for sale which were purchased in contemplation of such sale. 
(b)  Any violation of this division shall void any license issued to conduct a sale hereunder in addition to any other penalty imposed by the Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.116; Ord. of 11-28-94(14), § 1; Ord. of 9-9-96(2), § 1) 
Secs. 22-102-22-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INITIAL MERCHANTS 

Sec. 22-121. - Merchant defined. 
    The word merchant as used in this article shall be deemed to mean any person who engages in or conducts a business of selling goods, wares and merchandise and who for the purpose of carrying on such business uses, leases or occupies either in whole or in part, a room, building, structure, or vacant property for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise. The provisions of this article shall not apply to commercial travelers making sales to dealers or selling agents in the usual course of business for resale, nor to persons making bona fide sales of goods, wares and merchandise for future delivery, nor to canvassers or peddlers licensed under other ordinances; nor to societies making sales for charitable, religious or public purposes nor to a producer of agricultural products making sales of the products grown by the producer himself nor to sales made by persons or organizations where such sale is sponsored and supervised by an organization conducted for charitable, religious or public purposes, provided that such sale does not extend over a period of more than six consecutive days. 
(Code 1988, § 7.41) 
Sec. 22-122. - License required. 
    Every merchant, before opening and/or operating a mercantile establishment in the City of South Lyon or before advertising or exposing his goods, wares or merchandise for sale, shall procure from the city clerk an initial merchant's license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.42) 
Sec. 22-123. - Application. 
    Application for an initial merchant's license shall be in writing and shall contain a statement under oath containing the facts relating to the character of the business which the applicant desires to transact and the place where such business shall be conducted, including a true statement of the names and addresses of the persons, firms or corporations from whom goods, wares or merchandise were last taken, the names and addresses of the owners or persons in whose interest such business is conducted, also the places and dates where said applicant for the preceding 18 months has been engaged in business, stating the nature and character of said business, and all details necessary to exactly locate and identify all goods, wares and merchandise so to be sold. These requirements shall be in addition to the requirements of article II of this chapter and where annual license is required under other provisions of the Code, the applicant shall also file his application for such annual license. 
(Code 1988, § 7.43) 
Sec. 22-124. - Christmas tree sales or other seasonal sales. 
    Any school, church or other nonprofit organization, or any merchant whose name does not appear on the personal property tax roll of the City of South Lyon, desiring to engage in the business of selling Christmas trees, or engaging in any sales activity of a seasonal or temporary nature, shall, before engaging in such business, be required to secure a license hereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 7.44) 
Sec. 22-125. - Regulations. 
(a)  No license shall be granted to open or operate a mercantile business on any premises unless said premises be provided with a building having water and sewer connections and adequate toilet facilities; such building and appurtenances shall be in compliance with all applicable regulations, provisions of the city Code and statutes of the State of Michigan. All licenses issued pursuant to this article shall be transferable from one location to another in the City of South Lyon. Applications for all such transfers of location shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall contain a statement of the new location of such business. In the event of the sale of a licensed mercantile business in the City of South Lyon, the license therefor may be transferred from the seller to the purchaser of said business. Application for transfer of a license from seller to purchaser shall be made in writing to the city clerk and shall contain a statement, under oath, of the names and addresses of the owners or persons in whose interest such business is conducted, also the places where said applicant for the preceding 18 months has been engaged in business and stating the nature and character of said business. 
(b)  Persons who own or operate established mercantile businesses in the City of South Lyon and mercantile businesses licensed under the provisions of this article and who shall desire to open and operate branch stores or branch places of business of such established and licensed mercantile businesses shall first make application for branch licensed mercantile businesses for branch licenses for branch stores or branch places of business to the city clerk before opening or operating same. 
(Code 1988, § 7.45) 
Sec. 22-126. - Other licenses and requirements. 
    Nothing in this article shall be deemed to relieve any licensee from complying with all other requirements of the city Code pertaining to the operation of the licensed business including the payment of any license fee or the filing of any bond required as a condition to the operation of such business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.46) 
Sec. 22-127. - Non-owned premises. 
    No merchant shall be issued a license under this section unless he is also the owner or lessee of the premises on which the business is to be conducted and demonstrated to the clerk a valid license in force on the date of application, or in the alternative, presents a sworn statement from the owner or lessee of the premises indicating that the owner or lessee: 
(1)  Has agreed to provide operating water and sewer facilities which are available for use by the applicant and persons doing business with the applicant. 
(2)  Has agreed to provide lighting, parking areas and such other requirements as necessary to assure that the business operated by the initial merchant is not in violation of the city zoning ordinance or building codes, by reason of the merchant commencing business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.47) 
Secs. 22-128-22-140. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PEDDLERS 

Sec. 22-141. - Peddler defined. 
    The word peddler as used in this article shall include any person traveling by foot, wagon, automotive vehicle or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall sell or offer the same for sale from a wagon, automotive vehicle, or other vehicle or conveyance. Any person who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster." 
(Code 1988, § 7.71) 
Sec. 22-142. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of peddler without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 7.72) 
Sec. 22-143. - Fixed stands prohibited. 
    No licensee shall stop or remain in any one place upon any street, alley or public place, longer than necessary to make a sale to a customer wishing to buy. Any peddler using a vehicle, when stopped, shall place his vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as he has completed sales with customers actually present. 
(Code 1988, § 7.73) 
Sec. 22-144. - Prohibited areas. 
    No peddler, in the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway except as may be necessary and reasonable to consummate a sale nor remain, barter, sell, offer or expose for sale any goods, wares or merchandise in front of or at the side of any property against the wish or desire of the property owner or the tenant or occupant of such property. No peddler shall engage in peddling on any street, alley or public place after having been requested to desist by any police officer of the city because of congested or dangerous traffic conditions. 
(Code 1988, § 7.74) 
Sec. 22-145. - Practices prohibited. 
    No peddler shall shout or cry out his goods or merchandise, nor blow any horns, ring any bell or use any other similar device to attract the attention of the public. 
(Code 1988, § 7.75) 
Sec. 22-146. - Curb service prohibited. 
    No person shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in such a manner that the customers of or traders with such person occupy or congregate within the limits of any street, lane, highway, or public place within the city. No person shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or for the transaction of business, or to use any stands, stores or other places of business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting said business, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 7.76) 
Sec. 22-147. - Exempt persons. 
    The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article but shall be subject to the other provisions hereof: 
(1)  Farmers or truck gardeners selling or offering for sale any products grown, raised or produced by them, the sale of which is not otherwise prohibited or regulated. 
(2)  Any person, when engaged in peddling on foot in the neighborhood of his residence under the direct supervision of any school or recognized charitable or religious organization. 
(Code 1988, § 7.77) 
Sec. 22-148. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(12), § 1(7.78)) 
Secs. 22-149-22-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SOLICITORS 

Sec. 22-161. - Solicitor defined. 
    The word solicitor as used in this article shall include any individual, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling either by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for sale of goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not, and such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, hires, leases, uses, or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad box car, boat, hotel room, lodging house, apartment, shop, or any other place within the city for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery. The word "solicitor" shall include the word "canvasser." 
(Code 1988, § 7.81) 
Sec. 22-162. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of a solicitor within the city without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 7.82) 
Sec. 22-163. - License application. 
    The license application filed under the provisions of section 22-34 shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant. 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant. 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold. 
(4)  If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials establishing the exact relationship. 
(5)  The length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(6)  The place where the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, are manufactured or produced, where such goods or products are located at the time said application is filed, and the proposed method of delivery. 
(7)  A photograph of the applicant, taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner. 
(8)  The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two reliable property owners of the County of Oakland, State of Michigan, who will certify as to the applicant's good character and business respectability, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility. 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
(Code 1988, § 7.83) 
Sec. 22-164. - License fees. 
    The fees for a solicitor's license shall be as specified in sections 22-57 through 22-59. No fee for a solicitor's license shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, he may apply to the city manager for an adjustment of the fees so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit, and supporting testimony, show his method of business and gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the city manager may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The city manager shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the fee fixed for the solicitor's license is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the city manager shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the fee as prescribed by sections 22-57 through 22-59. Should the city manager determine the gross sales measure of the fee to be the fair basis, he may require the applicant's business in the City of South Lyon or at the end of each three-month period, a sworn statement of the gross sales and pay the amount of fee therefor, provided that no additional fee during any one license year shall be required after the licensee shall have paid an amount equal to the annual license fee as prescribed in sections 22-57 through 22-59. 
(Code 1988, § 7.84) 
Sec. 22-165. - Exempt persons. 
    Persons engaged in soliciting on foot in the neighborhood of their residence under the direct supervision of any school or recognized nonprofit organization shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.85) 
Sec. 22-166. - Violation and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(13), § 1(7.86)) 
Secs. 22-167-22-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS 

Sec. 22-181. - License required. 
    No person shall engage in a temporary business of selling goods, wares or merchandise at retail within the city from any lot, premises, building, room or structure, including railroad cars, without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the chief of police and city treasurer. 
(Code 1988, § 7.51) 
Sec. 22-182. - Temporary business defined. 
    Every person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of goods, wares or merchandise shall be deemed to be engaged in carrying on a temporary business unless his goods, wares or merchandise shall have been assessed for taxation in the city during the current year. 
(Code 1988, § 7.52) 
Sec. 22-183. - Indebtedness to the city. 
    No license shall be granted to any person owing any personal property taxes or other indebtedness to the city, or who contemplates using any personal property on which personal property taxes are owing, in the operation of such business. 
(Code 1988, § 7.53) 
Sec. 22-184. - Benefit sales. 
    Any person selling or offering for sale any goods, wares or merchandise on behalf of and solely for the benefit of any recognized charitable or religious purpose shall, after meeting all other requirements, be granted a license without payment of the fee required by sections 22-57 through 22-59. 
(Code 1988, § 7.54) 
Sec. 22-185. - Exemption. 
    Persons conducting a business licensed under another provision of this Code shall be exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 7.55) 
Sec. 22-186. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(11), § 1(7.56)) 
Secs. 22-187-22-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FILM PERMITS 

Sec. 22-201. - Definitions. 
    Motion picture, television, radio and photographic production means all activity related to staging, shooting, videotaping filming or digital recording commercial motion pictures, television shows, programs or commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or use for a commercial purpose where the photographer sets up stationary equipment on public or private property or the public right-of-way in any one location for longer than five consecutive minutes. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-202. - Film permit required. 
(a)  No person shall use any public right-of-way, or any public or private property, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, broadcasting, taking or making any commercial motion picture, television, radio or photographic production as defined in section 22-201 unless he/she shall have first made application for and obtained, as prescribed in this article, a permit for each instance. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Current news productions, which includes reporters, photographers or camera persons in the employment of a newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting of news events. 
(2)  Productions which are conducted by the city's public, education and government access organizations or by or at the direction of the city. 
(3)  Productions which are conducted within legally established commercial motion picture/television/radio/photography studios. 
(4)  Video or multimedia broadcast or transmission of a live performance within a live entertainment venue on large-screen monitors (i.e., jumbotrons). 
(5)  Video or multimedia broadcast on the Internet. 
(6)  Private events filmed or photographed for non-commercial purpose such as private parties or weddings. 
(7)  Productions for commercials for local businesses which do not involve the use of the public right-of-way. 
(8)  Productions which do not obstruct traffic, pose public safety issues, or comprise filming more than 12 hours in any 24-hour period. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-203. - Application-Filing. 
    Any person desiring a permit to conduct motion picture, television radio and photographic production activities under the provisions of this chapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the city manager or his/her designee or by furnishing the required information in person or by first class mail, facsimile or the internet to the city manager or his/her designee. The form must be signed and accompanied by all required fees, deposits hold harmless agreements and insurance certificates required by this chapter before it will be processed. If the application satisfies the criteria of this chapter the permit shall be issued within four working days of submittal, or within five working days of submittal if the activity requires traffic control in excess of three minutes, or within 14 working days of submittal if activities require road closures, or include stunts or special effects. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-204. - Application. 
    The applicant for a permit required by this article shall supply the following information on the application: 
(1)  The name, mailing address and phone number of the person making the application, along with the name and contact information for the location manager. Where the person making the application is a partnership, corporation or other association, this information shall be provided for all partners, officers and directors or members; 
(2)  The address, legal description and proof of ownership of the site at which the proposed activity is to be conducted. Where ownership is not vested in the prospective permittee, he or she shall submit an affidavit from the owner indicating the owner's consent to the use of the site for the proposed activity; 
(3)  A statement of the kind, character, and type of proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production; 
(4)  The dates and hours during which the proposed motion picture, television, radio and photographic production is to be conducted; 
(5)  An estimate of the maximum number of attendants expected at the motion picture, television, radio and photographic production for each day it is conducted; 
(6)  Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as follows: 
a.  A processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for the staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval. The processing fee shall be waived for charitable and nonprofit organizations which qualify under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code. The processing fee is nonrefundable. 
b.  A daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council to compensate the city for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. 
c.  A monitoring fee to reimburse the city for staff time required to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable costs for other city services or equipment approved for use during such activities, in an amount as determined at the time of the city's review of permit application. 
d.  The processing fee and the property use fee shall be waived for the following: 
Productions conducted by a cable television company operating under a franchise granted by the city which are not conducted on public property do not interfere with public rights-of-way, and which involve fewer than two motor vehicles; 
Productions for wholly charitable or educational purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly; and 
Student filming productions directed or produced by a person currently enrolled in courses related to the production. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-205. - Accompanying plans. 
    Each application for a permit required by this article shall be accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where applicable, of the prospective permittee's plans to provide for the following: 
(1)  The size or area of the property to be used, including a sketch of the filming site showing placement of work trucks, location of production vehicles; 
(2)  Sketch of the "base camp" if any, showing any off-street locations for crew parking, honey wagon, catering, and nonessential production vehicles; 
(3)  Traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing roads or lanes to be closed, if any; 
(4)  Description of the duration of the proposed activity and daily hours of operation; 
(5)  Facilities for cleanup and waste disposal; 
(6)  Letter of notification and signatures from businesses/neighborhoods impacted by filming if required by the city manager or his/her designee; and 
(7)  Insurance and bonding arrangements. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-206. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt by the city manager or his/her designee, copies of the application for a permit required by this article shall be forwarded to the police chief fire chief, community development department and to such other appropriate public officials as the city manager or his/her designee deems necessary. Such officers, departments and officials shall review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within four days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and recommendations to the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-207. - Requirements. 
    In processing an application for a filming permit required by this article the city shall, at a minimum, require the following: 
(1)  Security personnel. The permittee shall employ at his own expense such security personnel as are necessary and sufficient to provide for the adequate security and protection of the maximum number of attendants at the location of the filming activity and for the preservation of order and protection of property in and around the site of the filming activity. No permit shall be issued unless the police chief or his/her designee is satisfied that such necessary and sufficient security personnel will be provided by the permittee for the duration of the assembly. 
(2)  Notification. The permittee or his/her designee shall notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming, and as instructed by the city manager or his/her designee, of the duration and location of filming activities including information about planned special effects road and lane closures, "no parking" requests sidewalk usage and the time that any barricades will be placed on the street. 
(3)  Access. Production vehicles may not block parking lot access drives, fire hydrants, or be parked in fire lanes, and must allow a minimum of 20 feet of clearance between vehicles parked on either side of the road for emergency response vehicles to pass. 
(4)  Base camps. Base camps may not be located on a public street. Only the necessary production vehicles (i.e. grip and light truck) may be parked on a public street, if necessary at the filming location. Crew parking honeywagon, catering, and other non-essential production vehicles shall be at a predetermined location. 
(5)  Insurance. As a condition of issuing such a filming permit, the permittee shall furnish insurance in an amount to be determined by the city manager but in no event in an amount less than $1,000,000.00 to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to the city property arising out of the permittee's activities. An additional minimum of $5,000,000.00 of such general liability insurance coverage shall be required in the event motor vehicles, aircraft, helicopters, explosives or pyrotechnic are used in the activity. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general special endorsement form or the certificate of insurance (public liability) form provided by the city manager or his/her designee. The applicant shall also submit verification that adequate worker's compensation insurance coverage is maintained. 
(6)  Bonding. Before the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall deposit a sum of money in cash in an amount of $500.00 or in any higher amount determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The bond shall be in a form approved by the city attorney, conditioned upon the permittee's faithful compliance with all of the terms and provisions of this chapter and all applicable provisions of state or local law, and which shall indemnify the city, its agents officers, employees and the city council against any and all loss injury or damage whatever arising out of or in any way connected with the filming activity and which shall indemnify the owners of property adjoining the filming site for any costs attributable to cleaning up and/or removing debris, trash, or other waste resultant from the filming activity. 
(7)  Fire protection. The permittee shall at his/her own expense take adequate steps as determined by the fire chief to ensure fire protection. 
(8)  Hold harmless agreement. The permittee shall execute a hold harmless agreement as provided by the city prior to the issuance of any permit. 
(9)  Other conditions. Prior to the issuance of a permit, the city manager may impose any other conditions reasonably calculated to ensure compliance with the requirements of this section and to protect the health, safety, welfare and property of attendants or of citizens of the city, including a limitation on the duration of the permit and the location of activities thereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-208. - Findings. 
    In processing an application for a permit required by this article the city manager, or his/her designee, shall issue a permit as provided for in this chapter when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, he/she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property or unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations, threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property, or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant. 
(3)  The activity does not propose to include obscene matter or an obscene performance and will not involve conduct in violation of state, local, or federal laws, rules, or regulations, including 1984 PA 343, being MCL 752.361 to 752.374. 
(4)  At the determination of the city manager or his/her designee as well as the South Lyon Police Fire and Community Development Departments, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all property safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designees. 
(5)  The permit shall not authorize the production of a film that in any manner requires the use of property owned by or under the control of the City of South Lyon in violation of 2008 PA 84 prohibiting the production of a film that includes obscene matter or an obscene performance or that requires that individually identifiable records be created and maintained for every performer provided in 18 USC 2557. The decision of the city manager or his/her designee to issue conditionally issue, or deny a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing before the city council at the next available meeting. Where conditions are imposed as prerequisite to the issuance of a permit and where a permit is denied, notice thereof shall be mailed to the applicant by certified mail within five days of such action. In the case of a permit denial, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the notice. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-209. - Denial. 
    A filming permit, required by this article, may be denied if: 
(1)  The applicant fails to comply with any or all requirements of this chapter or with any or all conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter or with any other applicable provision of state, local, or federal law, rules, or regulations; or 
(2)  The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement in the application or in any supporting document. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-210. - Contents, posting, transferability. 
    A permit required by this article shall specify the name and address of the permittee, the kind and location of the filming activity, the maximum number of attendants permissible, the duration of the permit and any other conditions imposed pursuant to this chapter. It shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises of the filming activity, and shall not be transferred to any other person or location. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-211. - Revocation of permit. 
(1)  The city manager or his/her designee may revoke a permit issued pursuant to this article whenever the permittee, his employee or agent fails, neglects or refuses to fully comply with any and all provisions and requirements set forth in this chapter, including the conditions imposed upon issuance of the permit, or with any and all provisions, regulations, ordinances, statutes or other law incorporated by reference in this chapter. 
(2)  A permit shall automatically be revoked if riotous, disorderly, obscene, or otherwise unlawful conduct occurs at a filming location or if an assemblage exceeds 125 percent of the estimated attendance, as indicated on the application for a permit. In such instances the premises may be closed by the police department and the assembly disbursed. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-212. - Cost of additional services. 
    If deemed necessary by the city manager or his/her designee, additional police, code enforcement fire and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant. Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-213. - Clean-up and restoration. 
    The applicant shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of the area, and the cleanup of trash and debris. The area used shall be cleaned of trash and debris within two hours of the completion of the activity or within such other time established in the permit to the city's satisfaction. The applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or restored to the city's satisfaction, the city manager or his/her designee shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the applicant shall reimburse the city for such work within ten days of completing filming. In the event the applicant fails to so reimburse the city the city may secure its reimbursement from either a cash or surety bond which shall be posted with the city to ensure faithful performance of such restoration. Such faithful performance bond shall be filed at the time of the application in an amount of $500.00 or in any higher amount determined by the city manager or his/her designee to be reasonably required under the circumstances. The amount of the bond shall in no way limit the applicant's liability or responsibility for the costs of repairs or restoration in the event these costs exceed the bond amount. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-214. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager or his/her designee is hereby authorized to promulgate and enforce administrative regulations in the implementation and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-215. - Pending or prior actions prior to amendment. 
    That the amendment of the South Lyon City Code set forth in this article does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed, or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment, pending or incurred prior to the amendment of the South Lyon City Code set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-216. - Severability. 
    That should any section, subdivision, clause, or phrase of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid the validity of the ordinance as a whole or in part, shall not be affected other than the part invalidated. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Sec. 22-217. - Repealer. 
    All other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this article full force and effect. 
(Ord. of 6-22-09(1)) 
Secs. 22-218-22-230. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - MOBILE FOOD VENDING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 22-231. - Intent. 
(a)  To provide for the regulation of mobile food vendors and mobile food vending operations and activities. 
(b)  To allow mobile food vendors an opportunity to operate in the City of South Lyon on designated public property and on private property in the B-2 and B-3 districts subject to these regulations. 
(c)  To offer a variety of food for sale through mobile food vendors for consumption by the public. 
(d)  To ensure the highest quality offerings of food for sale to the public. 
(e)  To ensure that mobile food vendors add to the vibrancy, vitality, desirability, and aesthetic appeal of the city. 
(f)  To balance the interests of existing food establishments and other businesses in the city, residents, and mobile food vendors, and the public desiring additional options for food service in the City of South Lyon. 
(g)  To ensure mobile food vendors meet all applicable federal, state, county and local laws, ordinances, and health codes. 
(h)  To protect the public health safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-232. - Definitions. 
(a)  Mobile food vending shall mean vending, serving, or offering for sale food and/or beverages from a mobile food vending unit which meets the definition of a Food Service Establishment under Public Act 92 of 2000, including a mobile food establishment. 
(b)  Mobile food vending unit shall mean any motorized or non-motorized vehicle, trailer, cart, stand, or other device designed to be portable and not permanently attached to the ground from which food is vended, served, or offered for sale. 
(c)  Vendor shall mean any individual engaged in mobile food vending; if more than one individual is operating a single stand, cart or other means of conveyance, then vendor shall mean all individuals operating such single stand, cart or other means of conveyance. 
(d)  Operate shall mean all activities associated with the conduct of business of a mobile food vending unit, including set up and take down and/or actual hours where the mobile food vending unit is open for business. 
(e)  City shall mean the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-233. - Permit required. 
    No person shall engage in mobile food vending without first obtaining a license from the city authorizing mobile food vending and obtaining required licenses or permits required by state or local laws and codes. A private property owner shall not allow mobile food vending on its site without first obtaining a mobile food vending sponsor license from the city clerk. The city clerk shall prescribe the forms of such licenses and applications for such licenses. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-234. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A person exempt from the licensing requirements of this article under state or federal law. 
(b)  A person engaging in mobile food vending at a farmers market, special event, festival, block party, or other event approved and permitted by the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Secs. 22-235-22-240. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MOBILE FOOD VENDOR LICENSE 

Sec. 22-241. - Application. 
(a)  A person desiring to engage in mobile food vending in the city must submit to the city clerk the required non-refundable application fee along with a written, sworn application, signed by the applicant, if an individual, or if a business entity, by a person with authority on behalf of a business entity, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full legal name, date of birth, current address, telephone number and email address, and a copy of the individual's driver's license, operator's license or state identification card with photograph, or other photograph identification acceptable to the city. 
(2)  If the applicant is not an individual person, the applicant shall provide a list of all individuals who will be vending on its behalf, including each individual's full legal name, date of birth, current address, telephone number, and a copy of the individual's driver's license, operator's license or state identification card with photograph, or other photograph identification acceptable to the city, and relationship to the applicant. 
(3)  The name under which the mobile food vendor will be doing business. 
(4)  A description of food and beverages to be offered for sale from the mobile food vending unit. 
(5)  A description and photograph of the mobile food vending unit, including height, width and length dimensions. 
(6)  The proposed location(s) at which the applicant proposes and intends to engage in mobile food vending. 
(7)  Proposed hours of operation, by date as applicable. 
(8)  Copies of county health department mobile food establishment permit/license, and/or other permits/licenses. 
(9)  A description of the heating sources and cooking equipment contained in the mobile food vending unit. 
(10)  A description of the sanitation and hand-washing equipment in the mobile food vending unit. 
(11)  A description of how and where waste water or grey water utilized or generated in the operation of the mobile food vending unit will be disposed. 
(12)  A description of how and where waste, garbage, trash, refuse, litter, and debris generated in the operation of the mobile food vending unit will be disposed. 
(13)  A description of any sources of electricity, water, or other utilities and whether such are self-contained in the mobile food vending unit. 
(14)  A statement whether external electrical power or other utilities are needed, and if so, a description of such utilities and how they will be provided and written consent from the property owner from whom the utilities will be obtained. 
(15)  If the mobile food vending unit is a licensed motor vehicle, proof of vehicle registration with the State of Michigan and proof of motor vehicle or other applicable insurance for the unit in an amount meeting State of Michigan minimum requirements. 
(16)  Proof of a comprehensive general liability policy written on an occurrence basis having policy limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured shall be filed by the licensee with the approved application. The certificate shall provide that the city will receive 30 days written notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(17)  Signed indemnity and hold harmless agreement. 
(18)  A statement whether the applicant has ever had a mobile food vendor or similar food vending license or permit denied, revoked or suspended, and if so, the date, the jurisdiction and a statement of the reasons for the action. 
(19)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any person listed on the application who may be vending on applicant's behalf, has been convicted of a crime, and, if so, the nature of the offense. 
(20)  Any other information or documentation requested by the city clerk. 
(b)  Any change in the information provided in the application shall be provided to the city clerk within ten calendar days of any such change. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-242. - Investigation. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a mobile food vendor license, an investigation of the applicant shall be conducted for the protection of the public good which may include, but is not limited to, a review of the applicant's background (including other listed individuals), an inspection of the mobile food vending unit and proposed operation locations, a review of the completeness of the application and its compliance with applicable laws, regulations and requirements. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-243. - Fees. 
(a)  Application fee. An application for a mobile food vending license shall be accompanied by the required application fee in an amount established by city council resolution which shall be non-refundable. 
(b)  License fee. Each applicant to whom a license is granted shall pay a non-refundable license fee in an amount established by city council resolution. 
(c)  [Proration.] There shall be no proration of fees. 
(d)  [Military veterans.] No license fee shall be charged to any honorably discharged veteran of the United States military who is a resident of the State of Michigan and submits official documentation evidencing such to the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-244. - License duration. 
    Mobile food vendor licenses issued by the city clerk shall be valid for six calendar months and shall be issued and valid for either the period April 1 to October 31 or November 1 to March 31 unless otherwise revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-245. - License non-transferable; non-assignable. 
    Mobile food vendor licenses are not transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-246. - License display. 
    A mobile food vendor license issued to a mobile food vendor shall be displayed on the mobile vending unit so licensed and shall be produced upon request of any law enforcement officer, city code inspector, county health inspector, or authorized individual or entity. Any required health code permits, licenses, or certificates, including health inspection certificates, shall also be displayed on the mobile vending unit. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-247. - License denial. 
(a)  Any application may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Incomplete application. 
(2)  Failure to pay the required fees. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application. 
(4)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and health codes. 
(5)  Failure to comply with or a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Operating a mobile food vending unit or engaging in mobile food vending contrary to or in violation of conditions of the mobile food vendor license. 
(7)  Operating a mobile food vending unit or engaging in mobile food vending in a manner which creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  Having a mobile food vendor license revoked or suspended within the previous year. 
(9)  Recommendation for denial from city department heads or staff, including police chief, fire chief, and building official or their designees. 
(10)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable fire department and fire code requirements. 
(11)  Conviction of an offense that may jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare. 
(12)  Prior conduct or a history of conduct which may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(13)  Other reasons necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  If an application is denied, the city clerk shall provide the applicant written notice by personal service or by first class mail at the address listed in the application stating the reasons for the denial. 
(c)  An applicant who is denied a mobile food vending license may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after the date of the written notice of the denial was issued. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and its decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-248. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  A license may be suspended or revoked for a period up to one year any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and health codes. 
(3)  Failure to comply with or a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Operating a mobile food vending unit or engaging in mobile food vending contrary to or in violation of conditions of the mobile food vending license. 
(5)  Operating a mobile food vending unit or engaging in mobile food vending in a manner which creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  Having a mobile food vendor license issued revoked or suspended within the previous year. 
(7)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable fire department and fire code requirements. 
(8)  Conviction of an offense that may jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare. 
(9)  Prior conduct or history of conduct which may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(10)  Other reasons necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  In determining an appropriate administrative sanction, the city manager or his or her designee may consider the following factors: nature and timing of prior warnings; date(s) of violation; previous violations; duration of license; complaints; investment in business; circumstances of the violation; punishment imposed for previous violations; cooperation with city officials; and other aggravating or mitigating circumstances directly relating to any violation. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that a license should be revoked or suspended, the city manager or his or her designee shall provide the licensee written notice by personal service or by first class mail at the address listed in the application stating the action taken and the reasons for the action. 
(c)  A licensee whose mobile food vending license is suspended or revoked may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after the date of the written notice of action was issued. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and its decision shall be final. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in mobile food vending or operate a mobile food vending unit while the mobile food vendor license is suspended or revoked. No license which has been suspended or revoked shall be reinstated until the required reinstatement fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-249. - Requirements and operational regulations. 
    Mobile food vendors, mobile food vending units, and mobile food vending shall comply with the following requirements and regulations: 
(1)  If on public or city-owned or controlled property, the mobile food vendor may only locate and operate on such property as designated in a resolution adopted by city council for mobile food vending operations. 
(2)  If located on a public street in designated areas and spaces, vendors shall conform to and comply with all applicable parking regulations. 
(3)  If located on a public street, food service shall be provided on the non-driving lane side of the mobile food vending unit. 
(4)  If on private property zoned B-2 central business district or B-3 general business district, the mobile food vendor may only locate the mobile food vending unit and operate at the location on the site designated and approved in the sponsor's license. 
(5)  If operating on private property zoned B-2 central business district or B-3 general business district, ensure that the private property owner has provided the vendor with written permission to operate on the private property on the applicable date(s) including hours of operation, and ensure that the private property owner has also obtained a mobile food vending sponsor license from the city, and the vendor may operate only at and on the locations designated and approved in the sponsor's license. 
(6)  A mobile food vending unit and its operations shall not block or impair vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
(7)  Mobile food vending is prohibited in residential zones, except pursuant to a special event permit or other city approval. 
(8)  A mobile food vending unit shall not operate within 500 feet of a farmers market, block party, street fair, public festival, or special event approved by the city without the written consent of the event permit holder or sponsor. 
(9)  Mobile food vending operations shall be permitted during the hours of 7 a.m. and 11 p.m. unless other hours are designated in a mobile food vendor license, as permitted for mobile food vending operations on a sponsor site consistent with the sponsor's hours of business and applicable licenses, or as otherwise provided for in writing by the city manager. 
(10)  No mobile food vending unit may be left unattended for more than two hours; and any mobile food vending unit not in operation shall be removed between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. 
(11)  No food shall be prepared, sold, or displayed outside of the mobile food vending unit except as permitted pursuant to a county health department permit, license or approval. 
(12)  No outdoor cooking facilities, including grills, not contained in the mobile food vending unit are permitted. 
(13)  Waste receptacles must be provided and all trash, garbage, refuse, litter, debris and all other waste attributable to the mobile food vending operations must be removed and properly disposed of at the end of the hours of operation each day. Trash and waste from mobile food vending operations may not be disposed of in public and city-owned waste receptacles. 
(14)  Tables, chairs, benches, umbrellas or other seating or dining equipment or items are prohibited. 
(15)  All power sources must be self-contained and no electric or power cables or utilities equipment shall be extended to cross any public street, alley or sidewalk unless approved in the permit. 
(16)  All materials and supplies related to the mobile food vending operation must be stored in the mobile food vending unit. 
(17)  A mobile food vendor may have one portable sign that is no more than six square feet in area or a sandwich board sign with two faces that are no more than six square feet in area. The portable sign must be located within five feet of the unit. Under no circumstances shall such sign be placed upon the sidewalk or impede pedestrian and/or vehicle traffic and/or safety. 
(18)  Flashing, blinking or strobe lights are prohibited. All exterior lights over 60 watts shall contain opaque, hood shields to direct the illumination downward. 
(19)  Loud music, amplification devices and other audible methods to gain attention which causes a disruption or safety hazard as determined by the city are prohibited. All noises and sounds from and created by the mobile food vending unit must comply with the city noise ordinance. Unreasonable or excessive noise is prohibited. 
(20)  Mobile food vending units and operations must comply with the city's noise ordinance, sign ordinance, and all other city ordinances. 
(21)  Mobile food vending units and operations must comply with all applicable federal, state and county laws, regulations and codes. 
(22)  A licensed mobile food vendor, shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and insurers from and against any liability, claims, losses, costs, and expenses and attorney's fees arising from the vendor's use of public or city-owned or city-controlled property and its mobile food vending unit and operations. 
(22)  A licensed mobile food vendor shall obtain and maintain during the term of the license a comprehensive general liability policy written on an occurrence basis having policy limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured shall be filed by the licensee with the approved application. The certificate shall provide that the city will receive 30 days written notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-250. - Impoundment. 
    Any mobile food vending unit and/or equipment not in compliance with this article or left unattended on public, city-owned or city-controlled property may be ticketed and impounded at the owner's and/or vendor's expense. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-251. - Other permits and licenses. 
    A license obtained under this article shall not relieve a person of the responsibility for obtaining any other licenses, approvals, or authorizations required by any other ordinance, statute, code or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Secs. 22-252-22-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MOBILE FOOD VENDING SPONSOR LICENSE 

Sec. 22-261. - Application. 
    An owner of private property in the B-2 central business district or B-3 general business district desiring to obtain a license to allow a licensed mobile food vendor to operate on its site must submit to the city clerk the required non-refundable application fee along with a written, sworn application, signed by the owner, if an individual, or if a business entity, by a person with authority on behalf of a business entity, on a form to be furnished by the city clerk, which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, current address and date of birth. 
(2)  Property address. 
(3)  Zoning district. 
(4)  Sketch plan of proposed location for a licensed mobile food vending unit. 
(5)  Proposed hours of operation, including days and frequency of operations. 
(6)  A description of how and where waste, garbage, refuse, litter, and other debris from the mobile food vending operation will be disposed of and whether it will be disposed of on the sponsor's site. 
(7)  A description of how and where grey or waste water from the mobile food vending operation and unit will be disposed of and whether it will be disposed of on the sponsor's site. 
(8)  A description of any electric, water or sanitary sewer utilities or services that will be provided to the unit by the property owner. 
(9)  Proof of a comprehensive general liability policy written on an occurrence basis having policy limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured shall be filed by the licensee with the approved application. The certificate shall provide that the city will receive 30 days written notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(10)  Signed indemnity and hold harmless agreement. 
(11)  Any other information or documentation requested by the city clerk. 
(12)  Any change in the information provided in the application shall be provided to the city clerk within ten calendar days of any such change. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-262. - Fees. 
(a)  Application fee. An application for a mobile food vending sponsor license shall be accompanied by the required application fee in an amount established by city council resolution which shall be non-refundable. 
(b)  License Fee. Each applicant to whom a license is granted shall pay a non-refundable license fee in an amount established by city council resolution. 
(c)  [Proration.] There shall be no proration of fees. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-263. - License duration. 
    Mobile food vending sponsor licenses issued by the city clerk shall be valid for 12 calendar months from April 1 to March 31, unless otherwise revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-264. - License non-transferable; non-assignable. 
    Mobile food vending sponsor licenses are not transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-265. - License denial. 
(a)  Any application may be denied for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Incomplete application. 
(2)  Failure to pay the required fees. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application. 
(4)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and health codes. 
(5)  Failure to comply with or a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(6)  Allowing mobile food vending on the site contrary to or in violation of this article or the conditions of the mobile food vendor license or the mobile food vending sponsor license. 
(7)  Allowing mobile food vending on the site in a manner which creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(8)  Having a mobile food vending sponsor license revoked or suspended within the previous year. 
(9)  Recommendation for denial from city department heads or staff, including police chief, fire chief, and building official or their designees. 
(10)  Failure to comply with applicable fire department and fire code requirements. 
(11)  Failure to meet minimum parking requirements. 
(12)  Failure to meet applicable zoning requirements. 
(13)  Conviction of an offense that may jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare. 
(14)  Prior conduct or history of conduct which may be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(15)  Other reasons necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  If an application is denied, the city shall provide the applicant written notice by personal service or by first class mail at the address listed in the application stating the reasons for the denial. 
(c)  Applicants who are denied mobile food vending sponsor licenses may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after the date of the written notice of denial. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and its decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-266. - License suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Any license may be suspended or revoked for a period up to one year any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement contained in the application. 
(2)  Failure to comply with or a violation of applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances and health codes. 
(3)  Failure to comply with or a violation of the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Allowing the operation of a mobile food vending unit on the sponsor's property contrary to or in violation of this article or the conditions of the mobile food vendor license or the sponsor license. 
(5)  Allowing the operation of a mobile food vending unit on the sponsor's property in a manner which creates a public nuisance or constitutes a danger to the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  Allowing a mobile food vendor or person to engage in mobile food vending or to operate a mobile food vending unit without a license from the city. 
(7)  Failure to comply with applicable fire department and fire code requirements. 
(8)  Other reasons necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare consistent with the purposes of this article. 
(b)  In determining an appropriate administrative sanction, the city manager or his or her designee may consider the following factors: nature and timing of prior warnings; date(s) of violation; previous violations; duration of license; investment in business; circumstances of the violation; punishment imposed for previous violations; cooperation with city officials; and other aggravating or mitigating circumstances directly relating to any violation. If the city manager or his or her designee determines that a license should be revoked or suspended, the city manager or his or her designee shall provide the licensee written notice by personal service or by first class mail at the address listed in the application stating the action taken and stating the reasons for the action. 
(c)  A sponsor whose mobile food vending sponsor license is suspended or revoked may appeal to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within 14 days after the date of the written notice of action was issued. The city council shall hear and determine the appeal and its decision shall be final. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a sponsor to allow mobile food vending on its property while the mobile food vending sponsor license is suspended or revoked. No sponsor license which has been suspended or revoked shall be reinstated until the required reinstatement fee has been paid. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 22-267. - Requirements and operational regulations. 
    Mobile food vending sponsors shall comply with the following requirements and regulations: 
(1)  A sponsor must provide a licensed mobile food vendor with written permission to operate on the sponsor's property specifying the dates and hours of operation permitted by the sponsor. 
(2)  If operating on a sponsor's property within a B-2 or B-3 zoning district, a mobile food vending unit may only locate and operate at the approved location(s) designated in the mobile food vending sponsor license. 
(3)  Only one mobile food vending unit may operate on a sponsor property at a time unless approved through a special event permit. 
(4)  A mobile food vending unit shall not be located in or operate in a parking space required to meet the property's minimum parking requirement. 
(5)  Comply with applicable fire department and fire code requirements. 
(6)  A mobile food vending unit shall not block or impede vehicular or pedestrian traffic or movement on the sponsor property. 
(7)  A mobile food vending unit may not operate beyond the business hours of operation on the sponsor property unless approved by the city. 
(8)  Comply with the city's noise ordinance, sign ordinance, and all other city ordinances. 
(9)  Comply with all applicable federal, state and county laws, regulations and codes. 
(10)  A licensed mobile food vendor, shall, to the fullest extent permitted by law, indemnify, hold harmless and defend the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and insurers from and against any liability, claims, losses, costs, and expenses and attorney's fees arising from the vendor's use of public or city-owned or city-controlled property and its mobile food vending operations. 
(11)  A licensed mobile food vendor shall obtain and maintain during the term of the license a comprehensive general liability policy written on an occurrence basis having policy limits of no less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence. A certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured shall be filed by the licensee with the approved application. The certificate shall provide that the city will receive 30 days written notice of cancellation or non-renewal. 
(12)  A mobile food vending sponsor shall be responsible for and ensure that a mobile food vendor and/or mobile food vending unit operating on its property complies with all requirements of this article and the vendor's license while located or operating on sponsor's property. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Secs. 22-268-22-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-271. - Municipal civil infractions. 
    A person who violates any provision of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and upon a determination of responsibility thereto shall be punished as provided for in section 1-14 of this Code. Each day a violation exists and continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 13-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Secs. 22-272-22-279. - Reserved. 
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS 

Sec. 26-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of South Lyon Cable Communications Ordinance" and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 1) 
Sec. 26-2. - Declaration of purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide fair regulation of cable communications service in the City of South Lyon in the interest of the public to promote and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable communications service for the residents of the City of South Lyon, to promote and to encourage harmony between cable communications companies and their subscribers and to provide for the furnishing of cable communications system service to the residents of the City of South Lyon without unjust discrimination, undue preferences or advantages. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 2) 
Sec. 26-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cable communications company means any person who owns, controls, operates or manages a cable communications system for the purpose of providing cable communications service to members of the public located in the City of South Lyon; except the that such definition shall not include: 
(1)  A telephone, telegraph, or electric utility in a case where it merely leases or rents to a cable communications company utility pole contact space for the placing thereon of wire or cable facilities used in the distribution of television or other signals to the subscribers of such cable communications company; or 
(2)  A telephone or telegraph utility regulated by the Michigan Public Service Commission or Federal Communications Commission in a case where it merely provides communication channel service under published tariffs to a cable communication company for the distribution of television signals to the subscribers of such company. 
    Cable communications service means the business, in whole or in part, of receiving directly or indirectly over the air, and amplifying or otherwise modifying signals transmitting programs broadcast by one or more signals, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air, and redistributing such signals by wire, cable or other means to members of the public located in the City of South Lyon who pay for such service. 
    Cable communications system, cable system, cable television system, CATV, or system mean coaxial cables or other conductors, antennas, transmitters, fixtures, converters, distribution networks, studios and other equipment used or to be used to originate or receive radio frequency spectrum signals directly or indirectly off the air and to transmit them via cable to subscribers for a fixed or variable fee, including the origination, receipt, transmission, and distribution of voices, sound signals, pictures, visual images, digital signals, telemetry, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical or light impulses, whether or not directed to originating signals or receiving signals off the air. 
    City means the City of South Lyon. 
    City council means the city council of the City of South Lyon. 
    Local gross revenues means all gross revenues of the franchisee derived from cable services within the city including installation fees, disconnect and reconnect fees, fees for transmission of broadcast signals and access and origination channels, and revenue derived from per-program or per-channel charges, leased channel charges, and advertising revenues. 
    Person means and includes one or more individuals, firms, corporations, associations, partnerships or organizations of any kind, and any combination thereof. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 3) 
Sec. 26-4. - Franchise required. 
(a)  No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the City of South Lyon nor shall any person provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control of a cable communications company in the City of South Lyon without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the specifications of this chapter. Provided, however, such franchise is not required for any separate system which serves only the residents of one household, apartment dwellings or buildings under common ownership, control or management, and commercial establishments located on the premises, upon approval of the City of South Lyon. 
(b)  No person shall use, occupy or traverse the city streets, alleys, lanes, avenues, boulevards, sidewalks, bridges, viaducts, rights-of-way or any other public place or public way in the City of South Lyon or any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above, or under the surface of the ground, for the purposes of installing, constructing, maintaining or operating a cable communications system or facilities therefor or for the purpose of furnishing a cable communications service without such person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with all the specifications of this chapter, and all other building regulations. 
(c)  The specifications required by this chapter are minimum requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional requirements including, but not limited to, rates, charges, deposits, specifications regarding required interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, number of channels to be equipped and available for immediate use upon initial construction of the system, use of channels by the city, schools and other educational institutions quality of community access, availability of equipment to users, required establishment and expansion of service area, other use of channels and other specifications or requirements of a cable communications franchisee or system may be established in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 4) 
Sec. 26-5. - Franchise; application; contents; fees; issuance; transfer. 
(a)  The application for such franchise to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in the City of South Lyon or to furnish a cable communications service therein shall be made in writing to the city council in such form as may be prescribed; shall include a description and map of the territory within the City of South Lyon which the cable communications system is to be installed, constructed, maintained or operated or cable communications service is to he provided; shall be accompanied by a showing of the applicant's legal, financial, technical and other qualifications to be a franchisee, hereunder; shall contain: 
(1)  In establishing legal qualifications, if other than a single individual, a certified copy of the partnership agreement, articles of association, or articles of incorporation, as the case may be; 
(2)  In establishing financial qualifications, a copy of applicant's current balance sheet as of a date not more than 60 days prior to the date of the application shall be furnished; if a loan or other credit arrangement is to be consummated to finance the establishment and operation of the proposed facilities, full particulars relative thereto shall be disclosed, including the identity of the creditor; 
(3)  In establishing technical qualifications, a statement of the arrangements to ensure the rendition of good service, including the type and kind of facilities to be employed, the technical standards to be followed, the maintenance and repair facilities to be used, the number and description of technical personnel, including copies of any contracts, agreements or arrangements relating to any of the above; 
(4)  A statement as to the location of any antenna site or sites and the location of any of applicant's places of business in the City of South Lyon; 
(5)  A statement as to any affiliated corporations or business organizations engaged in providing cable communications service, or interlocking directorships or ownerships held by any owners, officers or directors of applicant with any other business engaged in providing communications service; 
(6)  A detailed statement as to the arrangements and timetable by which applicant proposes to construct its cable communications facilities and system; 
(7)  The applicant shall furnish information as to the following programming services and public services which it shall propose to provide: 
a.  The off-air signals to be carried initially; 
b.  The number of channels offered and the potential for diversified services a local government, educational institutions, community groups, householders and local commercial interests; 
c.  Projected development of customer and community services, indicating priorities in development, and estimated time schedules therefor; 
(8)  Cost estimates of development, installation, and maintenance of system, which items shall be deemed to include, but not be limited to, the proposed cost of acquisition of the system where approval of a transfer of the franchise has been requested; 
(9)  Revenue forecasts for the next five years of service; 
(10)  A proposed schedule of rates for installation charges, monthly service fees and relocation charges; 
(11)  Such other information as the city may request. The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $5,000.00, which fee shall be refunded if applicant is not granted a franchise. 
(b)  Upon the filing of such an application and the payment of the fee as prescribed, the city council shall refer the application to the cable communications commission for their review and recommendations and may request such additional information as it may deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a cable communications service in the City of South Lyon. The cable communications commission shall review any application submitted and shall forward a copy of their recommendations to the city council within 30 days after receipt of the application. 
(c)  It the city council determines that the applicant possesses the necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and otherwise, to reasonably assure applicant's ability to satisfactorily install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service to the public in the City of South Lyon, the city council may issue applicant a nonexclusive franchise therefor in the City of South Lyon, provided, that no franchise shall be issued (i) until the franchise application has been on file in the office of the city clerk and (ii) until the city council has held a public hearing on such application after due notice of the time and place of such hearing has been given the public. The public hearing shall be conducted pursuant to Act 267 of Public Acts of 1976. 
(d)  No franchise granted hereunder may be sold, transferred or assigned unless such transaction is first approved by the city after receipt of a written application therefor containing the same information as to transferee as would be required of an original applicant. Prior approval of the city shall be required where ownership or control of more than 25 percent of the right of control of franchisee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 25 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively. 
(e)  No franchise granted hereunder may be sold, transferred or assigned nor any more than 25 percent of the right of control of franchises be transferred to a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own or control 25 percent or more of such right of control, singularly or collectively, until such sale, transfer or assignment of franchise or transfer of right of control shall first have been offered to the city or to a person approved by the city. Such offer shall be made at a price not greater than, and on terms equivalent to, that made to the offeror by a bona fide bidder for such franchise or right of control. The city or the person approved by the city shall accept or reject the, offer within 90 days. This provision shall not be deemed to restrict the transfer by bequest or descent of stock of the franchisee. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 5) 
Sec. 26-6. - Franchise; nonexclusive; term; form. 
    Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a nonexclusive franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the city may approve and shall be issued in such form as shall be determined by the city. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 6) 
Sec. 26-7. - Franchise fees; reporting records. 
(a)  During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the person granted such franchise shall pay to the city, for the use of its streets, public places, and other facilities, as well as the maintenance, improvements and supervision thereof, and for the regulation of activities required by virtue of the franchise, an annual franchise fee of three percent of the gross revenues per year and upon approval by the Federal Communications Commission upon certain showings as found in title 47, section 76.31 of the Code of Federal Regulations an additional two percent up to a maximum of five percent of gross revenues total, said additional two percent to be earmarked for use on the cable TV system. The city shall be furnished a statement with each payment, certified as correct by the franchisee, and an audited annual statement for the entire year, prepared by a certified public accountant indicating the annual local gross revenues. All statements shall reflect the total amount of local gross revenues and the above charges, deductions, and computations for the period covered by the statement. 
(b)  Such franchise fee shall be paid on or before the last day of the month following and allowing for normal CPA time for closing the books for the year end, at the office of the city treasurer of the City of South Lyon, during regular business hours. If the city treasurer's office is closed on said day, then payment shall be made during regular business hours on the next business day. 
(c)  The city shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times the customer records of any person granted a franchise hereunder from which its franchise fee payments are computed and shall have the right of audit and recomputation of any and all franchise fees paid. No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 7) 
Sec. 26-8. - Construction of facilities; right to use streets; restrictions; disposal; duties. 
(a)  A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall confer upon the grantee named therein the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct reconstruct, replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and across the streets, avenues, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other public ways, easements, and rights-of-way, as existing as of the date of the grant of said franchise and all subsequent extensions thereof and additions thereto, in and belonging to the City of South Lyon, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits manhole and other television and/or radio conductors, equipment and fixtures for the installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable communications system (including audio, video and radio signals) or the furnishing of a cable communications service. 
(b)  Prior to the erection or installation of any towers, poles, guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes, or fixtures for use in connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system under a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, the grantee of a franchise hereunder desiring to erect or install such facilities for use in connection with its cable communications system shall first submit to the city, for its review and approval, a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor, underground conduit, manhole, or fixture for use in a cable communications system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been received from the city in the form of proper construction permits, provided, further, that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(c)  Any person accepting a franchise pursuant to this chapter and erecting or installing towers or poles shall, upon written request by the city, grant the city reasonable attachment space or spaces upon such towers or poles without a rental charge for the attachment of wire or cable owned and used by the city; provided however, that the city shall pay any costs incurred by such person in providing attachment space or spaces to said city including all necessary costs of rearrangement of such person's wires, cables or equipment and tower or pole replacement cost for a larger tower or pole, if required. 
(d)  Upon the expiration, termination or revocation of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, or should any person wish otherwise to dispose of any tower or pole erected or installed for use in connection with a cable communications system, the city retains the first right and option to purchase in place such towers or poles as it may require for their fair value based upon reproduction cost loss observed depreciation. Further, upon the expiration, termination or revocation of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, title to all underground conduit and manholes erected or installed and an automatic assignment of all easements related thereto obtained for use in a cable communications system under the rights conferred in this chapter shall pass to the city under its control over its streets, alleys and public rights-of-way to protect them from things injurious and dangerous to the public. 
(e)  In areas or portions of the city where transmission or distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone service and electric service are underground, or may be placed underground when installed, any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions, subject to the approval of the city as hereinbefore provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of any cable communications system or of any facilities employed in connection therewith shall be in compliance with the provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters, the Bell Telephone System's Code of Pole Line Construction, any standards issued by the Federal Communications Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto, and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the City of South Lyon. Every cable communications system installed, constructed, maintained or operated in the City of South Lyon shall be so designed, constructed, installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the city. 
(g)  Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to this chapter shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals and warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public place and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner specified and approved by the city, at such person's expense. 
(h)  Any person owning or maintaining a cable communications system or facilities therefor in or on the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places in the City of South Lyon shall, at its expense and without reimbursement from the city, upon request of the city, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from the street, alley, public right-of-way or public place, any property of such person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, the construction or change of the transmission or distribution facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other public improvements. Any such person shall also, at the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its cable communications transmission or distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the same. 
(i)  If any person shall fail to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter as hereinbefore set forth to be done in any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place as designated by the city, the city may cause such work to be done and such person shall pay to the city the cost thereof within 30 days of the receipt of an itemized statement of such cost. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 8) 
Sec. 26-9. - Standard of service. 
(a)  Any cable communications company granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall install, construct, maintain and operate its cable communications system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry, in conformity with the state of the art and any standards of operation or maintenance for a cable communications system which may be established or issued by the Federal Communications Commission. Further, it is the intention of the city that any person granted a franchise to furnish a cable communications service to the public within the City of South Lyon will furnish its subscribers high quality technical and public service. 
(b)  Every cable communications system franchised under this chapter shall maintain bi-direction signal capability for digital, audio and video signal transmission on all elements of the system. The extent to which the reverse capability is available to subscriber use shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Every cable communications system franchised under this chapter shall maintain a bi-directional system for digital, audio and video signal transmissions between units of the South Lyon Community School District and also between governmental units, the extent of which shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  Every cable communications system franchised under this chapter shall maintain and make available without charge such public access channels, education access channels and local government access channels, the extent of which shall be specified in the franchise agreement. 
(e)  Any cable communications company granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall maintain such capacity, capability and technical standards as will enable it to interconnect with any other cable communication system locating in any adjacent or nearby communities. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 9) 
Sec. 26-10. - Rates; discrimination; filing schedules; maximum rates; increase in rates, procedures. 
(a)  No cable communications company shall make any unjust or unreasonable discrimination in rates, charges, classifications, promotions, practices, regulations, facilities or services for or in connection with like services, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage in any respect whatsoever; provided, however, that this shall not be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graded scale of charges and classification of rates to which any subscriber coming within such classification shall be entitled. 
(b)  No rate or charge for installation of basic cable communications service provided in the City of South Lyon shall be effective, nor shall any cable communications company advertise, collect, or receive any rate or charge for its services, until it shall have filed a complete schedule of rates and charges with the city clerk and until such rates and charges shall have been approved by the city council. The charges made for services of the franchisee hereunder shall be fair and reasonable and no higher than necessary to meet all costs of the service (assuming efficient and economical management) and provide a fair return to the franchisee. The franchisee shall receive no consideration whatsoever for its service other than in accordance with this section or the franchise agreement, without approval of the city council. The applicant for a franchise shall include in its application its proposed rates, charges and deposits. 
(c)  No cable communications company may increase any rate or charge for cable communications service, or alter any classification, contract, rule, regulation, or practice as to result in any increase in its schedule of rates or charges for such service without the prior approval of such increased rate or charge or alteration in its classification, contract, rule, regulation or practice by the city council, after public hearing thereon. Said public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Act 267, Public Acts of 1976. Such public hearing shall be noticed at least ten days in advance in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of South Lyon. At said public hearing, the cable communications company shall set forth in detail the basis for its requested increase in rates or charges for service or alteration in its classification, contract, rule, regulation or practice, including the reasonableness and lawfulness thereof. In the determination of just, reasonable and lawful rates and charges, the city council shall consider and give due weight to all lawful elements properly to be considered, including expenses, a reasonable return on the cost of the property used in the service, depreciation, obsolescence, taxes, risks of the business and value of service to the customer. A decision on the increase or alteration shall be made by the city within 40 days after the close of the public hearing required under this section. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 10) 
Sec. 26-11. - Service; provision to city, schools; public emergencies. 
(a)  Every cable communications company furnishing service within the City of South Lyon shall, without charge for installation or service, provide one installation of its cable communications service to each department of the City of South Lyon and each fire, ambulance and police station in the city and each public educational building and public library (present and future) within the franchisee's current service area. 
(b)  Every cable communications company providing service within the City of South Lyon shall make its cable system available, without charge, to the City of South Lyon, the County of Oakland, the State of Michigan, the United States of America and/or emergency operations agencies for the prompt and simultaneous communication to subscribers and the public within the city of any information resulting from or required by war, threat of war, natural catastrophe, riot or insurrection, necessary to save or protect life or property. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 11) 
Sec. 26-12. - Indemnity; proof of insurance; effective date of franchise. 
(a)  Every cable communications company shall, within 30 days of the grant of a franchise to it pursuant to this chapter, file with the city clerk, and at all times thereafter maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its expense, a corporate surety bond, or such other surety arrangement as the city may approve, the amount of $25,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance by such cable communications company of its obligations under its franchise as herein set forth, and upon the further condition that if such cable communications company shall fail to comply with any one or more provisions of this chapter, there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety of such bond any damages or loss suffered by the city as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal of any property of such cable communications company as provided in this chapter plus attorney's fees and costs up to the full amount of the bond, said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any franchise granted under this chapter and any renewal thereof and thereafter until such cable communications company has liquidated all of its obligations to the City of South Lyon which may have arisen under the franchise or from the exercise of any privilege or right granted thereby. Any bond provided under this section shall provide that at least 30 days prior notice of any intention not to renew, to cancel or to make a material change therein shall be filed with the South Lyon city clerk. Nothing herein shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by any cable communications company or in any way to limit its liability for damages or otherwise. 
(b)  Any cable communications company within 30 days of the grant of a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall file with the city clerk, in addition to the bond as hereinbefore set forth: 
(1)  Proof of a general comprehensive liability insurance policy and an automobile liability insurance policy issued by companies licensed to do business in Michigan, protecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a cable communications system in the City of South Lyon with minimum liability limits of $500,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person and $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence, and $500,000.00 for the damages to property resulting from any one occurrence and said policy shall contain a provision that a written notice of cancellation or material change or reduction in coverage shall be given the city clerk at least 30 days in advance of the effective date thereof; and 
(2)  Proofs of adequate insurance as required by the Michigan Workmen's Compensation law applicable to it. 
(c)  No franchise hereunder shall be effective until the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section have been fully complied with and failure to file with the city clerk within 30 days after grant of a franchise, the bond, proof of general comprehensive liability insurance policy, proof of automobile liability insurance policy, proof of automobile liability insurance policy and proof of adequate workmen's compensation insurance, or any of them as required by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall render the franchise null and void without notice or further proceedings. 
(d)  The franchisee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city at all times during the term of the franchise from any and all claims, demands, judgments and/or liabilities whatsoever with respect to the franchise granted herein and shall specifically pay all damages and penalties which the city may legally be required to pay as a result of granting the franchise. Such damages and penalties shall include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of the installation, operation or maintenance of the installation, operation or maintenance of the CATV system authorized herein, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by the franchise and shall also include such part of the cost of repair or replacement of streets, alleys, bridges and other public places and ways as shall arise from construction or maintenance of the CATV system. In the case suit shall be filed against the city either independently or jointly with the franchisee to recover for any claim or damages, the franchisee, upon notice to it by the city, shall defend the city against the action and, in the event of a final judgment being obtained against the city, either independently or jointly with the franchisee, solely by reason of the acts of the franchisee, the franchisee will pay the judgment and all costs, and hold the city harmless therefrom. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 12) 
Sec. 26-13. - Termination; revocation or surrender of franchise. 
(a)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall expire without further proceedings one year after its effective date in the event the person granted such franchise has not commenced construction of a cable communications system within such period. 
(b)  If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall fail to provide cable communications service within and throughout the franchise areas as required under the terms of its franchise agreement, said franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of such franchise next following the 12-month period during which cable communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of city council action, unless prior to said date, said person shall have applied to the city council and the city council shall have for good cause shown granted an extension of the construction or service periods set forth in the franchise agreement. 
(c)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of a cable communications company, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceedings unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period; provided, however, that such receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or assignment of such franchise, as hereinbefore provided in subsection 26-5(e), within 60 days of the appointment of such receiver or trustee, if duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, and provided further, in case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities of a cable communications company, with or without the appointment of a receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this chapter, such franchise as granted will be terminated and cancelled without further proceedings upon 30 days written notice of termination served upon the cable communications company and the purchaser thereof, unless within such 30-day period, the purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the same as hereinbefore provided in subsection 26-5(e). 
(d)  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter is revocable by the city prior to its expiration where the cable communications company has become insolvent; or has failed substantially to comply with any provision or requirement of state or federal law or of this chapter, the representations made in its franchise application, or the provision of its franchise agreement; or has failed to apply to the Federal Communications Commission for a certificate of compliance with sufficient promptness to avoid interruption or delay in service required by the franchise. The city may give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such cable communications company 60 days to comply. At the expiration of such 60 days, such franchise shall be deemed terminated and revoked, without further city action, unless such cable communications company shall request a hearing before the city council upon its alleged failure to substantially comply with any provision or requirements of this chapter or of its franchise agreement. Said hearing shall be public with the cable communications company being permitted to fully participate therein including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and cross examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion thereof the city council, if it finds that the cable communications company has not substantially complied with any provision or requirement of this chapter or of its franchise agreement, may terminate and revoke the franchise. 
(e)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter may surrender it by written notice of intent to surrender its franchise filed with the city clerk not less than 60 days prior to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all rights privileges and authority under said franchise shall terminate; provided however, that said person shall have a period of six months thereafter to remove its towers, poles, wires, cables, fixtures or other facilities from the streets, alleys public rights-of-way or public places subject to the rights of the city as set forth in subsection 26-8(d). At the expiration of such six-month period, any property not removed by such person shall become the property of the City of South Lyon to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city in removing said property from its streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against such person under the performance bond required under subsection 26-12(a). 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 13) 
Sec. 26-14. - Commencement and completion of construction. 
(a)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall commence construction or installation of its cable communications system within 120 days after issuance of a certificate of compliance by the Federal Communications Commission, if such a certificate is required; otherwise within 120 days after execution of the franchise agreement. 
(b)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall complete construction within such areas and within such periods as are designated in the franchise agreement. Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter who is unable to construct according to the provisions of this section for "good cause" shall notify the city council of South Lyon in writing within 30 days of the occurrence of any delay or interruption of construction of more than 15 working days duration which interruption or delay would effect its inability to construct according to schedule. 
(c)  Franchisee shall provide construction guarantee bonds in the amounts and for the duration prescribed in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 14) 
Sec. 26-15. - Hearing and determination of complaints procedure; local office. 
(a)  The cable communications commission shall upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber of a cable communications company, have authority to hear and determine all complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices, quality of service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or refused to be furnished, or any other matter relating to the service or operation of the cable communications system or any person franchised under the terms of this chapter. 
(b)  Upon the filing of any complaint against any person pursuant to the preceding subsection, the cable communications commission shall give such person at least 20 days notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given such person upon the matters alleged in the complaint. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Act 267, Public Acts of 1576 as amended. The cable communications commission shall have the power to order such changes in the rates, charges, rules, regulations, service, equipment or other matters relating to the service or operation of the cable communications company as in its judgment, based upon the record of the hearing and the findings of fact made thereon, appear to be just, reasonable and lawful. The franchisee shall have the right of appeal of the decision of the cable communication commission to the city council, such appeal to be exercised by the filing of a written demand with the city clerk within 15 days after the decision of the cable communications commission. At the hearing the city council may affirm, reverse or affirm in part and reverse in part the decision of the cable communications commission. 
(c)  Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall have a business office located in the City of South Lyon suitably staffed for the purpose, among others, of receiving and investigating complaints, dealing with its subscribers, receiving payment for service and otherwise conducting business, unless otherwise provided in the franchise agreement. 
(d)  The franchisee shall have a publicly listed telephone that will accept complaints and requests for repairs on a 24-hour basis. 
(e)  The franchisee shall maintain the capability or responding to service requests within 48 hours of receipt of request. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 15) 
Sec. 26-16. - Priority of use. 
    Any right or privilege granted to any person under this chapter to use or occupy any street, alley, public right-of-way or public place shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of such property. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the City of South Lyon in the lawful exercise of its police power, and the grant of a franchise to any person as provided in this chapter shall confer no right, privilege or exemption not specifically presented therein. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 16) 
Sec. 26-17. - Surrender or other franchises. 
    By the application for and acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this chapter, a cable communications company agrees that upon subsequent additions of areas to the City of South Lyon, either by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or licenses held by it to provide a cable communications service or to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in such areas shall be surrendered and any rights or privileges in streets alleys, public rights-of-way or public places to install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable communications service in such areas as may subsequently be added to the City of South Lyon by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, shall thereafter be subject to and authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 17) 
Sec. 26-18. - Reports. 
    Every cable communications company shall file annually with the city a current map showing the exact location of the transmission and distribution facilities and equipment in the City of South Lyon used by it in providing cable communications service, and further, shall prepare and furnish the city on written request therefor at such times and in such form as may be prescribed such reports as to its operations, finances, facilities and activities as may be reasonably necessary to enable the city to perform its obligations, functions and duties under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 18) 
Sec. 26-19. - Rights of city. 
    Any franchise granted under this chapter is made subject to all applicable provisions of law relating to the City of South Lyon and ordinances thereof, and specifically subject to the rights and powers of the city and limitations upon the cable communications company holding such franchise as are set forth in the statutes of the State of Michigan pertaining to local government, which are herein incorporated by reference, and such cable communications company shall abide by and be bound by said rights, powers and limitations and any franchise granted under this chapter constitutes and shall be considered as a public utility franchise and a cable communications company shall be deemed to be a public utility. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 19) 
Sec. 26-20. - Cable communications commission. 
(a)  There is hereby established a commission to be known as the South Lyon Cable Communications Commission. 
(b)  The commission shall consist of five residents of the city appointed by the city council. Each member shall serve a term of three years; provided, however, that appointments to the first commission shall be for such terms as follows: two members for a term of three years; two members for a term of two years; and one member for a term of one year. Any vacancy in the office shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the term. No employee of, or person with ownership interest in a cable television franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be eligible for membership on the commission. Members of the commission shall serve without pay. 
(c)  The commission, in addition to the functions and responsibilities that city council or city manager may delegate to it from time to time by resolution, shall review and recommend rules, regulations and policies governing the city's government access channel, content and programming, and suggest and assist in the development of locally originated programs. It shall also have those functions assigned to it by the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 20; Ord. No. 02-14, Pt. I, 4-14-14) 
Sec. 26-21. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or the enforcement thereof. 
(b)  Section headings as set forth in this chapter are for convenience only and shall not be a part of this chapter nor be used to construe any provisions hereof more broadly or narrowly than its text would indicate. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 21) 
Sec. 26-22. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. For the purpose of this chapter, each day of violation of section 26-4 and section 26-10 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 22) 
Sec. 26-23. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective 20 days after the adoption of the ordinance from which it is derived but not before its publication subsequent to final adoption in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 9-14-81, § 23) 
Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 30-1. - Intent and purpose. 
    It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish procedures, rights and duties for the City of South Lyon Cemetery regarding the sale of burial rights, maintenance and improvement, burial preparation and supervision and administration of perpetual care fund by the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 3.20) 
Sec. 30-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Burial right means the right and privilege of interment of a deceased human body granted by the city to an owner through the issuance of a certificate for a lot. 
    Cemetery means the South Lyon Cemetery, which is owned and controlled by the city, including all lots, common areas, drives, roads, and buildings. 
    Certificate means a certificate of ownership issued by the city to a lot owner confirming and conveying a burial right which shall be subject to the cemetery rules. 
    City means the City of South Lyon and its duly authorized agents and employees. 
    Fund means the cemetery perpetual care fund, maintained by the city for purposes of paying for the care, maintenance, expansion and improvement of the cemetery and consisting of the portion of the purchase price received by the city from the sale of lots and interest earned thereon as set forth in this chapter together with such other amounts as the city council may determine to deposit in the fund from other sources. 
    Lot means a portion of the cemetery of a shape and size designated by the city for which a certificate may be issued conveying a burial right to an owner. 
    Owner means a resident or nonresident of the city who has purchased a lot as confirmed by an issued certificate. 
    Rules means written standards, conditions, regulations and restrictions governing the use and appearance of the cemetery and lots therein. 
(Code 1988, § 3.21) 
Sec. 30-3. - Sale of burial rights. 
(a)  A person may purchase a burial right for a lot in the cemetery by paying to the city the applicable resident or nonresident price which has been established and may be modified by resolution of the city council. 
(b)  Upon receiving the established price and confirming a person's residency, if applicable, the city shall issue to the person a certificate for the lot. 
(c)  Certificates may be transferred by the owner to another person upon written notice to the city and payment of any additional fee based on nonresidency of the transferee or increase in lot prices since original purchase. 
(Code 1988, § 3.22) 
Sec. 30-4. - Burial preparation and supervision. 
(a)  Upon being notified by the owner or person acting for the owner of a desired date for a burial and receiving payment or guarantee of payment of the grave opening charge which has been established by resolution of the city council, the city shall prepare the lot for the burial by the day and time requested or notify the owner or owner's representative of the city's inability to prepare the lot by the day and time indicated. 
(b)  In establishing grave opening charges, the city council may establish different charges based on the amount of notice received and increased cost of complying with the request due to holiday or overtime pay and other relevant considerations. 
(Code 1988, § 3.23) 
Sec. 30-5. - Maintenance. 
    The cemetery shall be maintained and may be expanded or improved by the city through its department of public works, by contract or otherwise, with the cost of said maintenance, expansion or improvement to be paid for from the fund. 
(Code 1988, § 3.24) 
Sec. 30-6. - Perpetual care fund. 
(a)  From the proceeds from the sale of burial rights as described in section 30-3, the city shall deposit 100 percent of those proceeds in the fund. 
(b)  The city treasurer shall be custodian of the fund which may be kept in one or more bank accounts, but shall be separate from and not intermingled with any other city funds, with the investment or reinvestment of monies in the fund to be approved by resolution of the city council subject to such terms, conditions, limitations, and restrictions imposed by law. 
(c)  Neither the principal or interest in the fund shall be expended for any purpose except the care, maintenance, expansion and improvement of the cemetery. 
(d)  Expenses for regular care and maintenance of the cemetery may be paid administratively by the treasurer to the contractor or by appropriate transfer to another city fund upon confirmation by the city of the accuracy of the amount and that the services billed for have been rendered. 
(e)  Expenses for expansion or capital improvements at the cemetery shall require approval of the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 3.25) 
Chapter 34 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 34-1-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 

Sec. 34-31. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and may be referred to as the "City of South Lyon Downtown Development Authority Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 1) 
Sec. 34-32. - Definitions. 
    The terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as given to them in Act 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 or as hereinafter provided in this section unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary. As used in this article: 
    Act 197 means Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 as now in effect or hereafter amended. 
    Authority means the downtown development authority of the City of South Lyon, Michigan, created by this article. 
    Board or board of trustees mean the board of trustees of the authority, the governing body of the authority. 
    Chief executive officer means the city manager of the City of South Lyon. 
    City means the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 
    Council or city council mean the city council of the City of South Lyon. 
    Development plan means a plan developed by the downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
    Downtown district means the downtown district as described in Exhibit A attached as part of the ordinance from which this article derives. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 2) 
Sec. 34-33. - Determination of necessity. 
    The city council hereby determines that it is necessary for the best interests of the city to halt property value deterioration and increase property tax valuation where possible in the downtown business district of the city to eliminate the causes of that deterioration, and to promote economic growth by establishing a downtown development authority pursuant to Act 197. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 3) 
Sec. 34-34. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created, pursuant to Act 197, a downtown development authority for the City of South Lyon, Michigan. The authority shall be a corporate public body and shall be known and exercise its powers under the title of the "South Lyon Downtown Development Authority." The authority may adopt a seal, may sue and be sued in any court of this state, and shall possess all of the powers necessary to carry out the purpose of its incorporation as provided by this article and Act 197. The enumeration of a power in this article or in Act 197 shall not be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 4) 
Sec. 34-35. - Description of downtown district. 
    The downtown district in which the authority shall exercise its powers as provided by Act 197 shall consist of the territory in the city described in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part hereof, subject to such changes as may hereinafter be made pursuant to this article and Act 197. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 5; Ord. of 9-8-97) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A to Ordinance of February 13, 1995, as amended by Ordinance of September 8, 1997, is not included herein but is on file in the city offices. 
Sec. 34-36. - Board of trustees. 
    The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a board of trustees consisting of the city manager of the City of South Lyon and eight members appointed by the city manager of the City of South Lyon, subject to approval by the city council. At least five of the members shall be persons having an interest in property located in the downtown district. At least one of the members shall be a resident of the downtown district, if the downtown district has 100 or more persons residing within it. Of the members first appointed, two shall be appointed for one year, two for two years, two for three years, and two for four years. A member shall hold office until the member's successor is appointed. Thereafter, a member shall serve for a term of four years. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the city manager of the City of South Lyon for the unexpired term only. Members of the board shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses. The chairperson of the board shall be elected by the members of the board. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 6) 
Sec. 34-37. - Powers of the authority. 
    Except as specifically otherwise provided by this article, the authority shall have all powers provided by law subject to the limitations imposed by law. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 7) 
Sec. 34-38. - Director; bond of director. 
    If a director is employed as authorized by section 5 of Act 197, he shall post bond in the penal sum of $5,000.00 as required by said section of said statute. The premium of the bond shall be deemed an operating expense of the authority, payable from funds available to the authority for expenses of operation. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 8) 
Sec. 34-39. - Fiscal year; adoption of budget. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the authority shall begin on July 1 of each year and end on June 30 of the following year, or such other fiscal year as may hereafter be adopted by the city. 
(b)  The board shall annually prepare a budget and submit it to the city manager for submission to the city council. The board shall not finally adopt a budget for any fiscal year until the budget has been approved by the city council. The board may, however, temporarily adopt a budget in connection with the operation of any improvements which have been financed by revenue bonds where required to do so by the ordinance authorizing the revenue bonds. 
(c)  The authority shall submit financial reports to the city council at the same time and on the same basis as departments of the city are required to submit reports. The authority shall be audited annually by the same independent auditors auditing the city, and copies of the audit report shall be filed with the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 9) 
Sec. 34-40. - Development plan. 
    The board may create a development plan for the area encompassed by the downtown development authority, and such plan, when approved by the board and the city council, shall be implemented as set forth in the development plan and as required by law. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(1), § 10) 
Secs. 34-41-34-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION 

Sec. 34-61. - Corporation founded. 
    There shall be established hereby, the economic development corporation of the City of South Lyon, which corporation is founded, established and shall operate in accordance with Act 338 of Public Acts of 1974. 
(Code 1988, § 5.471) 
Sec. 34-62. - Articles approved. 
    The corporate articles, as submitted to the council on March 3, 1975, together with the appropriate petition of same date, as signed by E. Everett Perkins, Mayme L. Hoots and Donald W. Burns, are hereby approved; the council having held public hearing concerning same as required by statute and having further invited competitive applications: none being offered or filed thereafter. 
(Code 1988, § 5.472) 
Sec. 34-63. - Corporate term. 
    The corporation shall exist for so long as, and for such purposes as, allowed by said Act 338 of Public Acts of 1974, and said corporation shall otherwise be governed by the article and bylaws, if any, which articles shall be forthwith filed with the Michigan Department of Treasury and upon approval by the board of directors, such bylaws as enacted shall be submitted to the council of the City of South Lyon, for final approval. 
(Code 1988, § 5.473) 
Secs. 34-64-34-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - HOUSING COMMISSION 

Sec. 34-81. - Housing commission continued. 
    The city housing commission, heretofore created pursuant to Act No. 18, Public Acts of 1933 (Ex. Sess.), State of Michigan, as amended is hereby continued. 
(Code 1988, § 1.151) 
Sec. 34-82. - Members, term and appointment. 
    In accordance with section 4 of said Act 18 of 1933 (Ex. Sess.) the city housing commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by the mayor with the approval of the city council. Each of said members shall serve for a term of five years and until his successor shall be appointed and qualified. Members of the first commission shall be appointed for staggered terms. Members shall serve without compensation but shall be reimbursed for any actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1988, § 1.152) 
Sec. 34-83. - Meetings, rules, record, quorum, officers, employees. 
    The commission shall meet at regular intervals, said meetings to be public. It shall adopt its own rules of procedure, and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A president and vice-president shall be elected by the commission. The commission may appoint a director who may also serve as secretary, and such other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The commission shall prescribe the duties of all of its officers and employees and may, with the approval of the appointing authority, fix their compensation. The commission may from time to time as necessary employ engineers, architects and consultants. 
(Code 1988, § 1.153) 
Sec. 34-84. - Powers and duties. 
    In addition to such other powers, duties, rights and obligations provided for by charter and statute, such commission shall have the following enumerated powers and duties: 
(1)  To determine in what areas of the city it is necessary to provide proper sanitary housing facilities for families of low income and for the elimination of housing conditions which are detrimental to the public peace, health, safety, morals, and/or welfare. 
(2)  To purchase, lease, sell, exchange, transfer, assign and mortgage any property, real or personal, or any interest therein, or acquire the same by gift, bequest or under the power of eminent domain; to own, hold, clear and improve property; to engage in or to contract for the design and construction, reconstruction, alteration, improvement, extension, and/or repair of any housing project or projects or parts thereof; to lease and/or operate any housing project or projects. 
(3)  To control and supervise all parks and playgrounds forming a part of such housing development but may contract with existing departments of the city for operation or maintenance of either or both. 
(4)  To establish and revise rents of any housing project or projects, but shall rent all property for such sums as will make them self-supporting, including all charges for maintenance and operation, for principal and interest on loans and bonds, and for taxes. 
(5)  To rent only to such tenants as are unable to pay for more expensive housing accommodations. 
(6)  To call upon other city departments for assistance in the performance of its duties, but said departments shall be reimbursed for any added expense incurred therefor. 
(7)  It shall have such other powers relating to said housing facilities project as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution of the governing body of the city or as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the act. 
(Code 1988, § 1.154; Ord. No. 15-16, Pt. II, 11-28-16) 
Sec. 34-85. - Interest of members, officers, employees in contracts. 
    No member of the housing commission or any of its officers or employees shall have any interest directly or indirectly in any contract for property, materials or services to be acquired by said commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.155) 
Sec. 34-86. - Report to governing body. 
    The commission shall make an annual report of its activities to the city council and shall make such other reports as the city manager may from time to time require. 
(Code 1988, § 1.156) 
Sec. 34-87. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 15-16, Pts. I, II, adopted Nov. 28, 2016, repealed § 34-87, which pertained to deeds, contracts, leases, purchases and derived from Code 1988, § 1.157. 
Chapter 36 - ELECTRIC FRANCHISES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 95, adopted August 14, 2000 enacted a new chapter 36, electric franchises, designated as sections 1.1 through 6.5. Said sections have been renumbered, at the discretion of the editor, and have been redesignated as sections 36-1 through 36-65, so as to better fit the format of the Code. 

Sec. 36-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of South Lyon Electric Franchise Ordinance". 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(1.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-2. - Purpose and findings. 
(a)  Pursuant to section 29 of article 7 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, and the city Charter, use of the highways, streets, alleys and other public places for operation of a public utility requires the consent of the city and the transaction of local business in the city by public utility requires that a franchise first be obtained. This article is adopted for the purpose of confirming and providing the process, terms and conditions for suppliers of electricity to obtain the required consents and franchises and to fully exercise the city's constitutional authority which includes reasonable control of its highways, streets, alleys and public places. 
(b)  As a result of the regulatory changes that have or may occur, and interpretations of existing laws, at the state and federal levels, specifically including the Michigan Public Service Commission (deregulation), persons that may be authorized to supply electricity to customers in the city are no longer limited to the public utility that owns and operates the facilities used to deliver electricity to customers. This article is adopted in recognition of the deregulation which has and may continue to occur, with the intent and purpose of confirming that all persons supplying electricity to customers in the city are required to have a franchise as provided in this article, regardless of whether it is required as a condition of state or federal regulatory permits, approvals or certificates. 
(c)  The city will incur costs and expenses in reviewing and acting on franchise requests, and upon granting a franchise, monitoring and enforcing its terms and conditions. Such costs and expenses should be paid by franchise applicants and holders as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(1.2), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-3. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meanings indicated. 
    City means the City of South Lyon. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    Customer means a residential, commercial or industrial end-user of electricity in the city. 
    Disruption means a physical change, modification, alteration, disturbance, injury and/or damage to or in a right-of-way, including, but not limited to, construction, installation, location, maintenance, modification, alteration, replacement or repair of facilities, and the removal or alteration of a right of way surface grade or material, tree, sign, marker, hydrant or other material or object. 
    Facility or facilities means an overhead or underground cable, wire line, main, pipe, pole, building, structure, equipment and all other manmade or placed materials or objects or combinations thereof, for the transmission or distribution of electricity or natural gas to customers. 
    Franchise means a nonexclusive limited authorization to transact a local business and the right to incidental use of right of way under this article. 
    Grantee means the holder of a valid and effective franchise granted by the city. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission. 
    Person means a natural person, company, corporation, partnership, joint venture, voluntary association, organization or other form of legal entity. 
    Right-of-way means any and all public rights of way, streets, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, thoroughfares, public easements and public places located within the city. 
    Supplier means a person that supplies electricity (electric generation) to customers in the city through facilities in the city in which it has no ownership, operations, leasehold, repair or maintenance rights or responsibilities. 
    Utility means a person that owns, operates, and maintains facilities used to provide electricity to customers in the city. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(1.3), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-4. - Franchise requirement. 
    Being a supplier of electricity to customers in the city is the transaction of local business of a public utility, which shall not be done without a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(1.4), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-5. - Right-of-way limitations. 
    A franchise granted under this article constitutes the city's consent to grantee's limited and incidental use of right-of-way to the extent that facilities are located within it. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(1.5), 8-14-00) 
Secs. 36-6-36-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRIC FRANCHISE PROCESS 

Sec. 36-11. - Franchise approvals. 
    After a franchise ordinance is adopted and all publication and other legal requirements for it to become effective are satisfied, a certified copy of the ordinance shall be delivered or mailed to the approved grantee together with a written acceptance for the approved grantee to sign under oath, confirming its acknowledgement, agreement and acceptance of the franchise and all of its terms and conditions. If the required signed and notarized acceptance is not delivered to the clerk within 30 days of the delivery or mailing of the franchise ordinance and agreement to grantee, the effectiveness of the ordinance will be automatically terminated. Upon the approved grantee's timely acceptance of the franchise ordinance, it shall constitute a contract between the city and grantee. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(2.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-12. - Franchise terms and conditions. 
    Unless amended by the individual franchise ordinance, all of the definitions in article I, terms and conditions in articles III and IV of this article shall apply and be incorporated by reference as part of every supplier's individual franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(2.2), 8-14-00) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL FRANCHISE TERMS AND CONDITIONS 

Sec. 36-21. - Franchise rights. 
    Subject to all terms and conditions in this article III and the individual franchise ordinance, a franchise grants the grantee the right to transact a local business of supplying electricity, as designated in the individual franchise ordinance, to customers in the city using facilities of an identified utility to the extent that it is lawful under applicable legislation, administrative rules, including those of the MPSC, and express or implied contract or agreement with the utility. A franchise does not grant the right to own, construct, operate, maintain or repair facilities in the city. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-22. - Term, revocation and termination. 
    The term of a franchise, which shall be stated in the individual franchise ordinance, is subject to revocation at the will of the city and may be surrendered and terminated by the grantee on 30 days written notice. Any unsatisfied obligations of grantee to the city shall survive revocation or termination and be enforceable by the city as provided in the franchise, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.2), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-23. - Nonexclusive. 
    A franchise is nonexclusive and does not restrict the city from approving additional franchises or establishing any priority between grantees to transact local business and the incidental use of right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.3), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-24. - Assignment. 
    A franchise may not be sold, leased, assigned, transferred or used by any person other than the grantee without the written approval of the city by ordinance amendment. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.4), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-25. - Compliance with laws and ordinances. 
    A franchise requires grantee compliance with all applicable current and future city, county, state and federal ordinances, laws, rules and regulations and any permit, approval, certificate or license requirements and conditions under such laws and shall not be construed as a waiver by grantee of any of its rights under state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.5), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-26. - No right-of-way disruption. 
    Disruption or obstruction of, and physical entry in or upon a right-of-way by a grantee, its personnel or equipment is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.6), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-27. - City rights paramount. 
    A franchise and the rights granted by it shall at all times be subject to the paramount rights of the city in its right-of-way, and shall be subject to immediate suspension or termination by the city in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.7), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-28. - Vacation. 
    If a right-of-way is vacated, discontinued, abandoned, terminated or released, a grantee's incidental right to use the right-of-way shall immediately terminate. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.8), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-29. - Public emergencies. 
    Without prior notice, the city has the right to remove, damage, destroy or otherwise disrupt and/or order a cessation of use of facilities used by grantee or its customers, when necessary due to a public emergency. Public emergency means any situation which, in the opinion of the city official authorized to declare an emergency, presents an immediate threat to persons or property in the city. The city shall have no liability or responsibility for repairing or restoring facilities damaged by actions taken under this section. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.9), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-30. - Interpretation. 
    A franchise shall not be construed in any manner as a waiver or limitation of the city's discretion and authority or rights to regulate and control the use of right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.10), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-31. - No city liability. 
    The city and its officials, employees, agents, volunteers and contractors shall have no liability for damages or injuries to any person or property, including grantee, that arise from the granting, enforcement or exercise of rights under a franchise. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.11), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-32. - Indemnity. 
    A grantee shall, at its sole cost and expense, defend, indemnify and hold harmless, the city and its officials, employees, agents, volunteers, contractors, right-of-way and property from all claims and liability for damages or injury to persons or property caused by or resulting from the actions or omissions of grantee and/or its officers, employees, agents and contractors. This obligation extends to all costs and expenses, including attorney fees that may be incurred by the beneficiaries of grantee's obligation. The city shall notify grantee of any claim or liability that is covered by grantee's obligation, and shall not be prevented from participating in the defense of any claim by its own attorney, the cost of which shall be grantee's responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.12), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-33. - Insurance. 
    The city reserves the right to require the grantee to have, maintain and provide specified liability insurance coverages. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.13), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-34. - Disclosures. 
    Grantee shall provide and update written disclosure to the city of its contact person(s), address, telephone numbers, fax numbers, e-mail addresses, if applicable, and procedures for service requests and complaints. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.14), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-35. - Supply requirements. 
    Grantee shall supply electricity in accordance with all applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.15), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-36. - City costs. 
    Grantee shall reimburse the city for any costs it incurs, including reasonable attorney fees, in enforcing franchise terms and conditions, generally not to exceed $2,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.16), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-37. - Reservation of city rights. 
    A franchise shall at all times be subject to the rights of the city, which are hereby reserved, to make all regulations, take all actions and do all things provided for in its Charter. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(3.17), 8-14-00) 
Secs. 36-38-36-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FRANCHISE TERMS AND RENEWALS 

Sec. 36-41. - Franchise term. 
    No franchise granted under this chapter shall be for longer than 15 years. The term of each franchise shall be stated in the individual franchise ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(4.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-42. - Renewals and extensions. 
    There is no right to a franchise renewal or extension. Franchise renewal or extension may be applied for and approved as provided in article II. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(4.2), 8-14-00) 
Secs. 36-43-36-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VIOLATION AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 36-51. - Transaction of business without franchise. 
    Any person transacting business without a franchise required by this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall pay a fine in the following amount: 
First offense $3,500.00 Second or subsequent offense $5,000.00  
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(5.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-52. - Right-of-way restoration. 
    Any person in violation of the franchise requirement of this chapter or a franchise issued under it who damages a right-of-way shall be responsible for restoration of the right-of-way to the condition that existed prior to the violation. If such person fails or refuses to restore the right-of-way after 30 days notice from the city, and if the city determines that the civil infraction remedy is inadequate under the circumstances, the city may initiate proceedings in the appropriate court to recover the cost estimated to accomplish the restoration, or recover such costs as have been actually expended by the city in achieving the restoration, as the case may be. Such costs shall include finance and reasonable administrative costs estimated or incurred. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(5.2), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-53. - Separate offenses. 
    Each occurrence of a violation, and each day a violation exists, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(5.3), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-54. - Injunctive relief. 
    Violations of this chapter, or a franchise issued under it, are considered to be a nuisance per se with such violations and correction of any conditions resulting from violations subject to abatement by injunctive or other appropriate order by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(5.4), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-55. - Election of remedies. 
    Violations of this chapter and franchises issued under it subject the violator to franchise revocation, if applicable, and city enforcement through one or more of the remedies provided in this article, and the election by the city to pursue one form of remedy does not waive or restrict the city's option to pursue other remedies at the same or later time. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(5.5), 8-14-00) 
Secs. 36-56-36-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - MISCELLANEOUS 

Sec. 36-61. - No waiver. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any of the rights, remedies and/or authority of the city pursuant to any laws, ordinances, Codes or regulations of the city, and the city reserves the right to exercise all authority and take any and all action granted to it by any constitution, law, city ordinance, Code and/or regulation. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit and/or preclude the city from exercising its right of eminent domain. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(6.1), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-62. - Notices. 
    Any notices required to be sent to the grantee by this chapter may be delivered, or may be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the grantee at the address listed in the franchise application, or such other address as grantee has provided to the clerk in writing. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(6.2), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-63. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause or provision of this chapter shall be declared to be unconstitutional, void, illegal or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such section, clause or provision declared to be unconstitutional, void or illegal shall thereby cease to be a part of this chapter, but the remainder of this chapter shall stand and be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(6.3), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-64. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed only to the extent necessary to give this chapter full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(6.4), 8-14-00) 
Sec. 36-65. - Savings. 
    All proceedings pending and all rights and liabilities existing, acquired or incurred at the time this chapter takes effect are saved and may be consummated according to the law when they are commenced. 
(Ord. No. 95, § 1(6.5), 8-14-00) 
Chapter 38 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 38-31. - Department head. 
    The ambulance department shall be headed by the ambulance director. 
(Code 1988, § 1.81) 
Sec. 38-32. - Ambulance personnel. 
    Ambulance personnel, whether professional, paraprofessional or other personnel, shall perform such duties and responsibilities as shall be conferred upon them from time to time by the ambulance director of the City of South Lyon, and personnel of the department shall have and perform such duties as are imposed upon public employees serving as paramedics, assistants or drivers, or attendants, by any administrative directive, resolution, the Charter of the City of South Lyon, the South Lyon City Code and by law. 
(Code 1988, § 1.82) 
Sec. 38-33. - Director's duties. 
    The ambulance director shall be the administrator and head of the ambulance department. The ambulance director shall be responsible for the administrative offices of the ambulance department as provided by chapter VI of the city Charter of the City of South Lyon, and said director may delegate any and all such duties, responsibilities, and functions to an officer within the ambulance division. The ambulance director shall in addition thereto have such powers, duties and responsibilities as shall from time to time be lawfully conferred upon him by the manager of the City of South Lyon, and by law. Wherever any statute, ordinance, this Code, municipal regulation or law shall require a duty or responsibility of the ambulance director, such duties and/or responsibilities shall be assumed by and performed in the City of South Lyon by the ambulance director. 
(Code 1988, § 1.83) 
Sec. 38-34. - Appointments and dismissals. 
    The ambulance director, and all employees of said department, shall be appointed and/or dismissed by the manager. Hiring, and/or appointments to this department, shall be made by the city manager, in a manner and form used for other general employees of the city, or pursuant to eligibility requirements and other standards as the manager shall require, or in accordance with such city policies, ordinances, or laws which may hereinafter be enacted. The ambulance director shall, from time to time, recommend to the manager the organization and functions of the department of ambulance, including its personnel strength and chain of command. Pursuant to chapter VI of the Charter of the City of South Lyon, the manager shall submit to the council, for review and concurrence, all proposed programs, organizations and reorganizations involving the department of ambulance and its functions, including acquisition and use of all facilities and equipment thereby required, subject to the budgetary control by the council of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.84) 
Sec. 38-35. - Department rules. 
    The manager shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem expedient for the proper administration of the ambulance department and the duties, responsibilities and privileges of the personnel of that department, and provided further that such regulations shall not be in conflict with any existing state law, city Charter, or other ordinances of the City of South Lyon; provided further that such regulations shall become effective 24 hours after the same shall have been posted on a bulletin board in the office of the ambulance director. 
(Code 1988, § 1.85) 
Secs. 38-36-38-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EMERGENCY RESPONSE COST RECOVERY 

Sec. 38-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Emergency response means: 
(1)  The dispatch, provision, or utilization of the police, fire fighting, emergency medical, and rescue services by the City of South Lyon to or at an accident involving a motor vehicle where one or more of drivers were operating a motor vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(2)  The making of a traffic stop and arrest by a police officer when the driver was operating a motor vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance pursuant to the Michigan Vehicle Code or the Uniform Traffic Code as adopted by the City of South Lyon. 
    Expense of emergency response means the direct and reasonable costs incurred by the City of South Lyon associated with the occurrence of an emergency response, including, but not limited to, the cost of providing police, firefighting, and rescue services, and shall include, but not be limited to, the cost connected with the administration and provision of a breathalyzer test and the video taping of the driver if applicable. 
(Code 1988, § 10.202; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-52. - Presumptions. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a person is impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or the combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance when his or her physical or mental abilities are impaired or substantially and materially affected to a degree that he or she is no longer able to operate a motor vehicle with the caution characteristic of an ordinary, careful, and prudent driver. 
(b)  It shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor if a chemical analysis of his or her blood, urine, or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his or her blood was in excess of 0.07 percent. 
(Code 1988, § 10.203; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-53. - Liability for costs. 
(a)  Any person who, while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and controlled substance, operates a motor vehicle which results in an emergency response shall be responsible and liable for the expense of the emergency response. 
(b)  The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person liable for expenses under this article. The expense of an emergency response constitutes a debt of that person and is collectible by the city for incurring those costs in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied, or as an assessment under the Charter of the City of South Lyon. Additionally, the 52-1 Judicial District Court is authorized to collect the costs for the city and may impose an additional administrative service fee upon the city for such collection in an amount mutually agreed upon by the court and the city. 
(Code 1988, § 10.204; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1; Ord. No. 10-15, Pt. I, 10-26-15) 
Sec. 38-54. - Schedule of costs. 
    The city council for the City of South Lyon shall by resolution adopt a schedule of the costs including within the expense of an emergency response. This schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department. 
(Code 1988, § 10.205; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-55. - Bill for services. 
    The chief of police or the designee thereof, within 15 days of an emergency response, shall prepare a list of itemized costs and submit the same to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall within ten days of receiving itemized costs incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for the same by first class mail or personal service to a person liable for said expenses as enumerated under this article. Said bill shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of service. 
(Code 1988, § 10.206; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-56. - Failure to pay costs of emergency response. 
    Any failure by the responsible person to pay the itemized costs within 30 days of service shall be considered a default. In case of default, the City of South Lyon shall commence civil suit to recover the unpaid expenses of an emergency response and any costs allowed by law. 
(Code 1988, § 10.207; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Sec. 38-57. - Civil nature of liability. 
    This chapter shall be construed to be a responsibility and liability of a civil nature on the part of the responsible person. This shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including fines and/or costs which may be imposed by a judge under the Michigan Vehicle Code or the Uniform Traffic Code on a driver for operating a motor vehicle while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance. 
(Code 1988, § 10.208; Ord. of 9-9-96(3), § 1) 
Chapter 42 - ENVIRONMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LITTER AND BLIGHT 

Sec. 42-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned vehicle means and shall include, without limitation, any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of 48 continuous hours, or more, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more after the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked. 
    Blighted structure means and shall include, without limitation, any dwelling, garage, or outbuilding, or any factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse or any other structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended. 
    Building materials means and shall include, without limitation, lumber, brick, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete, or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
    Disabled motor vehicle means any disabled machine, truck, tractor, automobile, or motor vehicle which is incapable of being self-propelled upon the public streets or which does not meet the requirements for operation upon the public streets, including a current license. 
    Junk means and shall include, without limitation parts of machinery or motor vehicles, broken and unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
    Junk motor vehicles means and shall include, without limitation, any vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the State of Michigan for a period in excess of 14 days, and shall also include, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 14 days, provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicensed, but operative, vehicles which are kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used automobile or other motorized vehicle dealer; provided, further that the time limit such vehicles may remain upon the premises of a motor vehicle repair garage shall be a period of 120 days rather than 60 days, with extension of additional 30-day period upon presentation to the enforcing officer of written proof the offending vehicle is involved in insurance claim litigation or a similar matter and additional time is required for settlement before a vehicle can be moved. 
    Trash and rubbish mean and shall include any and all forms of debris not herein otherwise classified. 
(Code 1988, § 9.51) 
Sec. 42-32. - Cause of blight. 
    It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles, disabled vehicles, building materials, and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the City of South Lyon tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, the increase in criminal activity, and therefore contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1988, § 9.52) 
Sec. 42-33. - Open storage yards. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles on any private property in the city except within a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a properly zoned licensed or approved junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk gatherer. 
(Code 1988, § 9.53) 
Sec. 42-34. - Vacant structures. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, dwelling, garage, out-building, factory, shop, store, or warehouse unless the same is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons or unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the City of South Lyon, and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1988, § 9.54) 
Sec. 42-35. - Building materials storage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation of building materials on any private property, except in a completely enclosed building or except where such building materials are part of the stock in trade of a business located on said property, or except when such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the City of South Lyon, and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1988, § 9.55) 
Sec. 42-36. - Junk vehicles. 
    The city manager or the chief of police or the duly authorized representative of either official may remove or cause to be removed any junk vehicle or abandoned vehicle, or parts of either, from any unenclosed private property after having notified, in writing, the owner or occupant of such property of his intention to do so at least 48 hours prior to such removal. Such notice shall be served personally upon the owner or occupant of property, if occupied, or may be posted in a conspicuous place upon vacant or unoccupied property. Such junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, shall be removed and disposed of in accordance with the law. Such removal by the designated enforcement official shall not excuse or relieve any person of the obligation imposed by this article to keep his property free from storage or accumulation of junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles, or parts of either, nor from the penalties for violation thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.56) 
Sec. 42-37. - Violations. 
(a)  Municipal civil infraction penalties. A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Liability for additional costs. In addition to fine and/or imprisonment, such violators shall be chargeable with the actual costs incurred by the enforcing officer for the city in the removal from the violators' premises of such trash, rubbish, junk, wrecked, dismantled or unusable vehicles or abandoned vehicles, together with an additional charge of 20 percent of such removal costs to reimburse the city for incidental expenses necessitated by such removal and abatement of the nuisance. Such actual costs of removal and the 20 percent additional charge shall constitute a lien against the premises and shall initially be charged and billed to the occupant of the premises, or to the title holder of record of unoccupied premises. If said sum is not paid to the city within a period of 30 days following such removal the total amount of such charges shall be processed as a special assessment against such property or suit be instituted for collection of such charges against the responsible party, at the option of the city. 
(c)  Authority to remove trash, rubbish, junk, etc. The enforcing officer, under appropriate court order, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon any premises to remove trash, rubbish, junk, wrecked, dismantled or unusable vehicles or abandoned vehicles and abate the nuisance thereby created, following refusal or neglect of the owner, person in charge or occupant to comply with the terms of notice for removal thereof served upon him and his further refusal to permit the enforcement official to remove the same from the premises. 
(Code 1988, § 9.57; Ord. of 11-28-94(27), § 1) 
Sec. 42-38. - Vehicles under repair. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business which engages to any extent in the repair of motor vehicles to store or permit the storage of any motor vehicle under repair (including, without limitation, junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles, or disabled motor vehicles as defined herein) on any private property, except pursuant to all of the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Such vehicle may be stored on such property for a period not to exceed 45 days. The owner or proprietor may apply to the chief of police, or his duly authorized representative, for an extension of such time period. Such extension shall be granted for a reasonable period of time if, in the discretion of the chief of police or his representative, the owner or proprietor has demonstrated that parts or materials necessary to effectuate the repair of such vehicle have been ordered and that a reasonable extension is necessary for their delivery. 
(2)  The owner or proprietor of any business which stores such vehicles shall maintain a written record of all vehicles stored pursuant to this section. This record shall include the name, address, and phone number of the registered owner of the vehicle, and the date such vehicle was received by the business for repair. This record shall be open to inspection by the police department of the city at all times during the ordinary business hours of the business. As a condition of doing business, the owner or proprietor is deemed to have given consent to the inspection prescribed by this subsection. This record may be in the form of a normal written repair order, a police book, or in any other manner normally used by the business as long as it contains the minimum required information. 
(3)  Failure to maintain or knowingly falsifying the record described in subsection (2) shall constitute a violation of this Code, punishable as described in section 1-14. 
(Code 1988, § 9.58) 
Sec. 42-39. - Littering. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly dump, deposit, place, throw or leave, or cause to permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or waters other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. 
(b)  Littering with dangerous substances. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or throw glass or other dangerous pointed or edged substances in or on any beach or waters adjacent thereto, highway, or walk, or on public property within 50 feet of a public highway. 
(c)  Objects thrown into path of vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause any litter or any object to fall or to be thrown into the path or to hit a vehicle traveling the highway. 
(Code 1988, §§ 9.291-9.293) 
Secs. 42-40-42-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - NOISE 

Sec. 42-61. - Excessive noise declared nuisance. 
    All loud or unusual noises or sounds and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities are hereby declared to be public nuisances. 
(Code 1988, § 9.10) 
Sec. 42-62. - Specific offenses. 
    Each of the following acts is declared unlawful and prohibited, but this enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Animal and bird noises. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person. 
(2)  Construction noises. The erection (including excavating therefor), demolition, alteration or repair of any building, and the excavation of streets and highways, on Sundays, and other days, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., unless a permit be first obtained from the city manager. 
(3)  Sound amplifiers. Use of any loudspeaker, amplifier or other instrument or device, whether stationary or mounted on a vehicle for any purpose except one which is noncommercial in character and when so used shall be subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
b.  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operations shall be authorized. The permitted four hours of operation shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m. and 1:30 p.m. and between the hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. 
c.  Sound amplifying equipment mounted on vehicles shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when said truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. 
d.  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools or churches. 
e.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound amplifying equipment and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
f.  No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of 15 watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(4)  Engine exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which effectively prevents loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(5)  Handling merchandise. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(6)  Blowers. The discharge into the open air of air from any noise creating blower or power fan unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled sufficiently to deaden such noise. 
(7)  Hawking. The hawking of goods, merchandise, or newspapers in a loud and boisterous manner. 
(8)  Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching, apparently out of control, or to give warning of intent to get under motion, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. 
(9)  Radio, television and musical instruments. The playing of any radio, television set, phonograph, or any musical instrument in such a manner or with such volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(10)  Shouting and whistling. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing or the making of any loud noise on the public streets between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or the making of any such noise at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any school, place of worship, or office, or in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(11)  Whistle or siren. The blowing of any whistle or siren, except as a warning of fire or danger. 
(Code 1988, § 9.11) 
Sec. 42-63. - Exceptions. 
    None of the terms or prohibitions of section 42-62 shall apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Emergency vehicles. Any police or fire vehicles or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business. 
(2)  Highway maintenance and construction. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or on behalf of the city or the State of Michigan during the night, when the public safety, welfare, and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day. 
(Code 1988, § 9.12) 
Sec. 42-64. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(25), § 1(9.13)) 
Secs. 42-65-42-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - NUISANCES 

Sec. 42-81. - Nuisance defined and prohibited. 
    Whatever annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public; offends public decency; interferes with, obstructs or renders dangerous any street, highway, navigable lake or stream; or in any way renders the public insecure in life or property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by any provision of this article. No person shall commit, create, or maintain any nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.1) 
Sec. 42-82. - Nuisances per se. 
    The following acts are hereby declared to be public nuisances: 
(1)  No person shall cause, permit or allow the emission of dense smoke into the atmosphere from any building or premises owned or occupied by him. 
(2)  No person shall burn any garbage, refuse, hides, feathers or other organic or animal matter within the city limits. 
(3)  No person shall maintain any tree the roots of which are causing damage to any public sewer, sidewalk, pavement or other public property, nor shall any person set out or plant any tree in the public street or any portion thereof, including the "tree lawn" without a permit from the city manager. 
(4)  No person shall permit or allow any manure, offal, rubbish, refuse, junk or waste paper to collect or lie upon any property owned or occupied by him in such a manner as to attract flies, vermin or rodents, or as to emit offensive or unhealthy odors or so as to permit it to be scattered on adjoining lands by the wind. 
(5)  No person shall operate or maintain any machine, device, apparatus or instrument between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. which shall cause reasonably preventable electrical interference with the operation of any radio or television receiving set. 
(6)  No person shall attach, post or paint any sign, advertisement or other written or printed matter or any picture or device upon any lamp post, electric light or telephone pole, or public property located within any public street, alley or other public place within the city. 
(7)  No person shall throw, scatter or deposit any posters, handbills, cards or other written or printed matter or any waste paper or any bottles or cans or debris of any type in any public street or alley or public place nor shall any person leave or deposit the same on any private property in such a manner as to permit them to be blown onto any street, alley or other public place. 
(8)  No person shall deposit, place, or throw any dead or sick or injured animal, or part thereof, or any garbage, rubbish or other animal or organic matter into any reservoir or upon the banks or any stream, lake, pond, sewer or well, or upon any street or alley within the city. 
(9)  No person shall keep any doves or pigeons which shall damage buildings or other property by depositing excreta thereon. 
(10)  No person shall keep any horses, cattle, sheep, swine, goats, mules or other livestock or fowl within the corporate limits of the City of South Lyon except as permitted under chapter 102. 
(11)  No person shall allow an accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, age or dilapidation, or any other condition or happening to any lot, building or structure thus becoming a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city, or those residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure. 
(Code 1988, § 9.4) 
Sec. 42-83. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager and his subordinates, the health officer, the public safety director and his subordinates are hereby authorized and empowered to abate or destroy any public nuisance in any manner allowed or permitted by law, and in addition, the continuance of any such nuisance may be enjoined at the suit of the city by any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 9.5) 
Sec. 42-84. - Abatement costs. 
    Any expense incurred by the city in the abatement or removal of any nuisance as a result of the failure of any person, firm or corporation causing same to wholly abate or remove such nuisance within the time stated shall be charged against the lot or premises upon which the nuisance was maintained and from which it was removed, as a special assessment, and shall become a lien against such lot or premises at the same time and of the same character and effect, and collectible in the same manner as provided in chapter 78. 
(Code 1988, § 9.6) 
Sec. 42-85. - Multiple offenses. 
    For each and every day in which any such owner, or occupant, shall fail to remove, renovate and abate said nuisance after notification to do so as aforesaid and expiration of said 24-hour period, said owner or occupant may be complained of, as for a separate and distinct offense and punished as in this Code provided for. 
(Code 1988, § 9.7) 
Sec. 42-86. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(25), § 1(9.13)) 
Secs. 42-87-42-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SOIL EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 42-101. - Adoption of rules. 
    The City of South Lyon adopts by reference, pursuant to authority granted in Act 347 of Public Acts of 1972, those rules and regulations that have presently been promulgated by the department of natural resources, water resources commission, for the purpose of controlling soil erosion and sedimentation, which are set forth in part 17 of the General Rules of the Water Resources commission, more particularly referred to as rule 1701 through 1714 inclusive (R323.1701-323.1714). 
(Code 1988, § 8.41) 
Sec. 42-102. - Permit requirements. 
    The city adopts as the official permit application and permit, the form and format of the foregoing documents respectively which have been promulgated by the department of natural resources together with permit requirements and procedures accompanying the form of application for permit, and together with the earth change requirements as accompanying the form of the official permit. 
(Code 1988, § 8.42) 
Sec. 42-103. - Additional requirements. 
    In addition to the above conditions and requirements, the council may, by resolution, adopt and provide for: 
(1)  Project bonding procedures and requirements. 
(2)  Appeal procedures from permit denials in part or in whole. 
(3)  Enforcement procedures in addition to the penalties attached hereto. 
(4)  Schedule of fees to be paid prior to the issuance of permit hereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 8.43) 
Sec. 42-104. - Enforcement. 
    The city manager of the City of South Lyon, acting with the advice of the city engineer, shall be responsible for the administration of this article including the issuance of all permits contemplated hereunder and the enforcement of all regulatory provisions. 
(Code 1988, § 8.44) 
Sec. 42-105. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(22), § 1(8.45)) 
Chapter 46 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Outdoor burning. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is intended to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to safeguard the health, comfort, living conditions, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of South Lyon by regulating the air pollution and fire hazards of outdoor burning. 
(b)  Applicability. This section applies to all outdoor burning within the City of South Lyon. 
(1)  This section does not apply to grilling or cooking food using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas in cooking or grilling appliances. 
(2)  This section does not apply to burning for the purpose of generating heat in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation. 
(3)  This section does not apply to the use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction or maintenance activities. 
(c)  Severability. Should any portion of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this ordinance shall remain enforceable. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Clean wood means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
    Construction and demolition waste means building waste materials, including but not limited to waste shingles, insulation, lumber, treated wood, painted wood, wiring, plastics, packaging, and rubble that results from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on a house, commercial or industrial building, or other structure. 
    Fire chief means the Chief of the South Lyon Fire Department. 
    Municipality means the City of South Lyon. 
    Open burning. The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. Open burning does not include road flares, smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of portable/fixed outdoor fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open. 
    Outdoor/wood furnace also known as an outdoor wood-fired boiler, outdoor wood-burning appliance, or hydronic heater, means a fuel-burning device that is designed to burn clean wood or other approved solid fuels and is not located within a building intended for habitation by humans or domestic animals; and heats building space and/or water through the distribution, typically through pipes, of a fluid heated in the device, typically water or a mixture of water and antifreeze. 
    Portable/fixed outdoor fireplace. A portable/fixed, outdoor, solid-fuel-burning fireplace that may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible material. A portable/fixed outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney opening in the top. 
    Recreational fire. An outdoor fire burning materials other than refuse where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, portable/fixed outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet (914 mm) or less in diameter and two feet (610 mm) or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes. 
    Refuse means any waste material except trees, logs, brush, stumps, leaves, grass clippings, and other vegetative matter. 
(e)  General prohibitions. 
(1)  Open burning shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Recreational fires or fires in portable/fixed outdoor fireplaces that are offensive or objectionable because of smoke emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Burning of refuse shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Burning of leaves, grass clippings, or both shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Attendance. All outdoor burning e.g. recreational fires and use of portable/fixed outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with a minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
(g)  Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet (7620 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. 
(h)  Portable/fixed outdoor fireplace. Portable/fixed outdoor fireplaces shall be used in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within 15 feet (3048 mm) of a structure or combustible material. 
Exception: Portable/fixed outdoor fireplaces used at one- and two-family dwellings. 
(i)  Agricultural burning. Open burning of weeds, brush, and crop stubble on agricultural lands is allowed if conducted in accordance with other applicable provisions of this section. 
(j)  Prescribed burns. 
(1)  "Prescribed burn" means the burning, in compliance with a prescription and to meet planned fire or land management objectives, of a continuous cover of fuels. A "prescription" means a written plan establishing the criteria necessary for starting, controlling, and extinguishing a burn. 
(2)  Fires set for forest, prairie, and wildlife habitat management are allowed only if conducted in accordance with Part 515 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.51501 et seq. 
(k)  Outdoor wood furnaces. An outdoor wood furnace may be installed and used in the City of South Lyon in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  A building permit must be applied for and approved by the City of South Lyon Building Department prior to the installation of an outdoor wood furnace. 
(2)  Fuel burned in the outdoor wood furnace shall be only clean wood, wood pellets made from clean wood, or other listed fuels specifically permitted by the manufacturer's instructions such as fuel oil, natural gas or propane backup. 
(3)  The following items are strictly prohibited in outdoor wood furnaces: 
 Any material not listed in subsection (2). 
 Wood that has been painted, varnished, or coated with similar material and/or has been pressure treated with preservatives and contains resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
 Rubbish or garbage, including but not limited to food wastes, food packaging, food wraps. 
 Any plastic materials including but not limited to nylon, PVC, ABS, polystyrene or urethane foam, and synthetic fabrics, plastic films and plastic containers. 
 Rubber, including tires or other synthetic rubber-like products. 
 Newspaper, cardboard, or any paper with ink or dye products. 
 Any other items not specifically allowed by the manufacturer or this provision. 
(l)  Fire suppression training. Notwithstanding subsections (e) and (f) of this section, structures and other materials may be burned for fire prevention training only in accordance with all of the following provisions. 
(1)  The burn must be exclusively for fire prevention training. The burning shall not be used as a means to dispose of waste material including tires and other hazardous materials. 
(2)  All asbestos must be removed prior to conducting the fire suppression training. If the structure is a residential dwelling, the owner may remove the asbestos or have it removed by a licensed abatement contractor. If it is a commercial building, all asbestos must be removed by a licensed abatement contractor. A listing of accredited individuals and companies licensed by the Department of Energy Labor, and Economic Growth Asbestos Program can be accessed at www.dleg.state.mi.us/asbestos_program. 
(3)  A notification of the demolition must be submitted to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment, Air Quality Division at least ten business days prior to burning a standing structure. The notification must be submitted using Form EQP 5661 "Notification of Intent to Renovate/Demolish." 
(4)  All ash and demolished materials must be disposed of in an approved landfill or at an alternate location approved by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment. 
(5)  Asphalt shingles and asphalt or plastic siding shall be removed prior to the practice burn unless the fire chief determines that they are necessary for the fire practice. 
(6)  At least 48 hours before a planned practice burn, residents within 500 feet of the site of the proposed burn shall be notified. 
(7)  All fire suppression training should conform to the guidelines established by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard on Live Fire Training Evolutions (NFPA 1403). 
(m)  Liability. A person utilizing or maintaining an outdoor fire shall be responsible for all fire suppression costs and any other liability resulting from damage caused by the fire. 
(n)  Right of entry and inspection. The fire chief or any authorized officer, agent, employee or representative of the City of South Lyon who presents credentials may inspect any property for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(o)  Enforcement and penalties. 
(1)  The fire chief, police chief, and/or their designees are authorized to enforce the provisions of this section. 
(2)  Any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or governmental entity who violates any of the provisions of this section or fails to comply with a duly authorized order issued pursuant to this section shall be deemed to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction as defined by Michigan Statute which shall be punishable by civil fine determined in accordance with the schedule outlined in Code of Ordinances City of South Lyon, section 2-246, schedule of civil fines established. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(5); Ord. of 6-29-11, §§ 1-15) 
Sec. 46-2. - Nuisance per se. 
    Any building, structure or premises erected, used, occupied or maintained in violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se. Upon application to any court of competent jurisdiction, the court may order the nuisance abated and/or the violation, or threatened violation, restrained and enjoined. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(6)) 
Secs. 46-3-46-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Chapter 95 of the 1988 Code was described as having been saved from repeal, kept on file and available for public inspection at the office of the city clerk. The city submitted a copy of chapter 95 to be included in this publication. Chapter 95 was codified as chapter 46, article II, of this publication. References to chapter 95 have been history noted as though they appeared in the 1988 Code. 

Sec. 46-31. - Adoption of code. 
    The International Fire Code, 2015 Edition, including appendices B, C, D, E, F, H, I, K, L and M, as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fire code of the city, in the State of Michigan regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life and property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fire code on file in the office of the city are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 46-32 of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 8.11; Ord. of 7-24-06; Ord. of 2-9-09(1); Ord. No. 02-19, Pt. I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 46-32. - Supplemental information and amendments. 
(a)  That the following sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby revised as follows: 
Section 101.1. Insert "City of South Lyon." 
Section 105.1.1 is revised to read as follows: 
"Permits required by this code shall be obtained from the building official. Permit fees, if any shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times and shall be readily available for inspection by the building official." 
Section 105.6 is revised to read as follows: 
"The building official is authorized to issue operational permits for the operations set forth in Sections 105.6.1 through 105.6.48 upon consultation with the fire code official." 
Section 105.7 is revised to read as follows: 
"The building official is authorized to issue construction permits for work as set forth in Section 105.7.1 through 105.7.18." 
Section 109.4 is revised to read as follows: 
"Failure to comply. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or fail to comply with any order issued pursuant to any section thereof shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties provided for in Section 18-36 of the City Code. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense." 
Section 111.4 is revised to read as follows: 
"Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be responsible for committing a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00." 
Section 307 is deleted. 
(b)  That the geographic limits referred to in certain sections of the 2015 International Fire Code are hereby established as follows: 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 is revised to read as follows: 
"The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the City." 
Section 5706.2.4.4 is revised to read as follows: 
"The storage of Class I and II liquids in above-ground tanks is allowed only in districts zoned I-1 and I-2." 
Section 5806.2 is revised to read as follows: 
"Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited in the City." 
Section 6104.2 is revised to read as follows: 
"Within the limits established by law restricting the storage of liquefied petroleum gas for the protection of heavily populated or congested areas, the aggregate capacity of any one installation shall not exceed a water capacity of 2,000 gallons. (7570 L). 
Exception: In particular installations this capacity limit shall be determined by the building official, after consultation with the fire code official and consideration of special features such as topographical conditions, nature of occupancy, and proximity to buildings, capacity of proposed containers, degree of fire protection to be provided and capabilities of the local fire department." 
(c)  Constitutionality. That if any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed the ordinance from which this article is derived, and each section, subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases be declared unconstitutional. 
(d)  Effect. That nothing in this article or in the fire code hereby adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited in the ordinance from which this article is derived; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this article. 
(e)  Publication. That the city clerk shall publish the ordinance from which this article is derived in a manner required by law. A complete copy of the code is made available at the office of the city clerk in compliance with state law requiring that records of public offices be made available to the general public. 
(Code 1988, § 8.12; Ord. of 7-24-06; Ord. of 2-9-09(1); Ord. No. 02-19, Pt. II, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 46-33. - Enforcement; inspections. 
(a)  The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the fire prevention bureau of the fire department of the City of South Lyon and which shall be operated under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. 
(b)  The chief of the fire department may detail such members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(1)) 
Sec. 46-34. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the fire department shall have the power to allow a party to depart from the literal requirements of the sections contained in this chapter, including the International Fire Code, as adopted, upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon, shall be entered upon the records of the fire department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(2); Ord. of 7-24-06) 
Sec. 46-35. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever the chief of the fire department shall refuse to grant a modification of the fire code as set forth in section 46-34, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the zoning board of appeals in writing within 14 days from the date of the decision. 
(b)  Whenever the building inspector shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the Code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the building inspector to the zoning board of appeals in writing within 14 days from the date of the decision. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department shall be an ex officio member of the zoning board of appeals for any matter that is submitted to said board that arises out of this chapter but shall have no vote on any matter before the zoning board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(2); Ord. of 7-24-06) 
Sec. 46-36. - Interpretation and application. 
    Where the provisions of the Michigan State Police Fire Marshal's Regulations impose more restrictive regulations than required of this code, then the fire marshal's regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. of 9-9-96(5), § 8.12(4)) 
Sec. 46-37. - Inspections of fire hydrants. 
(a)  Owner means a person, corporation, domestic or foreign business, limited liability corporation or other business entity or charitable organization owning a piece of property. 
(b)  Private fire hydrant means a fire hydrant that is located on a parcel of privately owned property and not located in a public right-of-way. 
(c)  An owner shall inspect the fire hydrant after each use and/or annually, whichever is the shortest amount of time, to ensure that it is compliant with the standards set forth in the NFPA 25 guidelines. A copy of said guidelines shall be made available upon request to the fire inspector. 
(d)  An owner shall provide a copy of said inspection to the fire inspector by April 30 of each year or within seven days after the use of said fire hydrant. 
(e)  A violation of this section shall be a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 2-9-02(1)) 
Sec. 46-38. - Notice to be given regarding inspection of private fire hydrants and charges. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to give general notice in the following manner to every owner having charge of any lands in this city wherein a private fire hydrant is located if an inspection has not been provided pursuant to the previous section. 
(b)  Notices shall be mailed to the owner of record of the property as the same shall appear in the records of the City of South Lyon, and similar notice shall also be published once in the official newspaper. These notices shall set forth in effect that all private fire hydrants shall be inspected before a certain date, which date shall be fixed by the fire inspector. The posting and publication of such notices shall take place at least ten days prior to the date upon which the private fire hydrants shall be inspected and such notice shall read as follows: 
"To the owners of any lands in the City of South Lyon: Notice is hereby given that all private fire hydrants in the City of South Lyon, Oakland County, Michigan, must be inspected on or before the ________ day of _______, 20___. 
Failure to comply with this notice on or before the date mentioned shall make the parties so failing liable for the inspection of same at a charge of $175.00 for the first hour and $75.00 for each additional hour, to be levied and collected against the property in the manner provided by law. 
South Lyon, Michigan 
________, 20___ 
Fire Inspector, City of South Lyon" 
(c)  In case the owner having charge of any land in the City of South Lyon shall refuse or neglect to inspect the private fire hydrant on or before the date stated in such notice, the City of South Lyon, through its employees, may enter upon the land and to cause all such inspections to be made with as little damage to vegetation to be made and to charge the cost thereof, together with ten percent of such cost to cover contingent expenses, against the owner of said premises and against the property itself. 
(Ord. of 2-9-02(1)) 
Sec. 46-39. - Cost to be charged against owner. 
    The city clerk shall keep a record of the cost of the inspection of the private fire hydrants upon each separate lot and parcel of land by the city, and shall notify the owner of the said premises by ordinary mail or otherwise, if the address of such owner be known, that the city has inspected the fire hydrant in accordance with the provisions of this article, together with a statement of the amount due the city. If the cost and charges due the city for inspecting the fire hydrant upon any lot or parcel of land in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not have been collected on or before December 31 of the year in which the expense was incurred by the city, the same shall be reported by the city clerk to the council to be collected by a special assessment, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the City of South Lyon and chapter 78. 
(Ord. of 2-9-02(1)) 
Secs. 46-40-46-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 46-61. - Department head. 
    The fire department of the City of South Lyon shall be headed by the fire chief. 
(Code 1988, § 1.71) 
Sec. 46-62. - Firefighters. 
    Firefighters shall perform such duties and responsibilities as shall be conferred upon them from time to time by the Fire Chief of the City of South Lyon, and said firefighters shall have and perform such duties as imposed upon firefighters by any administrative directive, resolution, the Charter of the City of South Lyon, the South Lyon City Code and state and federal law. 
(Code 1988, § 1.72; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 46-63. - Fire chief's duties. 
    The fire chief shall be the administrator and head of the fire department who shall be charged with the prevention and extinguishment of fires, the protection of life and property against fire, the removal of fire hazards, and the performance of other public services of an emergency nature assigned to the department. The fire chief may delegate any and all such duties, responsibilities, and functions to firefighters within his department. The fire chief shall in addition thereto have such powers, duties and responsibilities as from time to time shall lawfully be conferred upon him by the Manager of the City of South Lyon, and by law. Whenever any statute, ordinance, this Code, municipal regulation or law shall require a duty or responsibility of the fire chief, such duties and/or responsibilities shall be assumed or performed in the City of South Lyon by the fire chief. 
(Code 1988, § 1.73; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 46-64. - Appointments and dismissals. 
    The fire chief shall be appointed and/or dismissed by the city manager. The fire chief shall have the authority to appoint, promote, and/or dismiss firefighters subject to approval from the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.74; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 46-65. - Charter benefits. 
    Firefighters of the City of South Lyon shall be entitled to all the rights, privileges and benefits heretofore granted and established for firefighters under section 6.12(b) of the Charter of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.75; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 11-26-12) 
Sec. 46-66. - Department rules. 
    The fire chief shall from time to time, subject to approval from the city manager, adopt procedures, directives, rules, and regulations as he may deem expedient for the proper administration of the fire department and/or the duties, responsibilities and privileges of firefighters, and provided further that such regulations shall not be in conflict with any existing collective bargaining agreement between the City of South Lyon and the members of the fire department; 
(Code 1988, § 1.76; Ord. No. 09-12, Pt. I, 11-26-12) 
Secs. 46-67-46-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS 

Sec. 46-91. - Duties. 
    Each residential unit shall be equipped with an approved, operable smoke detector(s) as outlined in section 46-95 upon the construction, sale, transfer or major renovation of said residential unit. 
(Code 1988, § 9.351) 
Sec. 46-92. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Approved detectors means all smoke detectors which comply with the specifications of the Underwriters Laboratories Inc., or any other nationally recognized laboratory standards and bear a label indicating that the detector has been so listed and approved. 
    Construction means the erection of a new residential unit. Residential units not completed prior to the effective date of Ordinance 152 shall be considered under construction and governed by the terms of this article. 
    Major renovation means any repair, remodeling or renovation of the interior of an existing residential unit which requires the expenditure of $3,000.00 in labor and materials. Labor performed by the owner of the residential unit or labor donated shall be assigned a reasonable value and included in the total amount expended on a major renovation. 
    Residential unit means all buildings or structures in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided for individuals with or without dining facilities. The term residential unit shall include, but not be limited to, the following: one-family, two-family, multi-family, apartment house, boardinghouse, tourist house, dormitory and senior citizen and adult foster care facilities. 
    Sale or transfer means conveyance of any interest in a residential unit except by mortgage. The sale or transfer shall be deemed to occur upon transfer of title, execution of a land contract or the exercise of an option to purchase the residential unit. 
    Smoke detector means an instrument which detects visible or invisible particles of combustion and activates a signaling device upon such detection. 
(Code 1988, § 9.352) 
Sec. 46-93. - Owner's responsibility to install and maintain. 
    It shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner or landlord of the residential unit to install and maintain an approved and operable smoke detector(s) in the residential unit. In the case of a sale or transfer of a residential unit, it shall be the duty of the owner immediately prior to the conveyance of the residential unit to install an approved and operable smoke detector(s). 
(Code 1988, § 9.353) 
Sec. 46-94. - Certificate of compliance and time for completion. 
    Prior to the sale or transfer of a residential unit, the owner of the residential unit shall obtain a certificate of compliance from the city clerk. Said certificate shall be completed by the owner of the residential unit and returned to the city clerk prior to the sale or transfer of the residential unit. 
(1)  In the case of new construction, the certificate of compliance shall be completed and returned to the city clerk prior to the issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy. 
(2)  In the case of a major renovation, the form shall be completed and returned to the city clerk prior to final inspection of the major renovation by the city inspector. 
(Code 1988, § 9.354) 
Sec. 46-95. - Number of smoke detectors required. 
(a)  One or more smoke detectors shall be installed in all single-family residential units. At least one smoke detector shall be installed on the first living level. Smoke detectors shall also be installed at the top of each stairwell leading to any occupied area. If the location at the top of the stairwell is more than 15 feet from the doorway leading to a room to be used for sleeping purposes, additional units shall be installed within a 15-foot radius of said doorway. 
(b)  Where a multi-family residential unit is involved, a minimum of one smoke detector shall be installed within 15 feet of any doorway leading to a room used for sleeping purposes in each single-family residential unit. In addition, approved and operable smoke detectors shall be required to be located at the uppermost ceiling of all interior stairwells. 
(Code 1988, § 9.355) 
Sec. 46-96. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 9.356; Ord. of 11-28-94(28), § 1) 
Secs. 46-97-46-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FIREWORKS CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-12, Pts. I, II, adopted September 24, 2012, repealed the former Art. V., §§ 46-121-46-127, 46-141-46-150, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 46-121. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Act means the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act No. 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq., as amended. 
    APA standard 87-1 means 2001 APA standard 87-1, standard for construction and approval for transportation of fireworks, novelties, and theatrical pyrotechnics, published by the American Pyrotechnics Association of Bethesda, Maryland. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States consumer product safety commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5, Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, homemade fireworks, and special effects. 
    Homemade fireworks means any composition or device designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation that is not produced by a commercial manufacturer and does not comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507. 
    Livestock means those species of animals used for human food and fiber or those species of animals used for service to humans. Livestock includes, but is not limited to, cattle, sheep, new world camelids, goats, bison, privately owned cervids, ratites, swine, equine, poultry, aquaculture, and rabbits. Livestock does not include dogs and cats. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    Novelties means that term as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (i) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter. 
(4)  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
    Person means an individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 01-19, Pt. I, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 46-122. - General prohibition on ignition, discharge, and use of fireworks; exception. 
    No person shall ignite, discharge, or use fireworks within the city at any time, except: 
(1)  A person may ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on the following days after 11:00 a.m.: 
a.  December 31 until 1:00 a.m. January 1; 
b.  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; 
c.  June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days; 
d.  July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m.; 
e.  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(2)  This section shall not apply to low-impact fireworks. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 07-13, Pt. I, 7-22-13; Ord. No. 01-19, Pt. II, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 46-123. - Additional prohibitions and regulations. 
(a)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, including streets, roads, and rights-of-way, school property, church property, or the private property of another, without the express written permission to use fireworks on those premises from the owner or person or entity legally in possession and control thereof. 
(b)  A person shall not willfully cause fireworks to enter, by way of ignition, discharge, use or other means, upon the lands or premises of another without the express permission of the owner or occupant, or agent or servant of the owner or occupant of the lands or premises. A person who pleads or is found responsible for a violation of this subsection shall be presumed responsible for any resulting property damage and shall be required to pay full restitution to the owner and/or occupant of the lands or premises. 
(c)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance or a combination of both, 
(d)  A minor shall not possess, ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks. 
(e)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks in a manner that is intended to harass, scare, or injure livestock. 
(f)  A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks if the fire chief implements a no burning restriction. 
(1)  For purposes of this subsection, if the environmental concerns based on the department of natural resources fire division criteria are elevated to extreme fire conditions or very high fire conditions for 72 consecutive hours, the fire chief, in consultation with the department of natural resources, may implement, impose and enforce a no burning restriction that includes a ban on the ignition, discharge, and use of consumer fireworks, within the city. If a no burning restriction is implemented under this subsection, the fire chief or his designee shall ensure that adequate notice of the restriction is provided to the public. 
(2)  Not more than 24 hours after the fire condition is downgraded from extreme or very high fire conditions, the fire chief shall lift the no burning restriction, including a ban on the ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks within the city, and inform the public that the restriction has been lifted in the same manner that the restriction was announced or made known to the public. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 01-19, Pt. III, 2-11-19) 
Sec. 46-124. - Novelties not regulated. 
    This article does not apply to novelties. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12) 
Sec. 46-125. - Enforcement. 
    This article may be enforced by the fire chief, police chief, their designees, and sworn law enforcement officers. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12) 
Sec. 46-126. - Determination of violation; seizure of fireworks. 
    If an enforcing official determines that a violation of this article has occurred, the official may seize the fireworks as evidence of such violation. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12) 
Sec. 46-127. - Penalties. 
(1)  A person that violates subsection 46-122(1) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $1,000.00 for each violation, and $500.00 of the civil fine paid shall be remitted to the city police department. 
(2)  A person that violates this article, other than a subsection 46-122(1), is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of not more than $1,000.00, plus any costs, damages, and expenses as provided in sections 1-14, and 2-241 through 2-249 of the City of South Lyon Code of Ordinances and this article. 
(3)  In addition to any other penalties provided for herein, except for a violation of subsection 46-122(1), a person found responsible for a violation of this article shall pay the actual costs of securing, seizing, storing, and disposing of any fireworks and evidence seized. 
(Ord. No. 08-12, Pt. II, 9-24-12; Ord. No. 01-19, Pt. I, 2-11-19) 
Secs. 46-128-46-150. - Reserved. 
Chapter 50 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Capacity means the maximum number of seating facilities for patrons. 
    Clerk means the city clerk. 
    Drive-in restaurant means a restaurant wherein food, drink, ice cream, confections or dairy products are dispensed to patrons who mainly arrive by vehicle and are served therein. 
    Employee means any person who handles food or drink during preparation or serving, or who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, or who is employed in a room in which food or drink is prepared or served. 
    Health department means the city health department. 
    Health officer means the person designated to act as city health officer. 
    Itinerant restaurant means any restaurant operating for a temporary period in connection with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition or other similar gathering. 
    Restaurant means restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, short order cafe, luncheonette, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, and all other eating or drinking establishments, as well as kitchens or other places in which food or drink is prepared for sale on the premises or elsewhere. 
    Utensils means and shall include any kitchenware, tableware, glassware, cutlery, containers or other equipment with which food or drink comes in contact during storage, preparation or service. 
(Code 1988, § 6.1) 
Sec. 50-32. - Sanitation requirements for restaurants. 
    All restaurants shall comply with all of the following items of sanitation. 
(1)  Floors. The floors of all rooms in which food or drink is stored, prepared, or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned, shall be smooth, and shall be kept clean and in good repair. 
(2)  Walls and ceilings. Walls and ceilings of all rooms shall be kept clean and in good repair. All walls and ceilings of rooms in which food or drink is prepared shall be furnished in light color. The walls of all rooms in which food or drink is prepared or utensils are washed shall have a smooth, washable surface. 
(3)  Doors and windows. When flies are prevalent, all openings into the outer air shall be effectively screened and doors shall be self-closing unless other effective means are provided to prevent the entrance of flies. 
(4)  Lighting. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared, or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well lighted. 
(5)  Ventilation. All rooms in which food or drink is stored or prepared, or served, or in which utensils are washed, shall be well ventilated. 
(6)  Toilet facilities. 
a.  Generally. Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with chapter 18. Toilet rooms shall not open directly into any food processing room. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair, and well lighted and ventilated. Handwashing signs shall be posted in each toilet room used by employees. 
b.  Ventilation. All toilet rooms shall be properly vented by exterior windows or mechanical means to the outside air. 
c.  Lighting. All toilet rooms and passageways leading to the same shall be well lighted. 
d.  Maintenance. All toilet rooms shall be kept clean. Sanitary toilet paper shall be provided. 
e.  Other establishments. Establishments that are both restaurant and drive-in restaurant or establishments serving alcoholic beverages shall provide proper and adequate toilet facilities for employees and patrons. Separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex and adequate urinals shall be provided in the men's toilet. The number of fixtures provided shall be on the basis of the seating capacity of the establishment. 
(7)  Lavatory facilities. Adequate and convenient handwashing facilities shall be provided, including hot and cold running water, soap and dispenser, and approved sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited. No employee shall resume work after using the toilet room without first washing his hands. 
(8)  Water supply. Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water supply shall be from the city water system. 
(9)  Construction of utensils and equipment. All multi-use utensils and all show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or lead shall not be used: provided, that solder containing lead may be used for jointing. 
(10)  Cleaning and bactericidal treatment of utensils and equipment. All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerators, stoves, hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single-service containers shall be used only once. 
All multi-service eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after each usage. All multi-use utensils used in the preparation of food and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used, shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose. No article, polish, or other substance containing any cyanide preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleansing or polishing of utensils. 
(11)  Storage and handling of utensils and equipment. After bactericidal treatment utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies, dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to prevent contamination as far as practicable. Single-service utensils shall be purchased only in sanitary containers, shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. 
(12)  Disposal of wastes. All wastes shall be properly disposed of, and all garbage and trash shall be kept in suitable receptacles, in such manner as not to become a nuisance. 
(13)  Refrigeration. All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at or below 45 degrees Fahrenheit, except when being prepared or served. Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of. 
(14)  Wholesomeness of food and drink. All food and drink shall be clean, wholesome, free from spoilage, and so prepared as to be safe for human consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be served in the individual original containers in which they were received from the distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing device: provided, that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service. All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if shucked shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the shucking plant. Artificial or natural ice shall be from an approved source. 
(15)  Storage, display and serving of food. All food and drink shall be stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies, vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet infection, overhead leakage and other contamination; no animals or fowls shall be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored. All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be used. 
(16)  Cleanliness of employees. All employees shall wear clean garments and shall keep their hands clean at all times while engaged in handling food, drink, utensils, or equipment. Employees shall not expectorate or use tobacco in any form in rooms in which food is prepared. 
(17)  Miscellaneous. The premises of all restaurants shall be kept clean and free of litter or rubbish. None of the operations connected with a restaurant shall be conducted in any room used as living or sleeping quarters. Adequate lockers or dressing rooms shall be provided for employees' clothing and shall be kept clean. Soiled linens, coats, and aprons shall be kept in containers provided for this purpose. 
(18)  Itinerant restaurants. Itinerant restaurants shall be constructed and operated in an approved manner. 
(Code 1988, § 6.2) 
Sec. 50-33. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
    Samples of food, drink and other substances may be taken and examined by the health officer as often as may be necessary for the detection of unwholesomeness or adulteration. The health officer may condemn and forbid the sale of, or cause to be removed or destroyed, any food or drink which is unwholesome or adulterated. 
(Code 1988, § 6.3) 
Sec. 50-34. - Drive-in restaurants. 
(a)  Retaining wall or barrier. A retaining wall or barrier of a minimum of 26 inches in height, and of a design approved by the building inspector and subject to all requirements of chapter 18 (building regulations) shall be erected around the periphery of the area utilized for parking or dispensing, and such other places as are necessary, for the purpose of containing debris and refuse, provided, however, that such wall or barrier, when erected on a side of the premises adjacent to residential property, shall be of solid construction and a minimum of 48 inches in height, so as to prevent spillage of light from headlamps of vehicles utilizing the premises, onto said adjacent residential property, provided, further, that said wall or barrier is not required on the side or sides adjacent to any street or roadway serving the premises for ingress and egress. Said wall or barrier shall be of such type as to maintain harmony, insofar as is practicable, with the character of the surrounding properties, and shall not be allowed to fall into disrepair and shall be maintained and/or painted so as not to become an eyesore. 
(b)  Ingress and egress. There shall be one ingress and one egress (minimum 15 feet; maximum 30 feet) unless the physical conditions will permit more or less, as determined by the police department. The ingress and egress shall not be on residential streets. There shall be a proper sign denoting each entrance and exit. 
(c)  Waste paper containers. Waste paper containers shall be available and be spaced in such a fashion that one covered container will service four vehicles. Minimum capacity per container will be 30 gallons bulk material. Containers shall be painted and properly identified and be of self-closing type. 
(d)  Sounding of horns; posting of signs. No drive-in restaurant licensee shall permit the sounding of horns or other devices that produce loud and harsh noises on the premises and to this end he shall post one or more plainly legible signs notifying all patrons that hornblowing or sounding of other devices is not permitted on the premises to attract attention in order to obtain service. 
(e)  Noise and other disturbances by patrons. No person on the premises of a drive-in restaurant shall race the motor of any motor vehicle, blow his horn, needlessly bring to a sudden stop or start any motor vehicle, block any traffic aisle, remain on the premises for purposes other than the purchasing and consumption of food products or beverages sold by such restaurant, or make or cause to be made any other loud unseemly noise, nuisances or disturbances whereby the quiet and good order of the premises or of the neighborhood is disturbed. 
(Code 1988, § 6.4) 
Sec. 50-35. - License required. 
    No person shall operate a restaurant in the city who does not possess an unrevoked license of current issue granted in accordance with chapter 22. No such license shall be granted except on certification by the health officer. Such license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the restaurant. Only persons who comply with the requirements of this article shall be entitled to receive and retain such license. A person conducting an itinerant restaurant shall also be required to secure a license, which license shall be prominently displayed. 
(Code 1988, § 6.5) 
Sec. 50-36. - Enforcement. 
    The health officer shall have the authority and duty to enforce this article. 
(Code 1988, § 6.6) 
Sec. 50-37. - Inspections. 
(a)  At least once every six months, or as often as necessary, the health officer shall inspect every restaurant located within the city. 
(b)  The health officer shall have authority to enter any building or part thereof which is used, or which he has reason to believe is used for the storage, preparation, sale, serving or distribution of food or drink for human consumption, to inspect the premises, furniture, equipment, dishes or utensils used therein, to determine whether or not the sanitary requirements of this article are complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 6.7) 
Sec. 50-38. - Violations. 
    If, on inspection, the health officer finds any violation of the requirements of this article, he shall issue an order to the licensee or person in charge of the restaurant directing the correction of such violation within such reasonable time as he shall deem proper. 
(Code 1988, § 6.8) 
Sec. 50-39. - Failure to correct violations. 
    If the health officer finds a continuation of the violation upon a second inspection after such reasonable time, he shall suspend the license of the restaurant until such violations have been corrected. 
(Code 1988, § 6.9) 
Sec. 50-40. - Review of refusal, suspension or revocation of license. 
    When any license shall be refused, suspended or revoked by the health officer under the provisions of this article, the licensee or applicant shall be entitled to a hearing before the council upon timely application therefor in the manner prescribed in chapter 22, article II, for the review of license suspensions and revocations. 
(Code 1988, § 6.10) 
Sec. 50-41. - Immediate suspensions. 
    If the health officer finds insanitary conditions in any restaurant such that it would be immediately dangerous to the health of the general public, he may immediately suspend the license of and close the restaurant until such insanitary conditions are corrected, following which he shall give a written notice in a reasonable time to the licensee or the responsible representative in charge stating his reasons for closing the restaurant. A continuance to operate after receipt of such written notice shall constitute a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 6.11) 
Sec. 50-42. - Disease control. 
    No person who is affected with any disease in a communicable form or is a carrier of such disease shall work in any restaurant, and no restaurant shall employ any such person or any person suspected of being affected with any disease in a communicable form or of being a carrier of such disease. If the restaurant manager suspects that any employee has contracted any disease in a communicable form or has become a carrier of such disease he shall notify the health officer immediately. A placard containing this section shall be posted in all toilet rooms. 
(Code 1988, § 6.12) 
Sec. 50-43. - Food handler's card. 
(a)  No person shall be employed in a restaurant without first having obtained a food handler's card of current issue as provided in this article. 
(b)  Every employee shall give proof that he is not infected with any disease in communicable form, on forms approved by the health department and furnished by the clerk; such form to be known as "Foodhandler's Responsibility Agreement." This form will then be presented to the health department and if approved, the clerk, or health officer, may issue the foodhandler's card. 
(c)  All foodhandler's cards shall be in effect for one calendar year from the date of issue, after which time the employee shall secure a new card in the manner prescribed. 
(Code 1988, § 6.13) 
Sec. 50-44. - Procedure when infection suspected. 
    When suspicion arises as to the possibility of transmission of infection from any restaurant employee the health officer is authorized to require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from all restaurants; 
(2)  The immediate closing of the restaurant concerned until no further danger of disease outbreak exists, in the opinion of the health officer; 
(3)  Adequate medical examination of the employee and of his associates, with such laboratory examinations as may be indicated. 
(Code 1988, § 6.14) 
Sec. 50-45. - Additional regulations. 
    The health officer may formulate and promulgate such reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this article, as he may deem necessary to govern the inspection and operation of food establishments within the city, and no person shall disobey any such rule or regulation. 
(Code 1988, § 6.15) 
Sec. 50-46. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(9), § 1(6.16)) 
Chapter 54 - LAW ENFORCEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 54-1-54-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 

Sec. 54-31. - Department head. 
    The police department shall be headed by the chief of police for the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.61) 
Sec. 54-32. - Police officers. 
    Police officers employed by the City of South Lyon shall perform such duties and responsibilities as shall be conferred upon them from time to time by the chief of police of the City of South Lyon, and said police officers shall have and perform such duties as are imposed upon policemen by any administrative directive, resolution, the Charter of the City of South Lyon, and the South Lyon City Code, and state and federal law. 
(Code 1988, § 1.62) 
Sec. 54-33. - Duties of chief of police. 
    The chief of police shall be the administrator and head of the department of police. The police chief shall be responsible for administering the office of police chief as provided in chapter VI of the Charter of the City of South Lyon, and said director may delegate any or all such duties, responsibilities, and functions to an officer in the police department. The police chief shall in addition thereto have such powers, duties and responsibilities as from time to time shall lawfully be conferred upon him by the manager of the City of South Lyon, and by law. 
(Code 1988, § 1.63) 
Sec. 54-34. - Appointments and dismissals. 
    The chief of police and all police officers of the City of South Lyon shall be appointed by and/or dismissed by the city manager, and all new appointments shall be made from the eligibility list compiled from recognized examinations such as those conducted by the Michigan Municipal League. The chief of police shall, from time to time, recommend to the manager the organization and functions of the police department, including its personnel strength and chain of command. Pursuant to chapter VI of the Charter of the City of South Lyon, the manager shall submit to the council, for review and concurrence, all proposed programs, organizations and reorganizations involving the police department and its functions, including acquisition and use of all facilities and equipment thereby required, subject to budgetary control by the council of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.64) 
Sec. 54-35. - Charter benefits. 
    Police officers of the City of South Lyon shall be entitled to all of the rights, privileges and benefits heretofore granted and established for policemen under chapter VI, section 6.12(b), of the Charter of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.65) 
Sec. 54-36. - Department rules. 
    The manager shall, from time to time, adopt such rules and regulations as he may deem expedient for the proper administration of the police department and/or the duties, responsibilities and privileges of police officers, and provided further that such regulations shall not be in conflict with any existing collective bargaining agreement between the City of South Lyon and the members of the police department; provided further that such regulations shall become effective 24 hours after the same shall be posted on the bulletin board in the office of the chief of police. 
(Code 1988, § 1.66) 
Secs. 54-37-54-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 

Sec. 54-61. - Scope of article. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all unclaimed money or property, other than motor vehicles, which is recovered by the City of South Lyon and is not claimed within six months after recovery. 
(Code 1988, § 9.360) 
Sec. 54-62. - Disposition of money. 
(a)  All moneys recovered by the South Lyon police department or any other city employee shall be held at the South Lyon police department for a period of six months from the date of recovery. At the expiration of the six-month period the money shall be placed in the general fund of the City of South Lyon. 
(b)  All monies or property recovered by citizens and turned into the City of South Lyon shall be held by the police department for a period of six months. After the expiration of the holding period, the unclaimed money or property shall be returned to the finder, if known, and if unknown, disposed of in accordance with section 54-63. 
(Code 1988, § 9.361) 
Sec. 54-63. - Sale procedure. 
    After the expiration of the six months from the date of recovery any property may be sold at public auction or public bidding in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Prior to any auction sale or offering property for bids, the South Lyon City Clerk shall post a notice thereof in the police building and the city hall and shall publish said notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least one week prior to said sale. 
(2)  Said notice shall describe any money recovered or held and also any other property recovered and held together with the time and place of public sale or bid deadline at which said other property may be purchased by the highest bidder. Said highest bidder shall receive a bill of sale for the property bought from the City of South Lyon. When property is disposed of by means other than public auction, a report of the property disposed of and the basis of disposal shall be reported to the city council. 
(3)  Until the date of said sale, the money or other property may be claimed at the South Lyon Police Department and, if proof of ownership is provided, such money or other property shall be turned over to the claimant, and the sale shall be cancelled insofar as such property is concerned. 
(Code 1988, § 9.362; Ord. of 6-22-09(2)) 
Sec. 54-64. - Disposition of proceeds. 
    After the holding of such auction sale, the money received from such sale, after deducting the cost of conducting it, and any other money recovered and held which was included in the notice provided for in subsection 54-63(1) shall be turned over to the city treasurer to be credited to the general fund. 
(Code 1988, § 9.363) 
Sec. 54-65. - Reimbursement of owner. 
(a)  After notice and sale as provided herein, the owner may file a claim and, upon proving ownership of said property, shall be reimbursed by the city treasurer in an amount not to exceed the amount paid for such goods at said sale. Provided, however, that such a claim must be filed with the city clerk not later than one year after said sale. The period and provisions for claiming ownership hereunder shall also apply to any recovered money which was listed in said notice. 
(b)  The purchaser of any property sold at auction conducted pursuant to this article shall own the same free of any claims by the previous owner, who shall be limited to filing a claim under subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Except as provided in this section, no claim shall be valid to obtain any money or other property recovered after notice and sale as provided in this chapter, said property and money being considered as abandoned and belonging to the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.364) 
Sec. 54-66. - Disposition of unsold property. 
    Any property remaining after said sale may be disposed of as directed by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 9.365) 
Chapter 56 - MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 56-1-56-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED 

Sec. 56-31. - Marihuana establishments prohibited. 
    The City of South Lyon ordains that pursuant to the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, Section 6.1, the City elects to prohibit marihuana establishments within its boundaries. 
(Ord. No. 11-18, Pt. I, 11-12-18 
Secs. 56-32-56-49. - Reserved. 
Chapter 58 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Criminal Code of the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.131) 
Sec. 58-2. - Rules of construction. 
    The rule that a criminal statute is to be strictly construed shall not apply to this code or any of the provisions thereof. All provisions of this code shall be construed according to the fair import of their terms, to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law. 
(Code 1988, § 9.132) 
Sec. 58-3. - Miscellaneous definitions and rules of construction in this chapter. 
(a)  The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
(b)  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter genders. 
(c)  The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accused, and similar words, means and includes, unless a contrary intention appears, public and private corporations, copartnerships, and unincorporated or voluntary associations. 
    Act or doing of an act mean and shall include "omission to act." 
    Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor as set forth in article VII, section 7104, of the State of Michigan Public Act Number 368 of 1978, as amended, which is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth herein. 
    Firearm shall mean any weapon or device from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or other mass by means of explosives, compressed air or gas or by means of springs, levers, or other mechanical device. 
    Property means any matter or thing upon or in respect to which any offense may be committed. 
    Public place means any street, alley, park, public building, any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public, and other place which is open to the public view, or to which the public has access. 
    Writing, written, and any term of like import means and includes words printed, painted, engraved, lithographed, photographed or otherwise copied, traced or made visible to the eye. 
(Code 1988, § 9.133) 
Sec. 58-4. - Abandoned ice boxes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly leave in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container of a kind and size sufficient to permit the entrapment and suffocation of a child therein, without first removing the snap-lock or other locking device from the lid or cover thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.301) 
Sec. 58-5. - Excavations. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any land to dig, or cause to be dug, an excavation or a partially constructed basement for any building or structure on his land and leave the same for more than 90 days after such excavation has been commenced without covering or safely fencing the same. 
(Code 1988, § 9.302) 
Secs. 58-6-58-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 58-31-58-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DISORDERLY PERSONS 

Sec. 58-51. - Assault. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and battery on any person. 
(b)  Except as provided in by MCL 750.81(3), 750.81(4), 750.81a, 750.82, 750.83, 750.84, and 750.86, an individual who assaults or assaults and batters his or her spouse or former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 9.136; Ord. of 4-28-97, § 1) 
Sec. 58-52. - Drugged; drunk and disorderly. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of any narcotic drug in any public place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to be intoxicated in a public place and either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.137) 
Sec. 58-53. - Interference with conduct of business; interference with meetings of a public body. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously interfere with the orderly conduct of any place of business or maliciously create a disturbance in any street, alley, highway, public building, grounds or park or at any election. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb, or aid in disturbing, the public peace at any meeting of a public body by loud, boisterous, violent, or vulgar conduct. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to comply with an order or directive of the person in charge of a meeting of a public body when that person in charge is requesting compliance with rules established and recorded by the public body for the conduct of persons addressing a meeting of the public body. 
(Code 1988, § 9.138; Ord. No. 05-18, Pt. II, 6-21-18) 
Sec. 58-54. - Disturbance at an athletic event. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to invade the playing areas of any athletic contest or exhibition while in progress, except officials or participants. 
(Code 1988, § 9.139) 
Sec. 58-55. - Throwing objects on playing area. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cast, throw, hurl or fling any bottle, can, or any other object which could cause injury or damage in the spectator or playing area, while a game is in progress, or during an intermission or delay of such event. 
(Code 1988, § 9.140) 
Sec. 58-56. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb the public peace and quiet by loud, boisterous or vulgar conduct. 
(1)  Disturbance of the peace. No person shall disturb, tend to disturb, or aid in disturbing the peace of others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct and no person shall permit any such conduct in any house or upon any premises owned or possessed by him or under his management or control when within his power to prevent, so that others in the vicinity are or may be disturbed thereby. 
(2)  Noise. No person shall make or cause any noise other than common noise necessary to usual mode of living, transporting or manufacturing. 
(3)  Lights. No person shall use light(s), the installation of light(s), light(s) emitting device, or other similar device to annoy another. Nor shall any illuminating device or structure, or otherwise be so used or maintained or directed so as to shine onto or illuminate, or be directed so as to shine onto or illuminate property or premises other than that owned, rented, leased, or under the control of the person using, maintaining or directing the said illuminating device, structure or otherwise. 
(b)  The above shall not apply to illuminating devices such as street lights erected by a bona fide governmental agency or designee thereof, nor shall the above section apply in the event of common use or agreement between adjoining property owners for joint illumination. 
(Code 1988, § 9.141) 
Sec. 58-57. - Disorderly persons; responsibility for same. 
(a)  Generally. It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer any place occupied or controlled by him to be a resort of noisy, boisterous or disorderly persons. 
(b)  Disorderly places. No person owning, renting, managing or occupying any premises shall allow such premises to be used as a place of assignation or as a place of resort for common prostitutes, and no person owning, renting, managing or occupying any premises shall permit persons having the name and reputation of being common prostitutes to congregate and assemble in or upon said premises; nor shall any person owning, renting, managing or occupying any premises allow same to be used for gambling purposes; nor shall any person owning, renting, managing or occupying any premises allow such premises to be used for any illegal or immoral purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 9.142) 
Secs. 58-58, 58-59. - Reserved. 
Sec. 58-60. - Fighting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any disturbance, fight or quarrel in a public place. 
(b)  No person shall assault, strike or fight another; provided that the section shall not be construed to extend to authorized athletic events. 
(Code 1988, § 9.145) 
Sec. 58-61. - Obstructing public passage. 
(a)  Obstruction of passage. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any public street or sidewalk or in any park or public building or conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public. 
(b)  Obstruction of travel. No person shall stand or loiter either individually or with others in a manner resulting in the obstruction of free travel of either pedestrian or vehicle in any public right-of-way or in any private right-of-way commonly used by the public under permission of the owner, or his legal tenant. 
(Code 1988, § 9.146) 
Sec. 58-62. - Obstructing traffic. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to play any game in any public street or sidewalk or otherwise obstruct traffic on any street or sidewalk by collecting in groups thereon, for any purpose. 
(Code 1988, § 9.147) 
Sec. 58-63. - Interference with police department and related offenses. 
(a)  No person shall resist any public safety officer, member of the public safety department or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(b)  No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a public safety officer, a member of the public safety department or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. 
(c)  No person other than an official public safety officer of the City of South Lyon shall wear or carry the uniform apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn, or carried by the official public safety officers of the City of South Lyon. 
(d)  No person shall make available to, present to, or place within the reach of any person confined, under the authority of the City of South Lyon, any intoxicating or malt liquor or any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid the escape of such person, or any other person so confined under authority of the City of South Lyon. 
(e)  No person shall assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid, any person in the custody of, or confined under the authority of the City of South Lyon to escape from jail, place of confinement or custody. 
(f)  No person shall, while a prisoner in the jail, or at any place where the prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of or confined by the City of South Lyon, escape or attempt to escape or to assist others to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(g)  No person shall remain at any location after having been ordered or directed to disperse or leave that location by a public safety officer engaged in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1988, § 9.148) 
Sec. 58-64. - Obstruct, resist, hinder any city official. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, resist, or hinder any city official, public safety officer, fireman or employee in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1988, § 9.149) 
Sec. 58-65. - Improper conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any indecent, insulting, immoral, or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.150) 
Sec. 58-66. - Indecent exposure. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his or her person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.151) 
Sec. 58-67. - False police or fire calls. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke or prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or otherwise, the police or the fire department or any public or private ambulance to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
(Code 1988, § 9.152) 
Sec. 58-68. - Interference with police officer and related offenses. 
(a)  No person shall resist any City of South Lyon police officer, while in the discharge of their lawful duty, or in any way interfere with or hinder them in the discharge of their duties. 
(b)  No person shall identify themselves as a law enforcement officer unless that person is a duly sworn officer of the law. 
(c)  No person other than police officers of the City of South Lyon shall wear or carry the uniform apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn, or carried by the official police officers of the City of South Lyon. 
(d)  No person shall make available to, present to, or place within the reach of any person confined, under the authority of the City of South Lyon, any intoxicating or malt liquor or any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid the escape of such person, or any other person so confined under authority of the City of South Lyon. 
(e)  No person shall assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid, any person in the custody of, or confined under the authority of the City of South Lyon to escape from jail, place of confinement or custody. 
(f)  No person shall, while a prisoner in the jail, or at any place where the prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of or confined by the City of South Lyon, escape or attempt to escape or to assist others to escape or to attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(g)  No person shall remain at any location after having been ordered or directed to disperse or leave that location by a police officer engaged in the discharge or apparent discharge of his duties. 
(h)  No person shall offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the police department or a person empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. 
(Ord. of 6-14-99, § 1) 
Sec. 58-69. - False report of crime. 
    No person shall make or file with the public safety department of the City of South Lyon any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime or event occurring within the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.154) 
Sec. 58-70. - Malicious use of telephone or other communication device. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use a telephone or any service provided by a communications common carrier with the intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest, or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting by telephone or telegraph message that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime, or of an accident. 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for the transmission of messages by telephone thereby interfering with any communication service. 
(4)  Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene, or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
(5)  Repeatedly initiating a telephone call and, without speaking, deliberately hanging up or breaking the telephone connection as or after the telephone call is answered. 
(6)  Making any unsolicited commercial telephone call which is received between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. For the purpose of this subsection, an "unsolicited commercial telephone call" means a call made by a person or recording device on behalf of a person soliciting business or contributions. 
(7)  Deliberately calling a telephone of another person in a repetitive manner which causes interruption of telephone service or prevents a person from utilizing his or her telephone service. 
(b)  An offense shall be deemed committed under this section if the message, telephone call, or other communication either originates or terminates within the City of South Lyon. 
(Code 1988, § 9.155; Ord. of 4-22-96(2), § 1) 
Sec. 58-71. - Harassment/stalking. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a person to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  With the intent to annoy, alarm, or harass, follow a person in or about a public place. 
(2)  Knowingly send or deliver, or make, for the purpose of being delivered or sent, any letter, postal card, or writing containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed thereto and/or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark, or other designation with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any person, within the City of South Lyon, or with a view or intent to extort or gain any money or property belonging to another. 
(3)  Engage in a course of conduct directed toward another person that is unconsented to which alarms or seriously annoys another person and which serves no legitimate purpose, and which conduct includes, but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact that would cause a reasonable person to suffer emotional distress. As used in this subsection: 
a.  Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of a series of two or more separate noncontinuous acts, evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
b.  Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does not necessarily, require medical or other professional treatment or counseling. 
c.  Unconsented contact means any contact with another individual that is initiated or continued without that individual's consent, or in disregard of that individual's express desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued. Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to any of the following: 
1.  Following or appearing within the sight of that individual. 
2.  Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on private property. 
3.  Appearing at the work place or residence of that individual. 
4.  Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
5.  Contacting that individual by telephone. 
6.  Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual. 
7.  Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
(b)  Evidence. In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (a) of this section, evidence the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving repeated, unconsented contact with the victim, after having been requested by the victim to discontinue the same or a different form of unconsented contact, and to refrain from any further unconsented contact with the victim, shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct caused the victim to be alarmed or seriously annoyed. 
(Ord. of 4-22-96(2), § 1) 
Sec. 58-72. - Non-support. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability to refuse or neglect to support his family. 
(Code 1988, § 9.156) 
Sec. 58-73. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peeping in the windows of any inhabited place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.157) 
Sec. 58-74. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or private premises of any other person in the night time, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 9.158) 
Sec. 58-75. - Occupation or business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any illegal or immoral occupation or business in any public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.159) 
Sec. 58-76. - Loitering. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to engage in the following conduct: 
(1)  Intentionally obstruct the use of roads, sidewalks, parking lots, or other areas open to the general public by hindering the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Intentionally engage in activity which obstructs the free and uninterrupted use and enjoyment of property, or any business facing or fronting the property, after having been told to discontinue such activity by a police officer or a person who owns the property or business or is employed by such owner. 
(3)  Remain at any place where any illegal occupation or business is being conducted if such person knows or has reason to know of the illegality of such occupation or business. 
(Ord. of 7-12-99, § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. of July 12, 1999 amended section 58-76, loitering at place of illegal occupation or business, in its entirety, and replaced said section with a new section 58-76, loitering, as set out herein. Former section 58-76 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1988, § 9.160. 
Sec. 58-77. - Begging. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, or authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for a person to beg or solicit for immediate payment of money or goods from another person under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  On property of, or in a building containing, a bank, credit union, or other financial institution that as a principal business, maintains accounts for on-site deposits and withdrawals of cash by customers. 
(2)  Within 20 feet of an automated teller (ATM) machine. 
(3)  On an area of private property that is physically or visually separated and distinguishable from all public sidewalks where begging is prohibited by a posted sign that is visible to a reasonably observant person. 
(4)  In a manner which includes any of the following: 
a.  Touching the solicited person without that person's consent. 
b.  Blocking the path of the person being solicited, or the entrance to any building, facility, or vehicle, in a manner that hinders or impedes free and uninterrupted movement. 
c.  Making additional requests after a refusal by the person being solicited. 
d.  With the intent to continue to solicit, following behind, alongside or ahead of a person who walks away from the solicitor after having been solicited. 
e.  Using abusive language during or following refusal of a solicitation. 
f.  Making any statement, threat, or gesture, or engaging in any conduct that would cause a reasonable person to feel intimidated, fearful, or compelled to make a donation. 
(b)  This provision is intended to protect persons from threatening, intimidating, or harassing behavior; to keep public places safe for use by all members of the community; and to maintain and preserve public places as places where all members of the community can interact in a peaceful manner. This provision is also intended to facilitate the free flow of pedestrian and vehicular traffic on streets and sidewalks in the city. It is not the city's intent to limit people from exercising their constitutional rights to solicit funds or engage in other constitutionally-protected activities. Rather, this provision is intended to protect the First Amendment rights of all people within the city, as well as the rights of non-participating people and their property, and to ensure they will be free from duress, threats, or intimidation to the extent possible. 
(Code 1988, § 9.162; Ord. No. 03-14, Pt. I, 5-12-14) 
Sec. 58-78. - Intentionally aiming a firearm without malice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally without malice point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person. 
(Code 1988, § 9.162) 
Sec. 58-79. - Unlawful possession of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, or a substance which diminishes or tends to diminish the person's mental capacities to possess or control a firearm within the city. 
(Code 1988, § 9.163) 
Sec. 58-80. - Use and handling of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, wilfully, wantonly, or negligently use, carry or handle any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others. 
(Code 1988, § 9.164) 
Sec. 58-81. - Hurling projectiles from a motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object from any moving motor vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 9.165) 
Sec. 58-82. - Hurling projectiles at persons or motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wrongfully throw or propel any snowball, missile or object toward any person or motor vehicle. 
(Code 1988, § 9.166) 
Sec. 58-83. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 08-17, Pt. I, adopted Oct. 9, 2017, repealed § 58-83, which pertained to possession of a switchblade knife and derived from Code 1988, § 9.167. 
Sec. 58-84. - Unlawful possession of a knife. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be in possession of any knife with a blade more than three inches in length in any street or public place. 
(Code 1988, § 9.168) 
Sec. 58-85. - Open intoxicants in public place. 
    No person shall drink or consume alcoholic beverages except on his own private property or as an invitee on private property, duly licensed establishments, or where permitted by law in public places, and no person shall have in his possession an open or unsealed container containing an alcoholic beverage except on his own private property or as an invitee on private property or in a duly licensed establishment or where permitted by law in public places. 
(Code 1988, § 9.169) 
Sec. 58-86. - Discharge of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge any firearm within the City of South Lyon except at such times and locations as have been designated and approved by the director of public safety. 
(Code 1988, § 9.170) 
Secs. 58-87-58-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-111. - Interference and destruction of city property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully destroy, remove, damage, alter or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, alarm box, street light, street sign, or mark or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of, any public building, tree, or pole within the City of South Lyon, or destroy, take or meddle with any property belonging to the City of South Lyon, or remove the same from the building or place where it may be kept, placed or stored, without proper authority, or disturb, tamper with, disconnect or damage a water meter without proper authority. 
(Code 1988, § 9.181) 
Sec. 58-112. - Destruction of public property. 
    No person shall molest, injure, deface, interfere with or obstruct the use of any public property. 
(Code 1988, § 9.182) 
Sec. 58-113. - Damaging or unauthorized tampering or meddling with motor vehicle; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority from the owner, start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than in which it was left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle; or intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, the property of another, or intentionally cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attached, without the permission of the owner thereof; or 
(2)  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle, with intent to injure said machine or cause the same to move without the consent of the owner; provided, that this section shall not apply in case of moving or starting of motor vehicle by a public safety officer in the performance of his duty, or by a member of a fire department in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
(Code 1988, § 9.183) 
Sec. 58-114. - Breaking and entering or entering without breaking, without permission, places open to public; peace officers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter or to enter without breaking any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car, or structure used or kept for public or private use or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the outbuildings belonging thereto, without obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof. Provided, that this section shall not apply to any entering without breaking any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a peace officer or someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as such peace officer. 
(Code 1988, § 9.184) 
Sec. 58-115. - Destroying or injuring property by careless, reckless or negligent discharge of firearm. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to carelessly, recklessly or negligently, but not wilfully or wantonly, cause or allow any firearm under his control to be discharged so as to destroy or injury the property of another, real or personal. 
(Code 1988, § 9.185) 
Sec. 58-116. - Conversion of library property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to procure or take in any way from any public library or the library of any literary, scientific, historical or library society or association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, or exhibit or any part thereof, with intent to convert the same to be his own use, or with intent to defraud the owner thereof, or who having procured or taken any such book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, or exhibit or any part thereof to thereafter convert the same to his own use or fraudulently deprive the owner thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.186) 
Sec. 58-117. - Malicious destruction of property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal property of another by any means not particularly mentioned or described in the preceding section if the damage resulting therefrom shall be $100.00 or less. 
(Code 1988, § 9.187) 
Sec. 58-118. - Malicious destruction of a building. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn, or other building of another, or the appurtenances thereof if the damages resulting therefrom shall be $100.00 or less. 
(Code 1988, § 9.188) 
Sec. 58-119. - Malicious destruction of literary property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or wantonly tear, deface or mutilate or write upon, or by other means injure or mar any book, pamphlet, map, chart, painting, picture, photograph, periodical, newspaper, magazine, manuscript, or exhibit or any part thereof belonging to or loaned to any public library, or to the library of any incorporated or unincorporated literary, scientific, historical or library society or association. 
(Code 1988, § 9.189) 
Sec. 58-120. - Regulation of the entry upon lands of another after having been forbidden so to do. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden so to do by the owner or occupant, agent or servant of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, the agent or servant of either, without lawful authority to neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Code 1988, § 9.190) 
Sec. 58-121. - Receiving or concealing, stolen, embezzled or converted property; presumption. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive or aid in the concealment of any stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property knowing the same to have been stolen, embezzled or converted, if the property purchased, received or concealed shall be of the value of $100.00 or less. 
(b)  Any person being a dealer in or collector of any merchandise or personal property, or the agent, employee or representative of such dealer or collector, who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering any stolen, embezzled or converted property to him has a legal right to do so shall be presumed to have bought or received such property knowing it to have been stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may, however, be rebutted by proof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.191) 
Sec. 58-122. - Control of larceny, under $100.00. 
    Any person who shall commit the offense of larceny, by stealing, of the property of another, any money, goods, or chattels, or any bank note, bank bill, bond, promissory note, due bill, bill of exchange or other bill, draft, order or certificate, or any book of accounts for or concerning money or goods due or to become due, or to be delivered, or any deed or writing containing a conveyance of land, or any other valuable contract in force, or any receipt, release or defeasance, or any writ, process or public record, if the property stolen shall be of the value of $100.00 or less, shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 9.192) 
Sec. 58-123. - Retail fund. 
(a)  This section shall be known as the "retail fraud" section and it shall be deemed sufficient, and any actions for the enforcement of the provisions hereof, to define the same by such short title, and by reference to the number hereof. 
(b)  Any person who shall commit the crime of retail fraud within the terms of this section, shall be punished as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person within the City of South Lyon to do any of the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, of any property having a value of less than $100.00, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steal from the store property that is offered for sale, which has a value of less than $100.00. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain, money or property having a value of less than $100.00, from the store as a refund or exchange for property, having a value of less than $100.00, that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(d)  Any person committing any of the acts of larceny described within this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereon, before a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of the prosecution, or by imprisonment in the Oakland County Jail, not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(e)  In the event any section, sentence, word, phrase or part of this section shall be held invalid, such holdings shall not affect the balance of the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. of 11-24-97, § 1(9.193)) 
Sec. 58-124. - Roller skates, rollerblades, street skates and skateboards. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Roller skates, rollerblades and street skates means a set or series of small wheels on the bottom of a shoe or a frame that would attach to a shoe which are used for gliding on a surface such as a floor or sidewalk, etc. 
    Skateboards means an item consisting of a short board on small wheels at each end used for coasting and/or for performing athletic stunts. 
    To roller skate means to skate on any type of roller skates, rollerblades or street skates. 
(b)  Use regulated. It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate or use a skateboard(s) within the city without complying with the terms of this section. 
(c)  Riding on certain devices or structures. It shall be unlawful to roller skate or ride on a skateboard on any bench, table, planter wall, retaining wall or other device or structure which is not intended for pedestrian or vehicle traffic, or to jump or step on or off such devices or structures in the process of roller skating or riding a skateboard. 
(d)  Riding prohibited where posted. The city manager is hereby authorized to erect signs on any publicly owned parking area, street, sidewalk, parking structure, parking lot, or other public property prohibiting roller skating or the riding of skateboards thereon. It shall be unlawful to roller skate or ride a skateboard on any such posted parking area, street, sidewalk, parking structure, parking lot or other public property. 
(e)  Reckless or dangerous skating or riding. It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate or ride a skateboard on any sidewalk or other paved surface intended for pedestrians in a reckless or careless manner, or in a manner which is likely to result in injury or harm to any person or property. 
(f)  Riding on private property without permission. It shall be unlawful for any person to roller skate or ride a skateboard on private property that has been posted no skateboarding. 
(g)  Penalty for violation of section. Any person who violates any of the provision of this division shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 8-14-06) 
Secs. 58-125-58-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FRAUD 

Sec. 58-136. - Fortune telling for gain. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend for money or gain, to predict future events by cards, tokens, trances, the inspection of the hands or the conformation of the skull of any person, mind-reading so-called, or by consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies. 
(Code 1988, § 9.231) 
Sec. 58-137. - Fortune telling for gain, no specific means. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend for money or gain to tell fortunes or foretell future events by other means than those mentioned in the preceding section. 
(Code 1988, § 9.232) 
Sec. 58-138. - Pretending. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to pretend by or through means of palmistry, phrenology, clairvoyance, astrology, or fortune telling by cards or other devices for money or gain, to enable any one to get or recover lost or stolen property, or to give success in business, enterprise, speculation or games of chance, or to make one person dispose of property, business or valuable things in favor of another. 
(Code 1988, § 9.233) 
Sec. 58-139. - Advertisements as evidence. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publish by card, circular, sign, newspaper, or any other means whatsoever, that he or she shall or will predict future events; the said publication may be given in evidence to sustain an indictment under the foregoing three sections. Any person whose fortune may have been told as aforesaid shall be competent witness against all persons charged with any violation of the foregoing three sections. 
(Code 1988, § 9.234) 
Sec. 58-140. - Fraudulent procurement of food and lodging-Boardinghouses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, put up, board or lodge at any boardinghouse as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month, or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boardinghouse for credit, with intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodations, or for any person who, with intent to so defraud, to obtain credit at any boardinghouse for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. Provided, that no conviction shall be had unless complaint shall be made within ten days of the time of the alleged violation. 
(Code 1988, § 9.235) 
Sec. 58-141. - Same-Hotels, motels, restaurants, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as a guest and to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, or for any person with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, to obtain credit at any hotel, motel, restaurant or cafe for such food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 9.236) 
Sec. 58-142. - Same-Prima facie evidence of intent. 
    Obtaining such food, lodging, accommodation, by false pretense or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage, shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud mentioned in sections 58-140 and 58-141. 
(Code 1988, § 9.237) 
Sec. 58-143. - Control of checks written without sufficient funds. 
(a)  Generally. Any person who, with intent to defraud, shall make or draw or utter or deliver any checks, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft, or order, in full, upon its presentation, or any person who, with the intent to defraud, shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and who shall not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except where such lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy, or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing, shall, if the amount payable in the check is $100.00 or less, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Punishment, second offense. Any person found guilty of a second offense under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500.00. 
(c)  Evidence of intent to defraud. As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(d)  Notice of protest as evidence of intent to defraud. Where such check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(e)  Credit construed. The word "credit" as used herein, shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository, for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Code 1988, § 9.238) 
Sec. 58-144. - False pretenses with intent to defraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud or cheat, to designedly, by color or any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease, or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money or personal property or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or measures obtain a larger amount or quantity or property other than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, if such interest in land, money, personal property, use of such instrument, facility or article, valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained or less amount disposed of, shall be of the value of $100.00 or less. 
(Code 1988, § 9.239) 
Sec. 58-145. - Obtaining credit by false device. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain credit, or purchase or attempt to purchase any goods, property or service, by the use of any false, fictitious or counterfeit credit card, credit number, telephone number or other device, or by the use of any credit card, without the authority of the person to whom such card, number or device was issued, or by the use of any credit card, credit number, telephone number card, credit number or device which has been revoked and notice of revocation has been given to the person to whom issued. 
(Code 1988, § 9.240) 
Secs. 58-146-58-170. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-171. - Prostitution. 
(a)  Soliciting and accosting. It shall be unlawful for any person to accost, solicit or invite another in any public place, or in or from any building or vehicle, by word, gesture or any other means, to commit prostitution or any lewd, illegal or immoral act. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution. 
(b)  Admitting to place for purpose of prostitution. It shall be unlawful for any person to receive or admit or offer to receive or admit any person into any place, structure, house, building or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or assignation, or who shall knowingly permit any person to remain in any such place for any such purpose. 
(Code 1988, §§ 9.279, 9.280) 
Secs. 58-172-58-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OBSCENITY 

Sec. 58-186. - Indecent language. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any indecent, immoral, obscene, vulgar or insulting language. 
(Code 1988, § 9.271) 
Sec. 58-187. - Obscene materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly either sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute or offer either to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute, or advertise in any manner or to otherwise knowingly offer for either loan, gift, sale or distribution, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent, sadistic or masochistic book, magazine, pamphlet, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of any indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representations of such character. For the purpose of this section, possession of six or more identical copies, or six or more articles of any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, phonograph record, picture drawing, photograph, slide, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording, or any written, printed or recorded matter of any indecent character, shall be prima facie evidence of possession with intent to sell, lend, give away, distribute, show or transmute the thing. 
(Code 1988, § 9.272) 
Sec. 58-188. - Obscenity; tests. 
    The test to be applied in cases under section 58-189 shall not be whether sexual desires or sexually improper thoughts would be aroused in those comprising a particular segment of the community, the young, the immature or the highly prudish, or would leave another segment, the scientific or highly educated or the so-called worldly wise and sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved. But such test shall be the effect of the book, picture or other subject of complaint considered as a whole, not upon any particular class but upon all those whom it is likely to reach, that is, its impact upon the average person in the community. The book, picture or other subject of complaint must be judged as a whole in this entire context, not by considering detached or separate portions only, and by the standards of common conscience of the community of the contemporary periods of the violation charged. 
(Code 1988, § 9.273) 
Sec. 58-189. - Obscene materials; publishing or distributing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to publish or distribute for resale or for reading or other perusal any book, magazine, or pamphlet, so composed as to constitute a compilation of pictures, illustrations, caricatures, cartoons, words, stories and advertisements, or any combination or combinations thereof, featuring and primarily devoted for the purpose of commercial exploitation, to the description or portrayal or suggestion of illicit sex, or sexual relations, or perversion, lust or sexual passion, or to any combination or combinations thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.274) 
Sec. 58-190. - Sale conditioned on sale of obscene materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment or delivery for resale any paper, magazine, book, periodical or publication require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any other article, book or other publication which is contrary to section 58-189, or to deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure of any person to accept such articles, books or publications, or by reason of the return thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.275) 
Sec. 58-191. - Sale of obscene materials to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly either sell, distribute, or import for the purpose of selling or distributing, to a person under the age of 18 years, any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, phonograph record, picture, tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representation of such character, manifestly tending to corrupt the morals of youth, or to introduce into a family, school or place of education, or buy, procure, receive or have in his possession any obscene, lewd, lascivious, filthy or indecent book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, phonograph record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of an indecent character which may or may not require mechanical or other means to be transmuted into auditory, visual or sensory representation of such character, either for the purpose of a sale, exhibition, loan or circulation, to a person under the age of 18 years or with intent to introduce the same into a family, school or place of education. 
(Code 1988, § 9.276) 
Sec. 58-192. - Sale of a crime-oriented materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lend, give away, or show, or have in his possession with intent to sell, or give away, or to show, advertise, or otherwise offer for loan, gift or distribution, any book, pamphlet, magazine, newspaper, or other printed paper, devoted to the publication principally made up of criminal news, police reports or accounts of criminal deed, or pictures and stories of deeds of bloodshed, lust or crime. 
(Code 1988, § 9.277) 
Sec. 58-193. - Obscene materials, distribution by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner hire, use or employ any minor child to sell, or give away, or in any manner to distribute, or who having the care, custody, or control of any minor child, permit such child to sell, give away or in any other manner to distribute any book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, picture, drawing, photograph or other article or matter coming within the descriptions of articles and matter mentioned in sections 58-191 and 58-192 or either of them. 
(Code 1988, § 9.278) 
Secs. 58-194-58-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING MINORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 58-211. - Furnishing obscene books to children. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, give away or any way furnish to any minor child any book, pamphlet, or other printed paper or other thing, containing obscene language, or obscene prints, pictures, figures or descriptions tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, or any newspaper, pamphlets or other printed paper devoted to the publication of criminal news, police reports, or criminal deeds, and it shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner hire, use or employ such child to sell, give away, or in any manner distribute such books, pamphlets or printed papers, and it shall be unlawful for any person having the care, custody or control of any such child, to permit him or her to engage in any such employment. 
(Code 1988, § 9.206) 
Sec. 58-212. - Exhibition of obscene matter within the view of children. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit upon any public street or highway, or in any other place within the view of children passing on any public street or highway, any book, pamphlet or other printed paper or thing containing obscene language or obscene prints, figures, or descriptions, tending to the corruption of the morals of youth, or any newspaper, pamphlets, or other printed paper or thing devoted to the publication of criminal news, police reports or criminal deeds. 
(Code 1988, § 9.207) 
Sec. 58-213. - Contributing to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    No person shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in section 2 of chapter 12a of Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1939, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of the First Extra Session of 1944, and any amendments thereto whereto or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court. 
(Code 1988, § 9.208) 
Sec. 58-214. - Curfew violation, prohibiting children under certain years of age from loitering or remaining upon the public streets or highways or in any public place after certain hours of the night; responsibility for the violations; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 17 years to loiter, idle, congregate, or otherwise be in or on any public street, highway, alley or any public place between the hours of 10:15 p.m. and 6:00 a.m immediately following, on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday of each week, and between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. immediately following, on Friday and Saturday of each week, except when said minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian or some adult above 21 years of age delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such minor child, or where the presence of said minor in said place or places is connected with and required by some legitimate work, trade, profession, or occupation in which said minor is engaged, or where such minor is upon an errand or other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 14 years to loiter, idle, congregate, or otherwise be in or on any public street or highway, alley, or any public place, between the hours of 10:15 p.m and 6:00 a.m. except where the said minor is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or some adult above 21 years of age delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such child or where such minor is upon an emergency errand or other legitimate business directed by his or her parent or guardian. 
(c)  Any person assisting, aiding, abetting, or encouraging any minor to violate the provisions of subsection (a) and (b) of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(d)  When any minor is found violating the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section a presumption shall arise that the parent or guardian having the care and custody of the said minor allowed, permitted, assisted, aided, abetted and encouraged such minor in so violating said subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having the care or custody of any minor to allow or permit any such child, ward, or other person while in his or her custody, to loiter, idle or congregate in violation of subsections (a) and (b) of this section. 
(f)  Any person or persons, parents, guardians or persons having the care and custody of any minor violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not less than $10.00 nor more than $50.00, or by imprisonment in the Oakland County Jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. 
(Code 1988, § 9.209) 
Sec. 58-215. - Loitering by children during school hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any child under the age of 16 to loiter about the central business district, or any other place of business, or any public building during those hours of the day when the subject's school is in session. 
(Code 1988, § 9.210) 
Sec. 58-216. - Purchase, sale and possession of model glue, by minors. 
(a)  Definition. As used in this section the term model glue shall mean any glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or other adhesive of the type commonly used in the construction of model airplanes, automobiles, boats and other unassembled model kits, containing toluene, acetone, xylene, butyl alcohol, tricresylphosphate or other toxic ingredient. 
(b)  Purchase, possession. No person shall, for the purpose of violating or aiding another to violate any provision of this section, intentionally possess, buy, sell, give, transfer possession or receive possession of any model glue. 
(1)  No person under the age of 18 years shall possess or buy any model glue except as hereinafter provided. 
(2)  No person shall sell, give away or transfer possession of any model glue to another person under the age of 18 years except as hereinafter provided. 
(3)  A person may sell, give away or transfer possession of model glue to a person under the age of 18 years, and a person under the age of 18 years may accept same, for model building or other lawful use when said juvenile has in his possession and delivers the written consent of his parent or guardian, currently dated, to the person who makes the sale, gift or transfer. 
(4)  A person may sell, give away or transfer possession of not more than one assembly kit which contains not more than one container of model glue not to exceed one fluid ounce, as a necessary part of the model assembly kit to a person under the age of 18 years, and a person under the age of 18 years may accept same. 
(c)  Parent's consent. A person making a sale, gift, or transfer of possession of model glue to a person under 18 years of age who exhibits the written consent of his parent or guardian shall retain such written consent and shall record the name, address, sex and age of the juvenile and the name and address of the consenting parent or guardian. All data required by this section shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by the public safety department for a period of at least six months. 
(d)  Abetting minor. It shall be unlawful for any person to assist, aid, abet or encourage any minor to violate any provision of this section. 
(e)  Medical exemption. The provisions of this section shall not pertain to any person who inhales, drinks, eats or otherwise introduces into his circulatory or respiratory system any material described in subsection (a) of this section pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, dentist, or other person licensed by the State of Michigan to so direct or prescribe. 
(Code 1988, § 9.211) 
Sec. 58-217. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. IV, adopted March 28, 2016, repealed § 58-217, which pertained to purchase, sale and possession of tobacco, cigarettes, papers, etc., by minors and derived from Code 1988, § 9.212. 
Sec. 58-218. - BB guns. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to use or possess any handgun designed and manufactured exclusively for propelling BBs not exceeding .177 calibre by means of spring, gas, or air, outside the curtilage of his domicile unless he is accompanied by a person over 18 years of age. 
(Code 1988, § 9.213) 
Sec. 58-219. - Possession of knives by minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to be in possession of any knife, dart, or instrument of any description that could be used for cutting or stabbing in any street or public place (except for boy scouts, girl scouts or work tool). 
(Code 1988, § 9.214) 
Sec. 58-220. - Abandonment of children. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, parent, guardian, custodian, or anyone else to whose care, children under 11 years of age are entrusted to leave, neglect, or abandon said children in a parked motor vehicle in any public place or place open to the public without furnishing someone over the age of 17 years for supervision of said children. 
(Code 1988, § 9.215) 
Sec. 58-221. - Use of tobacco products, vapor products and alternative nicotine delivery products on school property. 
(a)  Prohibition. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d) of this section, a person shall not use a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product on school property. 
(b)  Violation. A person who violates subsection (a) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00. 
(c)  Definitions. As used in this section: 
(1)  Alternative nicotine product means a noncombustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. 
(2)  School district means a school district, local act school district, or intermediate school district, as those terms are defined in the School Code of 1976, Act Number 451 of the Public Ace of 1976, being MCL 380.1-380.1852; a joint high school district formed under part 3A of Act Number 451 of the Public Acts of 1976, being MCL 380.171-380.187; or a consortium of cooperative arrangement consisting of any combination of these. 
(3)  School property means a building, facility, or structure and other real estate owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by a school district. 
(4)  Tobacco product means a product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including but not limited to, cigarettes, non-cigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined in Section 2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act, and cigars. Tobacco product does not include a vapor product or a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(5)  Use a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product. 
(6)  Vapor product means a noncombustible product containing, designed or intended to contain nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device containing, designed, or intended to contain or use a product to be vaporized and a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(d)  Exceptions. Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to that part of school property consisting of outdoor areas including, but not limited to, an open-air stadium, during either of the following time periods: 
(1)  Saturdays, Sundays, and other days on which there are no regularly scheduled school hours. 
(2)  After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly scheduled school hours 
(Ord. of 7-28-97(2), § 1(9.217); Ord. No. 12-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 58-222. - Parental, custodial responsibility. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Delinquent acts means those acts which violate the laws of the United States, or the statutes of the United States, or the statutes of the state or the ordinances of the city or those acts which would cause or tend to cause the minor to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court as defined by MCL 712A.2, but does not include traffic violations. 
    Illegal drugs means any controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the public health code for the State of Michigan. Currently, such substances are defined in part 72 of the Health Code, being MCL 333.7201 et seq. 
    Juvenile delinquent means those minors whose behavior interferes with the rights of others or menaces the welfare of the community. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 18 years residing with a parent. 
    Parent means mother, father, legal guardian and any other person having the care or custody of a minor, or any person acting in the parent's stead who has custody or control of the minor. 
(b)  Parental duties. 
(1)  It is the continuous duty of the parent of any minor to exercise reasonable control to prevent the minor from committing any delinquent act. 
(2)  Included (without limitations) in this continuous duty of reasonable parental control are the following parental duties: 
a.  To keep illegal drugs or illegal firearms out of the home and legal firearms locked in places that are inaccessible to the minor; 
b.  To know the curfew ordinance of the City of South Lyon (section 58-214) and to require the minor to observe the curfew ordinance; 
c.  To require the minor to attend regular school sessions and to forbid the minor to be absent from class without parental or school permission; 
d.  To arrange proper supervision for the minor when the parent must be absent; 
e.  To take the necessary precautions to prevent the minor from maliciously or wilfully destroying real, personal, or mixed property which belongs to the City of South Lyon, or is located in the City of South Lyon; 
f.  To forbid the minor from keeping stolen property, illegally possessing firearms or illegal drugs, or associating with known juvenile delinquents, and to seek help from appropriate governmental authorities or private agencies in handling or controlling the minor, when necessary. 
(c)  Notification of parents; record of notification. 
(1)  Whenever a minor is arrested or detained for the commission of any delinquent act within the City of South Lyon, the parent of the minor shall be immediately notified by the South Lyon Police Department, advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and the parent's responsibility under this section. 
(2)  A record of such notification shall be kept by the South Lyon Police Department. 
(d)  Parental violation and penalty. 
(1)  If a minor commits a delinquent act, the parent shall be guilty of a violation of this section if it is proven that any act, word, or nonperformance of parental duty by the parent encouraged, contributed toward, caused, or tended to cause the commission of the delinquent act by the minor. 
(2)  Upon the first conviction of a violation of this section the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $75.00, nor more than $100.00. 
(3)  Upon the second conviction of a violation of this section the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $500.00 and, in addition, shall be sentenced to probation with the condition that the parent participates in, through completion, a court approved, community based treatment program (such as parenting skills, family services, employment and training, etc.) or, in the discretion of the court, be imprisoned for a period of not less than 15 days, nor more than 30 days. 
(4)  Upon the third or subsequent violation and conviction the parent shall be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00, nor more than $500.00, and, in the discretion of the court, imprisoned for a period of not less than 50 days nor more than 90 days. 
(Code 1988, § 9.171; Ord. of 2-10-97, art. 1) 
Secs. 58-223-58-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 

Sec. 58-236. - Alcoholic beverages, definition. 
    The phrase and words alcoholic beverages as used in this division shall include beer, wine, spirits, alcohol and any and all alcoholic liquors as said terms are construed and defined in section 2 of Public Act Number 8, of the State of Michigan for the year 1933, Extra Session, as amended, and the rules promulgated thereunder. 
(Code 1988, § 9.198) 
Sec. 58-237. - Prohibition of minors in place where liquor is sold. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor child under 18 years of age to be permitted to remain in any dance hall, saloon, barroom or any place where any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, or any wine or beer, or any beverage, liquor or liquors containing any spirituous or intoxicating liquor, beer or malt liquor is sold, given or furnished for a beverage, unless said minor is accompanied by parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor, keeper or manager of any such place to permit such minor child to remain in any such place, and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly encourage or induce in any way such minor child to enter such place or to remain therein. 
(Code 1988, § 9.199) 
Sec. 58-238. - Alcoholic beverages, furnishing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell or furnish any alcoholic beverage to a person who is less than 21 years of age, or fail to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is less than 21 years of age. A suitable sign which describes this subsection and the penalties for violating this subsection shall be placed in a conspicuous place in each room where alcoholic beverages are sold. The sign shall be approved and furnished by the state liquor control commission. In any action for a violation of this subsection, proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown before furnishing alcoholic beverages to a person under 21 years of age, a motor vehicle operator's license or a registration certificate issued by the selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and the identity of that person, shall be a defense. 
(Code 1988, § 9.200) 
Sec. 58-239. - Furnishing false information or evidence of age to a person under 21. 
    Any person who furnishes false information regarding the age of another person under the age of 21 years for the purpose of procuring the sale of alcoholic beverages to said other person, or who furnishes false documentary evidence to a person under the age of 21 years who uses the evidence to purchase alcoholic beverages shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 9.201; Ord. No. 10-17, Pt. I, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 58-240. - Misrepresenting age to secure purchase of alcoholic beverages by person under 21 years of age. 
    Any person under 21 years of age who falsely represents himself or herself to be 21 years of age or older through the furnishing of documentary evidence or the giving of other false information regarding his or her age, to any person selling alcoholic beverages, for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase any alcoholic beverage shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100.00, or both. 
(Code 1988, § 9.202; Ord. No. 10-17, Pt. II, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 58-241. - Possession and transportation of alcoholic beverage in a motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly possess or transport in a motor vehicle, alcoholic beverages unless said person (i) has attained the age of 21 years, or (ii) is employed by a licensee under Act No. 8, of the Public Acts of the Extra Session of 1933, as amended, by the liquor control commission or an agent of the liquor control commission, and is transporting or has the alcoholic beverages in the motor vehicle under said licensee's control during regular working hours and in the course of the person's employment. 
(Code 1988, § 9.203) 
Sec. 58-242. - Purchasing, consuming, or possession of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor or have any bodily alcohol content, except as provided in MCL 436.1703 and this section. For purposes of this section, a person under the age of 21 is deemed a "minor." This section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  A person less than 21 years of age who possesses alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her employment if employed by a person licensed by under the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, Public Act 58 of 1998, as amended, by the state liquor control commission, or by an agent of that commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal consumption. 
(2)  The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a person less than 21 years of age who is enrolled in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty member if the purpose of the consumption is solely educational and is a necessary ingredient of the course. 
(3)  The consumption by a person less than 21 years of age of sacramental wine in connection with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple. 
(4)  A minor who participates in an undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the state police, the commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(5)  A minor who participates in an undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(6)  As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Code 1988, § 9.204; Ord. of 4-22-96(3), § 1; Ord. of 8-9-04; Ord. No. 10-17, Pt. III, 10-23-17) 
Sec. 58-243. - Penalties, sanctions, submission to preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
    Notwithstanding the penalties provided in section 1-14, any minor who violates section 58-242 is responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by the following civil fines and sanctions and is not subject to the penalties prescribed in section 1-14: 
(1)  For a first violation of section 58-242, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute, the minor is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, shall be fined not more than $100.00 and may be ordered to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo screening and assessment as provided in MCL 436.1703(5) at his or her own expense as described in subsection (7). A minor may be found responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subsection (1), MCL 436.1703(1)(a), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
(2)  If a violation of section 58-242, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute occurs after one prior judgment for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (5), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $200.00 or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance use disorder services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (7). A minor who pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of section 58-242 under this subsection (2), may request deferral of proceedings and placement on probation under subsection (6). 
(3)  If a violation of this section 58-242, MCL 436.1703(1), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute occurs after two or more prior judgments for an alcohol or controlled substance violation identified in subsection (a)(5), the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor, which is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60 days but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation, failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile adjudication, a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, and may be ordered to participate in substance use services as defined in MCL 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and to undergo screening and assessment at his or her own expense as described in subsection (7). 
(4)  A minor that is subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of section 58-242 under subsections (2) or (3), may be ordered by court to submit to random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis, which may be requested by the minor's parent, guardian, or custodian as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(5)  For purposes of subsections (2) and (3), "prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile adjudication, or finding or admission of responsibility for a violation of the statutes listed in this subsection, or any federal or state law or local ordinance that substantially corresponds to any of those listed statutes: 
a.  MCL 436.1703(1), or former MCL 436.33b. 
b.  A misdemeanor violation that is dismissed under subsection (6), MCL 436.1703(3), or other local ordinance substantially corresponding to that statute. 
c.  MCL 436.1701 (sale/furnish alcohol to minors). 
d.  MCL 436.1707 (sale/service/furnish alcohol to intoxicated persons). 
e.  MCL 257.624a (transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle). 
f.  MCL 257.624b (transport/possess open alcohol in motor vehicle by minor). 
g.  MCL 257.625 (operating motor vehicle while intoxicated/impaired). 
h.  MCL 324.80176 (operating boat while under influence). 
i.  MCL 324.81134 (operating off-road vehicle while under influence). 
j.  MCL 324.82127 (operating snowmobile while under influence). 
k.  MCL 750.167a (hunting with firearm/weapon while intoxicated). 
l.  MCL 750.237 (carry/possess/use/discharge firearm while under influence). 
(6)  If a minor pleads guilty, or admits in a juvenile delinquency proceeding to a violation of section 58-242 under subsection (2), the court may defer further proceedings and place the minor on probation under MCL 436.1703(3), which provides for dismissal of the proceedings upon the terms and conditions of probation being fulfilled. An individual may only obtain one dismissal under MCL 436.1703(3). 
(7)  The court may order the person found responsible for or convicted of violating section 58-242 to undergo screening and assessment to determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs as provided in MCL 436.1703(5). 
(8)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. If a minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a peace officer may seek to obtain a court order. A peace officer may initiate municipal civil infraction or misdemeanor charges for a violation of section 58-242 based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a municipal civil infraction or criminal prosecution to determine whether the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. 
(9)  A law enforcement agency, upon determining that a person less than 18 years of age who is not emancipated pursuant to Act No. 293 of the Public Acts of 1968, being MCL 772.1-772.6, allegedly consumed, possessed, purchased, or attempted to consume possess, or purchase alcoholic liquor in violation of section 58-242, shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of the person as to the nature of the violation if the name of the parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the law enforcement agency. The notice required by this subsection shall be made not later than 48 hours after the law enforcement agency determines that the person who allegedly violated section 58-242 is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under MCL 722.1 to 722.6. The notice may be made by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice including, but not limited to, notice in person, by telephone, or by first class mail. If a person less than 17 years of age is incarcerated for violating section 58-242, then his or her parents or legal guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection. 
(10)  This section shall not be construed to limit the civil and criminal liability of the vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for violation of this section. 
(11)  In a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution for the violation of section 58-242 concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location where that consumption is legal. 
(12)  As used in this section, "any bodily alcohol content" means either of the following: 
a.  An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine. 
b.  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
(Code 1988, § 9.205; Ord. of 4-22-96(3), § 1; Ord. of 8-9-04; Ord. No. 01-13, Pt. I, 2-11-13; Ord. No. 10-17, Pt. IV, 10-23-17) 
Secs. 58-244-58-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - TOBACCO PRODUCTS, VAPOR PRODUCTS AND ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE DELIVERY PRODUCTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, adopted March 28, 2016, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 58-271-58-274. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 58-251-58-254. 

Sec. 58-251. - Purpose and findings. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the property and persons in the city by prohibiting persons under 18 years of age from possessing tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative nicotine delivery products, and prohibiting the sale and furnishing of tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative nicotine delivery products to persons under 18 years of age. 
    Persons under age 18 are prohibited by law from purchasing or possessing cigarettes and other tobacco products, and retailers are prohibited from selling them to minors. There are new tobacco-less products, however, commonly referred to as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars," "e-cigarillos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," or "electronic nicotine delivery systems," which allow the user to simulate cigarette smoking and ingest nicotine. These products may be purchased by minors and are being marketed without age restrictions or health warnings and come in different flavors that appeal to young people. 
    E-cigarettes, and similar vapor and alternative nicotine delivery devices and products, are a relatively new nicotine delivery system. While devices vary in their appearance and specific method of operation, they have a few basic elements in common. A solution of water, dissolved nicotine, and other ingredients (usually flavoring) is heated with a heating element (usually battery-powered). This vaporizes the nicotine solution, which passes into a mouthpiece and is inhaled in a manner similar to cigarette smoking. Often, glycerol or propylene glycol is added to the solution to give the appearance of smoke when the solution is vaporized. The concentration of nicotine contained in the solution can be customized by the retailer to the buyer's specifications, and many manufacturers make nicotine-free solutions. 
    The production and distribution of e-cigarettes and vapor products is not currently regulated by federal or state authorities, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has not completed testing of these products. But, initial studies by the FDA have determined that e-cigarettes can increase nicotine addiction among young people and contain chemical ingredients known to be harmful, which may expose users and the public to potential health risks. 
    The use of e-cigarettes, vapor products and similar alternative nicotine delivery products has increased significantly in recent years, as evidenced by the fact that: 
Between 2011 and 2012 the percentage of all youth in grades 6 to 12 who had tried electronic smoking devices doubled; 
 6.8% of all youth in grades 6 and 12 report trying electronic smoking devices; 
 10% of high school students have tried electronic smoking devices; 
 9.3% of youth who have used electronic smoking devices have never smoked conventional cigarettes; and 
 Between 2010 and 2011, rates of both awareness and use of unregulated electronic smoking devices by adults also increased significantly. 
    Existing studies on electronic smoking devices' vapor emissions and cartridge contents have found a number of dangerous substances including: 
 Chemicals known to cause cancer such as formaldehyde, acetaldehyde, lead, nickel and chromium; 
 PM2.5, acrolein, tin, toluene, and aluminum, which are associated with a range of negative health effects such as skin, eye and respiratory irritation, neurological effects, damage to reproductive systems, and even premature death from heart attacks and stroke; 
 Inconsistent labeling of nicotine levels in electronic smoking device products; and 
 In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used in antifreeze and toxic to humans. 
    Several studies have concluded that exposure to vapor from electronic smoking devices may cause passive or secondhand vaping. 
    Some cartridges used by electronic smoking devices can be refilled with liquid nicotine solution, creating the potential for exposure to dangerous concentrations of nicotine, and as a result: 
 In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used in antifreeze and toxic to humans; 
 Poisonings from electronic smoking devices have increased dramatically in the last three and one-half (31/2) years from "one (1) [a month] in September 2010 to two hundred fifteen (215) a month in February 2014;" 
 Analysis of reports of poisonings from electronic smoking devices finds that calls reporting exposure to electronic smoking devices are much more likely to involve adverse health effects when compared to calls reporting exposure to conventional cigarettes. 
    Clinical studies about the safety and efficacy of these products have not been submitted to the FDA for the over four hundred (400) brands of electronic smoking devices that are on the market and for this reason, consumers currently have no way of knowing: 
 Whether electronic smoking devices are safe; 
 What types or concentrations of potentially harmful chemicals the products contain; and 
 What dose of nicotine the products deliver. 
    The World Health Organization has strongly advised consumers against the use of electronic smoking devices until they are "deemed safe and effective and of acceptable quality by a competent national regulatory body." 
    The World Medical Association has determined that electronic smoking devices "are not comparable to scientifically-proven methods of smoking cessation" and that "neither their value as therapeutic aids for smoking cessation, nor their safety as cigarette replacements is established." 
    A study published in the Journal of Environmental and Public Health suggests that electronic smoking devices "may have the capacity to 're-normalize' tobacco use in a demographic that has had significant denormalization of tobacco use previously." 
    Electronic smoking devices often mimic conventional tobacco products in shape, size and color, with the user exhaling a smoke-like vapor similar in appearance to the exhaled smoke from cigarettes and other conventional tobacco products. 
    The use of electronic smoking devices in smoke-free locations threatens to undermine compliance with smoking regulations and reverse the progress that has been made in establishing a social norm that smoking is not permitted in public places and places of employment. 
    In September of 2013, forty (40) state attorneys general (including Michigan's) signed a letter to the Commissioner of the United States Food and Drug Administration, outlining their concerns with e-cigarettes and requesting the implementation of regulations that would address the advertising, ingredients, and sale to minors of e-cigarettes at the federal level. 
    It is the intent of the city council, in enacting the ordinance codified in this division, to provide for the public health, safety and welfare by facilitating uniform and consistent enforcement of smoke-free air laws; by reducing the potential for re-normalizing smoking in public places and places of employment; by reducing the potential for children to associate the use of electronic smoking devices with a normative or healthy lifestyle; and by prohibiting the sale or distribution of electronic smoking devices, vapor products, and alternative nicotine delivery products to minors. 
    Therefore, the South Lyon City Council determines that prohibiting the sale, giving, or furnishing of e-cigarettes and vapor products to minors and prohibiting the purchase, possession, or use of e-cigarettes and vapor products by minors is in the city's best interests and will promote public health, safety and welfare. For purposes of this division, the city is adopting the terms "vapor product" and "alternative nicotine delivery product" to address e-cigarettes and all similar devices, because these terms has been defined by the Michigan House and Senate in Senate Bills 667 and 668, enrolled in June of 2014, and Senate Bill 231 introduced in March 2015 as part of proposed amendments to the Youth Tobacco Act, being Public Act 31 of 1915. 
(Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 58-252. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of construction and application of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Alternative nicotine product means a noncombustible product containing nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, absorbed, dissolved, or ingested by any other means. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years of age. 
    Person who sells tobacco products at retail means a person whose ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of tobacco products subject to state sales tax. 
    Person who sells vapor products at retail means a person whose ordinary course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of vapor products. 
    Possession of a tobacco product shall mean either actual physical control of the tobacco product without necessarily owning that product, or the right to control the tobacco product even though it is in a different room or place than where the person is physically located. 
    Public place means a public street, sidewalk, or park or any area open to the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or premises, or in a public place of business. 
    Tobacco product means a product that contains tobacco and is intended for human consumption, including but not limited to, cigarettes, non-cigarette smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined in Section 2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act, and cigars. Tobacco product does not include a vapor product or a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
    Use a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product means to smoke, chew, suck, inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product. 
    Vapor product means a noncombustible product containing, designed or intended to contain nicotine that employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other electronic, chemical or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form. Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device containing, designed, or intended to contain or use a product to be vaporized and a vapor cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device. Vapor product does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug Administration. 
(Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 58-253. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  Subject to subsection (c) of this section, a minor shall not do any of the following: 
(1)  Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product, vapor product, or alternative nicotine delivery product. 
(2)  Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product. 
(3)  Use a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product in a public place. 
(4)  Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or attempting to possess a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product. 
(b)  An individual who violates subsection (a) above, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. Pursuant to a probation order, the court may also require participation in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program. An individual who is ordered to participate in a health promotion and risk reduction assessment program under this subsection is responsible for the costs of participating in the program. In addition, an individual who violates subsection (a) is subject to the following: 
(1)  For the first violation, the court may order the individual to do one (1) of the following: 
a.  Perform not more than 16 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
b.  Participate in a health promotion and risk reduction program, as described in this subsection. 
(2)  For a second violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the individual to perform not more than 32 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
(3)  For a third or subsequent violation, in addition to participation in a health promotion and risk reduction program, the court may order the individual to perform not more than 48 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing home or long-term care facility. 
(c)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to a minor participating in any of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product under the direction of the minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product under the direction of the state police or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action, unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product by the minor was not under the direction of the state police or the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(3)  Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to purchase tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks are conducted under the direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency, as defined in the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, and with the prior approval of the state police or a local police agency. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to the handling or transportation of a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product by a minor under the terms of that minor's employment. 
(e)  This section does not prohibit an individual from being charged with, convicted of, or sentenced for any other violation of law that arises out of the violation of subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  This section does not interfere with the right of a parent or legal guardian in the rearing and management of his or her minor children or wards within the bounds of his or her own private premises. 
(Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Sec. 58-254. - Furnishing to minors. 
(a)  A person shall not sell, give or furnish a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product to a minor, including, but not limited to, through a vending machine. A person who violates this subsection or subsection (h) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50.00 for each violation. 
(b)  A person who sells tobacco products, vapor products, or alternative nicotine delivery products at retail shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to employees and customers, a sign that includes the following statement: 
"The purchase of a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product by a minor under 18 years of age and the provision of a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product to a minor are prohibited by law. A minor who unlawfully purchases or uses a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product is subject to criminal penalties." 
(c)  If the sign required under subsection (b) above, is more than six feet from the point of sale, it shall be five and one-half inches by eight and one-half inches and the statement required under subsection (b) shall be printed in 36-point bold-faced type. If the sign required under subsection (b) is six feet or less from the point of sale, it shall be two inches by four inches and the statement required under subsection (b) shall be printed in 20-point bold-faced type. 
(d)  The signs required by subsection (c) above, may be procured from the department of community health pursuant to state law. The seller may add the "vapor product" and "alternative nicotine delivery product" language to the sign if the department of community health does not or will not include it. 
(e)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge under subsection (a) of this section, that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force, a written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco products, vapor products, and alternative nicotine delivery products to persons under 18 years of age and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described in this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the notice on the prosecuting attorney. The defendant shall serve the notice not less than 14 days before the date set for trial. 
(f)  If the prosecuting attorney proposes to offer testimony to rebut the affirmative defense described in subsection (e) above, the prosecuting attorney shall file a notice of rebuttal, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the notice on the defendant. The prosecuting attorney shall serve the notice not less than seven days before the date set for trial and shall include in the notice the name and address of each rebuttal witness. 
(g)  Subsection (a) of this section does not apply to the handling or transportation of a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product by a minor under the terms of the minor's employment. 
(h)  Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco product, vapor product or alternative nicotine delivery product to an individual, a person shall verify that the individual is at least 18 years of age by doing one of the following: 
(1)  If the individual appears to be under 27 years of age, examining a government-issued photographic identification that establishes that the individual is at least 18 years of age. 
(2)  For sales made by the internet or other remote sales method, performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age verification service that compares information available from a commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that are regularly used by government agencies and businesses for the purpose of age and identity verification to the personal information entered by the individual during the ordering process that establishes that the individual is 18 years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 11-16, Pt. I, 3-28-16) 
Secs. 58-255-58-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING DRUGS 

Sec. 58-261. - Possession and use of marihuana. 
(a)  Definition. Marihuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant or its seeds or resin. It does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted therefrom, fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Possession. No person shall possess or control marihuana within the City of South Lyon unless such possession or control is pursuant to a license or prescription, or otherwise allowed under the provisions of Public Act No. 368 of 1978 as amended. A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor punishable as provided in section 1-14. 
(c)  Use. No person shall use marihuana within the City of South Lyon unless said use is pursuant to a license, prescription or otherwise allowed as provided by Public Act No. 368 of 1978 as amended. A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00 plus costs of prosecution and/or imprisonment for not more than 90 days. 
(Code 1988, § 9.251) 
Sec. 58-262. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words and phrases, when used in this section shall, for the purpose of this section, have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Controlled substance means any drug, substance or immediate precursor enumerated in schedule 1-5 of section 7201 to 7231 of the Public Health Code, being sections 333.7201 to 333.7231 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Drug paraphernalia. 
(1)  Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is not limited to: 
a.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance, or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
b.  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing a controlled substance. 
c.  Isomerization devices used, intended for use or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
d.  Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances. 
e.  Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances. 
f.  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose used, intended for use or designed for use in mixing with, diluting or cutting controlled substances. 
g.  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
h.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devises used, intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
i.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes or other containers used, intended for use or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
j.  Containers and other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
k.  Hypodermic syringes, needles or other objects used, intended for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
l.  Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
1.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls. 
2.  Water pipes. 
3.  Carburetion tubes and devices. 
4.  Smoking and carburetion masks. 
5.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as marijuana cigarettes, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand. 
6.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials. 
7.  Chamber pipes. 
8.  Carburetor pipes. 
9.  Electric pipes. 
10.  Air-driven pipes. 
11.  Chillums. 
12.  Bongs. 
13.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(2)  Inclusions or exclusions from definition. The following are either included in or excluded from, the definition, as indicated: 
a.  Paper with colorful design or name design, or marketed for use with controlled substances is included in the definition. White paper or tobacco-oriented paper not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity with other items within the definition is not included. 
b.  Roach clips or other pincer-type devices designed or marketed for use with controlled substances are included in the definition. Common paper clips, tie clips, hair pins or alligator clips not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
c.  Pipes, bongs and similar inhalers designed or marketed for use with controlled substances are included in the definition. Pipes and inhalers not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
d.  Common household or retail items not designed or marketed for use with controlled substances and not displayed in proximity of other items within the definition are not included. 
(3)  Additional considerations. In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use. 
b.  Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any local ordinance or state or federal law relating to any controlled substance. 
c.  The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of this section. 
d.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances. 
e.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object. 
f.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver the object to a person or persons whom he or she knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this section. The innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this section, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as "drug paraphernalia." 
g.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use. 
h.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use. 
i.  National or local advertising concerning the object's use. 
j.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale. 
k.  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products. 
l.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise. 
m.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community. 
n.  Expert testimony concerning the object's use. 
    Market means the act of marketing a product. 
    Persons means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership or association. 
(b)  Prohibitions. 
(1)  Delivery, sale or marketing. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, sell, market or possess with intent to deliver, sell or market drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(2)  Possession. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with the intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance. 
(3)  Advertisements. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
(4)  Special offenses: delivery to minors. Any person, 18 years of age or over who violates subsection (b)(1) of this section, by delivering drug paraphernalia to a person or persons under 18 years of age who is at least three years his or her junior is guilty of a special offense, which shall be punished as a misdemeanor of the first degree. 
(5)  Exceptions. The prohibition contained in subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to the following: 
a.  To manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers, licensed medical technicians, technologists, nurses, hospitals, research teaching institutions, clinical laboratories, medical doctors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, chiropodists, veterinarians, pharmacists or embalmers in the normal course of their respective businesses or professions. 
b.  To common carriers or wholesalers of their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of such paraphernalia. 
c.  To public officers or employees while engaged in the performance of their official duties. 
d.  To persons suffering from diabetes, asthma or any other medical condition requiring self-injection. 
(c)  Penalties for violations. 
(1)  Misdemeanor of the second degree. Whoever violates any of the provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree. A misdemeanor of the second degree shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00 or by sentence of not more than 30 days of confinement in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(2)  Misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of subsection (b) of this section, any subsequent violation of the same section shall be a misdemeanor of the first degree. A misdemeanor of the first degree shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00 or by a sentence of not more than 90 days of confinement in jail, or both, in the discretion of the court. 
(3)  Civil forfeiture. Any drug paraphernalia used or possessed in violation of this section shall be seized and forfeited to the City of South Lyon or the seizing agency. 
(4)  Separate offenses. Each day that a violation of this section shall continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  This section shall be enforced by the City of South Lyon Police Department, the Oakland County Sheriff's Department, the Michigan State Police and/or other law enforcement officers as may be designated by the city council. 
(2)  In the event any subsection, sentence, word, phrase or part of this section shall be held invalid, such holdings shall not affect the balance of the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1988, § 9.252; Ord. of 12-8-97(1), §§ 1-5) 
Sec. 58-263. - Fraud and deceit in obtaining drugs, syringes. 
    Any fraud, deceit, misrepresentation, subterfuge, concealment of a material fact, or the use of a false name or the giving of a false address for the purpose of obtaining any narcotic drug or barbituric acid or any derivative, compound, preparation or mixture thereof or hypodermic syringe or needle or other instrument or implement or empty gelatin capsules or false statement on any prescription blank shall be deemed a violation of this article. No person who shall have obtained the possession of any narcotic drugs, hypodermic syringes, needles or other instruments or implements adapted for the use of such drugs or empty gelatin capsules pursuant to the terms of this article shall use the same or permit or authorize their use for any purpose other than that specifically authorized in the prescription or order by means of which such possession was obtained. 
(Code 1988, § 9.254) 
Sec. 58-264. - Inhalation prohibited. 
    No person shall inhale, drink, eat or otherwise introduce into his respiratory or circulatory system, any compound, liquid, chemical, or any substance known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope, plastic solvent or any other material or substance or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational, or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, judgment, balance or coordination of such person. For the purpose of this section, any such condition so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition. 
(Code 1988, § 9.255) 
Chapter 62 - PARKS AND RECREATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 62-1-62-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION 

Sec. 62-31. - Appointment. 
    The city council may appoint a parks and recreation commission. Said commission shall consist of seven members. The city council shall appoint the members of said commission for the following terms: two for one year, three for two years, two for three years, and thereafter such members annually for a three year term commencing on March 1 of the year of their appointment. The city council shall fill any vacancy occurring in the membership for the remainder of the unexpired term. The city council may remove any member for cause. Members serving on the parks and recreation commission shall continue in office until their successor is appointed. All members shall serve as such without compensation. 
(Code 1988, § 1.165; Ord. No. 04-14, Pt. I, 7-28-14) 
Sec. 62-32. - Duties. 
    The commission shall advise the city manager of its recommendations on the acquisition of park land, on the development of park land including the facilities to be placed thereon, and the operation, management and control of all indoor and outdoor parks and recreation facilities provided and financed by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.166) 
Sec. 62-33. - Rules and regulations of commission meetings. 
    The commission shall elect its own officers and shall provide written minutes of the actions taken at its meetings. The commission shall provide its own rules and regulations concerning its meetings and the conduct thereof, one of which shall be that the commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month. A copy of the minutes of each meeting shall be delivered to the office of the city manager within three working days of the end of the meeting. 
(Code 1988, § 1.167) 
Sec. 62-34. - Director of recreation. 
    The position of director of recreation, when deemed necessary and authorized by the city council, shall be filled by appointment by the city manager with the advice of the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 1.168) 
Sec. 62-35. - Finances. 
    The commission shall make no financial commitment for expenditure of funds or the incurring of indebtedness or obligation, without first having secured the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 1.169) 
Sec. 62-36. - Rules and regulations. 
    The commission shall recommend rules and regulations governing the operation and use of all city park land and facilities, which shall be effective upon approval by the city council. No person shall refuse or fail to comply with any such rules and regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 1.170) 
Secs. 62-37-62-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE OF PUBLIC PARKS 

Sec. 62-61. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park means any municipally owned, operated or maintained recreation facility, generally open to the public and used as hereinafter designated, including structures, buildings, appliances and any and all items used in the operation and maintenance of the park, including park grounds. 
    Trailway means any municipally owned, operated, or maintained trailway generally open to the public and used for recreational purposes. 
    Vehicle means automobiles, motorcycles and other motor driven vehicles or conveyances, horse or animal drawn conveyances, bicycles or any other conveyances used for the transportation of persons or goods or both. 
(Code 1988, § 3.1; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-62. - Hours of use. 
    Those parks hereby regulated shall be open to the public between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain within or use any park during any other hours except by permit obtained in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 3.2; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-63. - Use and parking of vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful to drive or operate a vehicle in areas other than designated roadways and parking areas existing, maintained, and designated as such. It shall also be unlawful for any vehicle to exceed posted speed limits within such a park. Any person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.3; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-64. - Animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for a person to keep, maintain or permit within or bring into a city park or park grounds, any so-called pet or other animal, except under the following conditions: 
(a)  The animal is tethered by leash and controlled by a person. 
(b)  The person controlling the animal is in possession of items needed for collection, containment, and disposal of animal feces. 
(c)  The person controlling the animal collects and disposes of any of that animal's feces deposited on park grounds. 
Any person who violates this section is deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988,§ 3.4; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1; Ord. of 7-12-10) 
Sec. 62-65. - Commercial activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any park or any portion thereof for activities of a commercial or fund raising or similar purpose without first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with the terms and conditions set forth herein. Any person who violates this section is responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.5; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-66. - Vandalism. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, mutilate, deface, or remove or attempt to destroy, mutilate, deface, or remove any facilities located within a park area. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, structures, their components, utility services, trees, shrubs, grass, asphalt paving, chairs, tables, and any other equipment or appurtenances located within the park. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 3.6; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-67. - Unlawful conduct. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to act, commit any act, or cause any other persons to act in such a manner so as to prevent the reasonable and safe enjoyment of the park or its facilities by others lawfully entitled to use one. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 3.7; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-68. - Park use permits. 
    There is hereby established a licensing authority which shall consist of the clerk and an additional person designated by the council which shall issue permits to those persons desiring to use a park under conditions requiring a permit therefor, pursuant to rules and regulations that may reasonably be established by resolution of the council, upon compliance with those rules and regulations and upon payment of required fees, if any. The licensing authority is hereby empowered to so issue a permit which shall authorize the particular use desired and which shall be prima facie evidence of compliance with the rules and regulations established for the issuance of said permit. 
(Code 1988, § 3.8) 
Sec. 62-69. - Purpose for which permit is required. 
(a)  Park use permits are required for any organized function consisting of more than 25 people. 
(b)  Park use permits are required for any group who wishes to reserve for their sole use a particular portion of city park, i.e., pavilion, baseball diamond, etc. 
(Code 1988, § 3.9) 
Sec. 62-70. - Alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverages within any public park. 
(b)  Exception. If a group wishes to reserve the city park under permit issued by the clerk and proposes to possess, serve, consume or sell alcoholic beverages, application must be made directly to city council not less than 30 days prior to the event, and such application must include: 
(1)  If beer and wine are proposed to be sold, a special license authorizing same must be obtained from the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission for the date(s) the park is requested. 
(2)  Proof of an insurance policy, listing the City of South Lyon as first insured, to indemnity the city to a maximum liability coverage in the amount of $1,000,000.00. 
(3)  A statement of the purpose of the gathering, the relationship, if any, between persons expected to attend, number and ages of those expected to attend, the names and address of persons responsible for organizing the event, and a list of activities expected to take place. 
(4)  Council shall within 15 days of application hold a public hearing and approve or disapprove of the application. 
(c)  Violations. Any person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 3.10; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-71. - Music. 
    The playing of music, either live or recorded, is permissible to the degree that the volume of such music is not offensive to residents bordering the park. Any person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1988, § 3.11; Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-72. - Enforcement. 
    The enforcement of park regulations and permit limitations is vested with the South Lyon Police Department. 
(1)  First violation of park regulations will result in a warning issued to the permit holder. 
(2)  Second violation of park rules will result in the immediate expulsion from the park. 
(3)  Violation of any limitation on activity expressed in a park permit shall be grounds for immediate termination of said permit. 
(Code 1988, § 3.12) 
Sec. 62-73. - Deposit. 
(a)  For groups wishing to reserve the park for a special function, the following deposits are required: 
(1)  25-50 people ..... $ 25.00 
(2)  51-100 people ..... 50.00 
(3)  101 or more people ..... 100.00 
(b)  The park will be inspected for damage by the superintendent of the department of public works, or his designee, on the next regular work day following the use of the park. If no appreciable damage is found, the full amount of the deposit will be refunded. If damage is discovered, the cost of repairs will be deducted from the deposit and the balance refunded. If the cost of repairs exceeds the amount of deposit, the permit holder will be billed the excess. 
(Code 1988, § 3.13) 
Sec. 62-74. - Trailway regulations and prohibitions. 
(a)  Motor vehicles. No person shall drive, propel, or park a motor vehicle or motor sports equipment of any nature upon any trailway except motor vehicles used by authorized personal for enforcement or maintenance purposes. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Bicycles, skateboards roller skates, etc. No person shall operate a bicycle, skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, or similar device in a careless or reckless manner upon a trailway. A person who commits a violation of this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(c)  Garbage, trash and litter. No person shall deposit or abandon in any way on or within a trailway any garbage, glass, trash, waste, sewage, litter, or other material, except in receptacles provided for that purpose. A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor. 
(d)  Loitering. No person shall loiter upon a trailway. As used in this subsection, the term "loiter" means the act of standing or idling in or about the trailway so as to hinder or impede or tend to hinder or impede passage of pedestrians or authorized vehicles. A violation of this subsection is a misdemeanor. 
(e)  Yielding to pedestrians. Any person operating a bicycle, skateboard, roller blades, roller skates, or other such item or authorized vehicle upon a trailway shall always yield to pedestrians and shall warn pedestrians before passing and shall also stay to the right except when passing. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal infraction. 
(f)  Animals. No person shall allow any animal to be upon a trailway unless such animal is leashed. A pet owner shall be responsible for animal cleanup. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages. No person shall consume or possess alcoholic beverages upon a trailway. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(h)  Horses. No person shall be allowed to bring any horse or to ride any horse in or upon a trailway. Any person who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(i)  Groups. No organized group of runners or bicycle riders consisting of ten persons or more shall run or ride together upon a trailway unless such group first obtains a parade permit from the chief of police or the city council pursuant to chapter 82, article IV. Any person or group who violates this subsection shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Sec. 62-75. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  Civil infractions. Any person who violates a section or subsection of this article in which a violation is designated as a "civil infraction" shall be fined in a sum up to $500.00. 
(b)  Municipal civil infractions. Any person, firm or corporation violating a provision of this article in which a violation is designated as a "municipal civil infraction" is subject to municipal civil infraction penalties as set forth in this Code. 
(c)  Trailway municipal civil infraction. Any person who commits a violation of any section or subsection of this article in which a violation is designated as a "trailway municipal civil infraction" is subject to the penalties specified in subsection (b) of this section and is also subject to the following: 
(1)  A citation that may be issued for a trailway municipal civil infraction shall be designed to allow the authorized local official to indicate that the defendant is required to appear at a formal hearing. An authorized local official issuing a ticket for a trailway municipal civil infraction shall require the defendant to appear at a formal hearing if either or both of the following apply: 
a.  The trailway municipal civil infraction caused damage to a natural resource or facility. 
b.  The authorized local official impounds the vehicle involved in the commission of the trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(2)  An authorized local official may cease and impound a vehicle operated in the commission of a trailway municipal civil infraction. Upon impoundment, the vehicle is subject to a lien, subordinate to a prior lien of record in the amount of any fine and costs and expenses the defendant may be ordered to pay pursuant to this article. The defendant or a person with ownership interest in the vehicle may post with the court a cash or surety bond in the amount of $750.00. If such a bond is posted, the vehicle shall be released from impoundment. The vehicle shall also be released and the lien shall be discharged upon a judicial determination that the defendant is not responsible for the trailway municipal civil infraction or upon payment of the fine, costs, and damages and expenses. 
(3)  In a trailway municipal civil infraction action an order issued by the court may require the defendant to pay one or both of the following: 
a.  The amount of damages to any land, water, wildlife, vegetation, or other natural resource or to any facility damaged by the violation of this article. Money collected under this subsection shall be distributed to the City of South Lyon. 
b.  The reasonable expense of impoundment under this article. Money collected under this subsection shall be distributed to the City of South Lyon or the entity employing the authorized local official who impounded the vehicle involved in the trailway municipal civil infraction. 
(4)  If the court determines that the defendant is responsible for the trailway municipal civil infraction and the defendant defaults on the payment of the fines, costs, or damages or expenses, or any installment pursuant to this article, any bond posted under this article shall be forfeited and applied to the fines, costs, damages, expenses, or installment. The court shall certify any remaining unpaid amount to the attorney for the City of South Lyon. The attorney for the City of South Lyon may enforce the lien by a foreclosure sale. The foreclosure sale shall be conducted in the manner provided and subject to the same rights as apply in the case of execution sales under sections 6031, 6032, 6041, 6042, and 6044-6047 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, being MCL 600.6031, 600.6032, 600.6041, 600.6042, and 600.6044-600.6047. 
(5)  Not less than 21 days before the foreclosure sale authorized under subsection (c)(4) of this section, the attorney for the City of South Lyon shall by certified mail send written notice of the time and place of the foreclosure sale to each person with a known ownership interest or lien of record on the vehicle. In addition, not less than ten days before the foreclosure sale, the attorney shall twice publish notice of the time and place of the foreclosure sale in a newspaper of general circulation in Oakland County. The proceeds of the foreclosure sale shall be distributed in the following order of priority: 
a.  To discharge any lien on the vehicle that was recorded prior to the creation of the lien under this article. 
b.  To the clerk of the court for the payment of the fine, costs, damages, and expenses that the defendant was ordered to pay under this article. 
c.  To discharge any lien on the vehicle that was recorded after the creation of the lien under this article. 
d.  To the owner of the vehicle. 
(d)  Any person who commits a violation of any section or subsection of this article which is designated as a misdemeanor shall be subject to a penalty of not more than 90 days in jail and/or a fine not to exceed $500.00 plus costs. 
(Ord. of 6-27-94, § 1) 
Chapter 66 - SECONDHAND GOODS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 66-1-66-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARAGE SALES 

Sec. 66-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Garage sale, lawn sale, attic sale, rummage sale , or flea market sale, or other similarly termed sale shall mean any sale of tangible personal property not otherwise regulated in the South Lyon City Code. 
(Code 1988, § 7.101) 
Sec. 66-32. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct what is known as a garage sale or rummage sale within the City of South Lyon without having first procured from the city clerk a license therefor. 
(Code 1988, § 7.102) 
Sec. 66-33. - Duration of sale. 
    Any person conducting a sale licensed hereunder may not conduct such sale for a period of more than three consecutive days. 
(Code 1988, § 7.103) 
Sec. 66-34. - Frequency of sales. 
    No person shall be allowed more than one license hereunder within any 12-month period, excepting that this section shall not apply to duly constituted nonprofit or religious organizations which shall have registered as such with the city clerk and, in which event, a license under this article shall be issued to such nonprofit or religious organizations for a one-year period. 
(Code 1988, § 7.104) 
Sec. 66-35. - Violations; posting license. 
    Any person who shall conduct a garage sale or rummage sale, without having procured said license from the city, shall be guilty of violating this Code. Said license shall be posted at the location of sale so as to be visible to the public. 
(Code 1988, § 7.105) 
Sec. 66-36. - Location of sales; storage of goods. 
    All garage or rummage sales shall be held at the rear of property or building, in garages or in confined quarters. There shall be no outside storage of goods or merchandise. 
(Code 1988, § 7.106) 
Secs. 66-37-66-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USED CAR SALES 

Sec. 66-61. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the City of South Lyon Used Car Sales Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 6-28-93, § 10.102) 
Sec. 66-62. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
    For sale sign means any form of writing on a window of a motor vehicle, preprinted signs indicating for sale or any other commonly used symbol a person would recognize to mean for sale. 
    Parking area means a place open to the general public including an area designated for parking of vehicles in shopping centers, public parking areas, public parks, and business parking lots where permission of the owner has not been obtained. 
    Person means a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual. 
(Ord. of 6-28-93, § 10.103) 
Sec. 66-63. - Violations. 
    Any person who parks, stores or displays a motor vehicle for sale in a parking area or a place open to the general public, or parks a motor vehicle with a visible "for sale sign" for more than four hours, in a parking area or a place open to the general public, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-28-93, § 10.104) 
Sec. 66-64. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article does not apply to vehicles that are for sale in a residential driveway or on the street immediately in front of the residential property, provided that the cars are licensed and that the vehicle listed for sale is owned by the property owner, and the car listed for sale is limited to one vehicle per residence. 
(b)  This article does not apply to businesses properly zoned to sell used cars/vehicles. 
(Ord. of 6-28-93, § 10.105) 
Sec. 66-65. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 6-28-93, § 10.106; Ord. of 11-28-94(32), § 1) 
Chapter 70 - SIGNS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 01-14, Pts. I, II, adopted February 10, 2014, repealed the former Ch. 70, §§ 70-1-70-14, and enacted a new Ch. 70 as set out herein. The former Ch. 70 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 70-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to permit and regulate signs and to minimize outdoor advertising within the city so as to protect public safety, health and welfare; minimize abundance and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of sight distance; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the City of South Lyon Master Plan and Zoning Ordinance; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are intended to be content neutral. 
    These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs in the city so as to: 
(a)  Protect the public right to receive messages, especially noncommercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, philosophical and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
(b)  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and warning the public, causes confusion, reduces desired uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for accidents. 
(c)  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
(d)  Reduce visual pollution and physical obstructions caused by a proliferation of signs which would diminish the city's image, property values and quality of life. 
(e)  Recognize that the principal intent of commercial signs, should be for identification of an establishment on the premises, and not for advertising special events, brand names, or off-premises activities; alternative channels of advertising communication and media are available for advertising which do not create visual blight and compromise traffic safety. 
(f)  Enable the public to locate goods, services and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by restricting the number and placement of signs. 
(g)  Prevent placement of signs which will conceal or obscure signs of adjacent uses. 
(h)  The regulations and standards of this chapter are considered the minimum necessary to achieve a substantial government interest for public safety, aesthetics, protection of property values, and are intended to be content neutral. 
(i)  Prevent off-premise signs from conflicting with other allowed land uses. 
(j)  Maintain and improve the image of the city by encouraging signs of consistent size which are compatible with and complementary to related buildings and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings. 
(k)  Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
(l)  Preserve and enhance the image of the city's downtown. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-2. - Sign definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Animated sign. A sign which uses lights, moving parts, or other means to depict movement, motion, action, the impression or appearance thereof, or create an image of a living creature or person. 
    Awning or canopy sign. A non-rigid fabric marquee or awning-type structure which is attached to the building by supporting framework, which includes a business identification message, symbol and/or logo. See "wall sign." 
    Business center. A grouping of two or more business establishments on one or more parcels of property which may share parking and access and are linked architecturally or otherwise present the appearance of a unified grouping of businesses. A business center shall be considered one use for the purposes of determining the maximum number of ground signs. An automobile or vehicle dealership shall be considered a business center regardless of the number or type of models or makes available, however, used vehicle sales shall be considered a separate use in determining the maximum number of signs, provided that the used vehicle sales section of the lot includes at least 25 percent of the available sales area. 
    Changeable message sign. A sign on which the message is changed mechanically, electronically or manually, including time/temperature signs and gasoline price signs. 
    Construction sign. A temporary sign identifying the name(s) of project owners, contractors, developers, realtors representing developers, architects, designers, engineers, landscape architects, and financiers of a project being constructed or improved; and not including any advertising of any product or announcement of availability of leasing space. 
    Device sign. Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps, ice containers and similar items indicating only the contents of such devices. 
    Directional sign. A sign which assists motorists in determining or confirming a correct route such as, enter, exit and parking signs. 
    Entranceway sign. A sign which marks the entrance to a subdivision, apartment complex, condominium development, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses. 
    Flashing sign. A sign which contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
    Ground or monument sign. A three dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding identification sign, consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
    Illegal sign. A sign which does not meet the requirements of this chapter and does not have legal non-conforming status. 
    Incidental sign. A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, signs used to designate bathrooms, and signs providing information on credit cards and business affiliations. 
    Mansard. A sloped roof or roof-like facade. Signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. 
    Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure or canopy, supported by and extending from the face of the building. A marquee sign is a sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure. 
    Moving sign. A sign in which the sign itself or any portion of the sign moves or revolves. A "rotating sign" is a type of moving sign. This definition does not include "changeable message signs." 
    Mural or painted wall sign. A design or representation which is painted or drawn on the exterior surface of a structure and which does not advertise a business, product, service, or activity. 
    Nameplate. A non-electric, on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
    Nonconforming sign. A sign that does not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. 
    Obsolete sign. A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed. 
    Off-premises advertising or billboard sign. A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located; a sign which directs travelers or provides a message unrelated to the site on which the sign is located, e.g. billboards. Off-premises advertising signs also include video signs and similar technologies. 
    Portable sign. A sign designed to be moved from place to place, whether or not it is permanently attached to the ground or structure. This includes hot-air and gas-filled balloons, pennants, streamers, festoons, ribbons, tinsel, pinwheels, nongovernment flags, and searchlights and signs mounted on a portable structures including those with wheels. 
    Projecting sign. A sign, other than a wall sign, that is affixed to any building or wall and whose leading edge extends more than 12 inches beyond such building or wall. 
    Pylon or pole sign. A sign supported on the ground by a pole or braces, without a monument base, and not attached to any building or other structure. 
    Real estate development sign. A sign that is designed to promote the sale or rental of lots, homes, or building space in a real estate development (such as a subdivision or shopping center) which is under construction on the parcel on which the sign is located. 
    Real estate open house sign. Temporary signs which advertise and direct the public to an open house for a building which is available for sale or lease, with the event held on a specific day. 
    Real estate sign. An on-premise temporary sign advertising the property or structure's availability for sale or lease. 
    Regulatory sign. A sign installed by a public agency to direct traffic flow, regulate traffic operations and provide information in conformance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
    Roof sign. Any sign that extends above the roofline or is erected over the surface of the roof. 
    Sandwich board sign. Also known as a poster panel or "A" frame sign. A moveable nonpermanent sign placed within the pedestrian public right-of-way of a public sidewalk during regular business hours consisting of an "A" frame or "inverted T" frame or other temporary style, with not more than two flat surfaces containing messages, and not permanently affixed to any structure or to the sidewalk itself. 
    Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, figure, symbol, banner, pennant, flag, balloon, logo, or placard consisting of written copy, symbols, logos and/or graphics, designed for the purpose of conveying, bringing attention to, identifying or advertising an establishment, product, goods, services, or other message to the general public. Unless otherwise indicated, the definition of "sign" includes interior and exterior signs which are visible from any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, or public property, but not signs which are primarily visible to and directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
    Snipe sign. A snipe sign is a sign made on any material and attached to any object and having no application to the premises where located. 
    Temporary sign. A sign not constructed or intended for long-term or permanent use. Examples of temporary signs include signs which announce a coming attraction, a new building under construction, a community or civic event or project, or other special events that occur for a limited period of time such as a garage, yard or estate sale. 
    Vehicle business sign. Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer which is being used principally for advertising purposes, rather than for transportation purposes. 
    Wall sign. A sign attached parallel to and extending not more than 12 inches from the wall of a building. Painted signs, signs which consist of individual letters, cabinet signs, and signs mounted on the face of a mansard roof shall be considered wall signs. Permanent signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside, shall also be considered wall signs. 
    Window sign. A sign located in or on a window which is intended to be viewed from the outside. Permanent window signs which are not affixed directly to a window or are positioned next to a window so that they are visible from the outside shall be considered wall signs. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-3. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
(a)  Signs which obstruct free access or egress from any building, including those that obstruct any fire escape, required exit way, window, or door opening or that prevent free access to the roof by firefighters. 
(b)  Moving signs and signs having moving members or parts, excluding barber shop poles. 
(c)  Animated signs. 
(d)  Inflatable signs. 
(e)  Signs which in any way simulate or could be confused with the lighting of emergency vehicles or traffic signals; there shall be no flashing, oscillating or intermittent, or red, yellow, or green illumination on any sign located in the same line of vision as a traffic control system, nor interference with vision clearance along any highway, street, or road or at any intersection of two or more streets. 
(f)  Signs which obstruct or impair the vision of motorists or nonmotorized travelers at any intersection, driveway, within a parking lot or loading area. 
(g)  Snipe signs, including nonregulatory signs placed in any public right-of-way, as well as those attached to a utility pole, affixed to a tree, street furniture, fences, or waste receptacle. 
(h)  Off-premise signs, including video signs or similar technologies. 
(i)  Roof signs unless specifically permitted elsewhere in this chapter. 
(j)  Portable signs, as defined, not provided for in this chapter. 
(k)  Pylon or pole signs not provided for in this chapter. 
(l)  Illegal signs. 
(m)  Obsolete signs and any sign or sign structure which: 
1.  Is structurally unsafe. 
2.  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment. 
3.  Is capable of causing electric shock to person who comes in contact with it. 
4.  Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing letters, or nonoperational lights. 
(n)  Flashing signs. 
(o)  Any sign which makes use of the words "Stop", "Look", or "Danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
(p)  Any sign not expressly permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-4. - Exemptions to permitting. 
    The following signs shall not require a permit provided such signs are outside of the public street right-of-way, are located to ensure adequate sight distance, and meet the requirements of section 70-6 of this chapter: 
(a)  Address signs. 
1.  In all single-family zoning districts, such sign shall not exceed two square feet in area. 
2.  In all other zoning districts, such signs shall not exceed six square feet in area. 
(b)  Barber shop poles noting that the bottom of the barber pole must be at least eight feet from the ground or sidewalk and the top must be lower than the height of the building. 
(c)  Community entrance or welcome signs. 
(d)  Construction signs meeting the size requirements for temporary signs under section 70-6. 
(e)  Temporary signs meeting the requirements of section 70-6. 
(f)  Device signs with the following conditions: 
1.  Sign area of each device shall not exceed three square feet in area. 
2.  Limit of one sign per device, such as vending machines, gas pumps or ice containers. 
(g)  Directory signs. A building with business occupants on the upper floors or the interior space on the first floor of a building may have a directory sign plaque not to exceed ten square feet in area at the street entryway. 
(h)  Employment signs. "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the place of business where posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall be six square feet with a maximum height of four feet. 
(i)  Essential service signs denoting utility lines, hazards and precautions or other similar information. 
(j)  Flags. 
1.  Not to exceed three per zoning lot; and 
2.  Not to exceed four feet by six feet. 
(k)  Historic markers. 
(l)  Incidental signs shall not exceed a total of two square feet, a total of two signs per business. indicating acceptance of credit cards, the location of public telephones, restrooms, restrictions on smoking and restrictions on building entrances or describing business affiliations and are attached to a permitted sign, exterior wall, building entrance, or window. 
(m)  Interior signs, including any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building, and which is not visible from outside the building or which is primarily directed at persons within the premises upon which the sign is located. 
(n)  Memorial signs or tablets shall not exceed four square feet in area, having the name of the building and/or the date of erection and cut, cast or engraved into a masonry or metal surface and made an integral part of the structure. 
(o)  Murals or painted wall signs painted on the exterior surfaces of a building or structure shall be less than 12 square feet in area. Such signs shall not have raised borders, raised letters, raised characters, decorations, or lighting appliances. Mural or painted wall signs greater than 12 square feet shall be only as approved by the planning commission if such sign enhances the architecture of the building. 
(p)  Nameplates. 
(q)  Political signs not exceeding 24 square feet in area per side, meeting corner clearance requirements of this ordinance, and not located in the public right-of-way. 
(r)  Real estate signs and real estate open house signs. 
(s)  Real estate development signs, conditioned upon removal when the building or development is completed. 
(t)  Regulatory signs including traffic control and street identification signs. 
(u)  Vehicle business signs. 
(v)  Warning signs that are publicly authorized, such as no trespassing, warning of electrical currents or animals provided such signs do not exceed two square feet in area. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-5. - General standards for permitted signs. 
    Signs which are permitted as on-premise accessory uses serving a commercial or informational purpose may be permitted subject to the requirements of this chapter; provided, that no such sign shall be erected or altered until approved by the building official and until a sign permit has been issued. 
(a)  Sign setbacks. 
1.  All signs, unless otherwise provided for, shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public or private street right-of-way line or access drive in all districts. This distance shall be measured from the nearest edge of the sign, measured at a vertical line perpendicular to the ground to the right-of-way. 
2.  Side yard setbacks for signs shall be the same as that required for the main structure or building, provided that all nonresidential signs shall be set back at least 100 feet from any residential district. 
(b)  Clear vision area. In order to ensure adequate sight distance for motorists, bicyclists and pedestrians, a minimum clear vision area shall be maintained between a height of 24 inches and six feet within a triangular area measured 25 feet back from intersection of public right-of-way lines. Furthermore, signs shall not be permitted where they obstruct motorist vision of regulatory signs, traffic-control devices or street signs. 
(c)  Design and construction. Signs, as permitted in the various zoning districts, shall be designed to be compatible with the character of building materials and landscaping to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect in accordance with the standards set forth herein. Signs shall not be constructed from materials that are remnants or manufactured for a different purpose. 
(d)  Illumination. 
1.  Signs may be illuminated, but only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it. 
2.  Use of glaring undiffused lights, including bare bulbs, neon, or flames, is prohibited. 
3.  Lighting shall be shielded and/or pointed downward so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares. 
4.  Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not attached to a building. 
(e)  Maintenance and construction. 
1.  Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner consistent with the building code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal, wood or other materials used for parts and supports. 
2.  All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they shall be able to withstand wind pressure of at least 20 pounds per square foot or 75 mph. 
3.  All signs, including any cables, guy wires, or supports shall have a minimum clearance of four feet from any electric fixture, street light, or other public utility pole or standard. 
(f)  Sign area. Measurement of allowable sign area is as follows: 

1.  The allowable area for signs shall be measured by calculating the square footage of the sign face and any frame or base of other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed as measured by enclosing the most protruding points or edges of a sign within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
2.  When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in calculating the area of the sign except that where two such faces are placed back to back, only larger face shall be considered, provided that both faces are part of the same structure, contain the same message and are separated by no more than two feet. 
3.  For purposes of calculating sign area allowed as a wall sign, the wall sign square footage shall be determined by measuring a parallelogram (box) which includes the portion of the canopy which contains a message, symbol and/or logo. 
4.  When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed, painted or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the calculation for sign area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of the sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
(g)  Sign height. 

1.  The permitted height of all signs supported by the ground shall be measured from the level of the ground, finished surface, adjacent to the sign. 
2.  Sign height shall not be measured from an area of the ground that has been built-up or constructed in a manner that would have the effect of allowing a higher sign height than permitted by these regulations (e.g. the height of signs erected on a berm shall be measured from the finished grade adjacent to the berm). 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-6. - Specific sign standards. 
    The number, display area, and height of signs within the various zoning districts are provided in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table and its accompanying footnotes. Additional standards for specific types of signs are given below. 
Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations WALL, CANOPY, OR PROJECTING SIGN GROUND SIGN TEMPORARY SIGNS (c) DISTRICT Number # Max. Size Number # (b) Max. Size per sign face Max. Height Max. Size per sign Total Area per Parcel Max. Height R1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 - 10% of front facade for all uses other than single-family residential units, duplexes, and attached condominiums 1 24 square feet 6 feet 6 square feet 14 square feet 4 feet R-T, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, MH B-1, B-2, B-3 & PD commercial uses 1 per business (a) 10% of front façade or 100 square feet, whichever is less (a) 1 72 square feet 6 feet 24 square feet 48 square feet 6 feet OS-1, & PD office uses I-1, I-2 P-1  
Footnotes to the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table 
(a)  Wall signs. One wall sign shall be allowed per business, in addition to any other allowed ground signs. Businesses located on a corner lot shall be allowed up to two wall signs, one for each front façade. The maximum wall sign area shall not exceed ten percent of the front facade of the building (any facade which faces a public street), per use or business establishment. However, for a commercial structure containing one use or business establishment, as determined by the planning commission, the size of the wall sign may be increased up to the maximum square footage as follows: 
201-400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 150 square feet Greater than 400 linear feet of building frontage facing a public street and having a public entrance 200 square feet  
1.  Window signs. Window signs shall be permitted not to exceed 25 percent of the window area of the façade. 
2.  No wall sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot. 
(b)  Ground signs. Only one ground sign is permitted per use, including uses which occupy more than one parcel and business centers containing more than one business or use, with additional signs permitted according to the following table, however, no site shall have more than two ground signs, regardless of the number of street frontages or the amount of frontage. Single uses on a single parcel do not qualify for this consideration: 
Frontage along 2 or more rights-of-way 1 sign up to the maximum sign face area shall be allowed along 2 frontages 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 1 ground sign along that frontage Greater than 300 feet of frontage along 1 right-of-way 2 ground signs  
(c)  Temporary signs 
1.  All temporary signs must comply with the sign size and height standards as specified in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table. 
2.  Location of temporary signs shall comply with the following: 
a.  Temporary signs shall not be attached to any utility pole, tree, fence, or be located within any public right-of-way. 
b.  Temporary signs shall not be located closer than 20 feet to the edge of the traveled portion of the roadway, nor shall they be located within any dedicated right-of-way. 
c.  Temporary signs shall not be erected in such a manner than they will or may reasonably be expected to interfere with, obstruct, confuse or mislead traffic. 
d.  Temporary signs cannot be placed or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind. 
e.  Temporary signs may not be posted on private property without first obtaining the permission of the property owner. 
f.  Signs shall not be located within any clear vision triangle, as described in section 70-4(b). 
3.  Each temporary sign shall be removed within 60 days of placement. Furthermore, no sign may be erected on a single parcel for more than 60 calendar days out of every 120 calendar days. Although a permit is not required for temporary signs, property and business owners must maintain a log of dates when temporary sign(s) have been in place showing compliance with the above standard. 
4.  Political signs must be removed within ten days after the applicable election. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-7. - Additional sign standards. 
(a)  Directional signs. No more than one directional sign shall be permitted for each approved driveway, with a maximum sign area of four square feet per sign, and a maximum height of four feet. Any directional sign which includes a business name, symbol or logo shall be calculated as part of the allowable ground sign square footage, as specified in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table. 
(b)  Off-premise advertising or billboard signs. New off-premise advertising or billboard signs are not permitted but existing ones may be maintained and repaired. This section is not intended to prohibit First Amendment views or speech but instead regulates community aesthetics. 
(c)  Projecting, awning and canopy signs. Projecting signs, awnings and canopy signs may be used as an alternative to wall signs listed in the Sign Dimensional Standards and Regulations Table, provided that they meet the following standards: 
1.  Any sign area on a canopy shall be included in calculations of maximum wall sign square footage. 
2.  Projecting or canopy signs in the B-1 district shall be set back at least two feet from any street curb line, shall not extend more than six feet over the public right-of-way, and shall leave a minimum clearance of eight feet above the ground. 
3.  Projecting, awning or canopy signs, other than those in the B-1 district, shall have a minimum ground clearance of ten feet, shall be set back at least six feet from any adjacent public right-of-way, nor project over an alley or private access lane. A projecting sign shall not extend for more than two feet from the building to which it is attached. 
4.  No awning, canopy or projecting sign shall extend above the roof or parapet of the structure to which it is attached by more than one foot. 
5.  Wood posts or supporting arms shall not be used in conjunction with any projecting sign, unless it is decorative in nature and part of the character of the sign. 
6.  Projecting signs shall not exceed ten square feet in area on each side. The area of such sign shall be in addition to any permitted sign provided for herein. 
7.  Canopy signs shall not be internally illuminated and must be blackened out on the underside. 
(d)  Entranceway Signs. One permanent sign per vehicular entrance identifying uses such as subdivisions, apartment complexes, condominium communities, senior housing complexes, manufactured housing communities, office and industrial parks and similar uses, provided that the sign is set back a minimum of 15 feet from any property line or public right-of-way is permitted. 
(e)  Changeable message signs. Changeable message signs may be permitted as a portion of, and accessory to, a ground or monument sign in the B-2, B-3, I-1 and I-2 districts, and when associated with a commercial or office use within an OS-1 or PD district, in accordance with the following: 
1.  One changeable message sign or one gasoline price sign shall be permitted per premises. 
2.  Message or gasoline price may be changed electronically or manually. 
3.  The area of a changeable message sign or gasoline price sign shall not exceed one-third the total area of the sign. 
4.  Illumination shall be concentrated within the face of the sign to prevent glare upon adjoining properties and thoroughfares. 
5.  Electronic messages or gasoline prices shall not flash, fade in or out, or scroll. 
6.  Electronic messages or gasoline prices shall be displayed for at least one hour, and changes shall take less than one second. 
7.  Any voids or burned out bulb in an electronic display shall be replaced within seven days and any malfunctioning signs must be turned off until repaired. 
8.  Electronic changeable message signs shall be at least 100 feet from any residential district or use, except as modified in subsection 10. below. 
9.  Electronic changeable message signs shall use only one color of lighting or bulbs to prevent nuisances and distractions upon adjoining properties and thoroughfares. 
10.  One electronic message sign, meeting the above requirements, may be approved by the planning commission for institutional uses, meaning a use by a public or quasi-public institution such as a religious organization, church, nonprofit organization, academic institution, library or hospital, located in a multiple-family residential zoning district when meeting the following requirements: 
a.  The institutional use is located on a principal arterial, as designated in the City of South Lyon Master Plan; 
b.  The sign will not create a nuisance for residential properties in the immediate vicinity of the sign, as determined by the planning commission and subject to any conditions; and 
c.  The appropriate size of the sign shall be determined by the planning commission but shall be no greater than 50 square feet in area. 
f.  Sandwich board signs. Sandwich board or portable A-frame signs are permitted in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts at the customer building entrances to businesses subject to the following requirements: 
1.  One sign per customer entrance shall be permitted regardless of the number of tenants on the premises. 
2.  The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and must be stored inside when the establishment is not open to the general public. 
3.  Each sign shall not exceed an overall height of 42 inches and an overall width of 24 inches. 
4.  The sign must be located adjacent to the building, no more than ten feet from the customer entrance to the business, be a minimum of two feet from the edge of the curb, and be located so that at least a five-foot wide sidewalk is maintained. 
5.  No sign shall be located in such a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
6.  All signs must be constructed or weather-proof, durable material and kept in good repair. 
7.  The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
8.  Sandwich board signs within the public right-of-way may be moved/removed by the city for municipal purposes (i.e. code enforcement, snow removal, traffic issues, maintenance, etc. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14; Ord. No. 03-15, Pt. I, 3-9-15) 
Sec. 70-8. - Nonconforming signs. 
    Nonconforming signs are those signs that do not comply with the size, placement, construction or other standards or regulations of this chapter, but were lawfully established prior to its adoption. Signs for which the zoning board of appeals has granted a variance are exempt and shall not be defined as nonconforming. It is the intent of this chapter to bring about, in an expeditious and timely manner, the eventual elimination of signs and their supporting structures that are not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. The following provisions apply to nonconforming signs, including the replacement of nonconforming signs with less nonconforming signs to encourage a quicker upgrade. A nonconforming sign may be continued and shall be maintained in good condition as described elsewhere in this chapter, however, the following alterations are regulated: 
(a)  A nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered so as to prolong the life of the sign or to change the shape, size, type or design of the sign unless the change shall make the sign conforming. 
(b)  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign with the exception of pole signs, which can be replaced with a ground or monument sign that is not in compliance with the requirements for ground signs in this chapter, subject to review and approval by the planning commission. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after damage or destruction of the estimated expense of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the building official or if 50 percent or more of the face of the sign is damaged or destroyed. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign shall not have any changes made in the words or symbols used or the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is designed for periodic change of message. 
(e)  Signs having a construction design that permits a complete change of the face portion of the sign display area shall not have any faces changed unless the change does not prolong the life of the total sign structure or alter the shape and size of the sign display area. 
(f)  A nonconforming sign shall not be re-established after the activity, business or usage to which it relates has been discontinued for a period of 90 days or longer as defined in section 70-9, dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(g)  Nonconforming and illegal freestanding pole signs that are replaced with conforming, freestanding monument signs within two years of adoption of this ordinance shall be granted an additional 20 percent of sign area above the maximum permitted. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-9. - Dangerous, unsafe, abandoned, and illegally erected signs. 
(a)  Dangerous signs. Any sign constituting an immediate hazard to health or safety shall be deemed a nuisance per se and may be immediately removed by the city without notice and the cost thereof charged against the owner of the property on which it was installed. 
(b)  Unsafe signs. Any sign that becomes insecure, in danger of falling, or otherwise unsafe but not considered an immediate danger by the building official to the health or safety of the public shall be removed or repaired within 30 days after written notice from the city building official. 
(c)  Abandoned signs. Any sign that advertises a business that has been discontinued for at least 90 days or that advertises a product or service that is no longer offered shall be deemed abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended by a change in ownership or management shall not be deemed abandoned unless the structure remains vacant for at least six months. An abandoned sign shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises within ten days after written notice from the city building official. 
(d)  Illegally erected signs. Any sign erected or displayed illegally in violation of this chapter shall be removed or made to comply with this chapter within ten days after written notice from the city building official. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-10. - Permits and application procedures. 
(a)  Required. Except as expressly provided in section 70-4 relating to signs allowed without a permit, and section 70-6(c) relating to temporary signs, it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter, relocate, or maintain any sign or other structure designed to display a message without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city and payment of a fee provided for in this section. 
(b)  Application. Applications for permits to erect, construct, maintain, use, display, alter, convert, repair a sign shall be made upon forms provided for by the city, and shall contain or have attached thereto the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant, property owner(s), and if applicable, the tenant(s) and occupant(s); 
(2)  Location of building, structure, or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected; 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings, structures, and property lines; 
(4)  Two drawings of the plans and specifications and method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground; 
(5)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the building official, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure in accordance with regulations adopted by the city; 
(6)  Name and address of the person erecting the structure and any applicable licenses; 
(7)  Any electrical permit required and issued for such sign; 
(8)  Insurance policy or bond as required by this chapter; 
(9)  Such other information as the building official, or his or her designee, may require to show full compliance with this and all other applicable laws of the city and the state; 
(10)  In the discretion of the building official, or his or her designee, when in his or her opinion the public safety requires it, the application containing the material required by this section shall, in addition, bear the certificate or seal of a registered architect or engineer as a condition to the issuance of a permit; 
(11)  In all applications for entranceway signs, the building official, or his or her designee, shall require that appropriate provisions have been made to ensure continued maintenance of the sign. 
(c)  Fees. A application, permit, review and inspection fees shall be paid to the city for each permanent permit and each temporary permit required by this chapter as shall be set by resolution of the council from time to time. 
(d)  Ordinary maintenance. No permit is required for the ordinary servicing or repainting of an existing sign message, the cleaning of a sign, the changing of information on a directory sign, or the changing of advertising on a permitted sign specifically designed for regular change of message without change in structure. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-11. - License and insurance. 
    Every person who engages in the business of erecting, altering or dismantling signs in the city shall first submit proof of appropriate licenses and a liability insurance policy that indemnifies the city and its prior, present and future officials, representatives and employees from all damage suits or actions of every nature brought or claimed against the erector for injuries or damages to persons or property sustained by any person or persons through any act of omission or negligence of said erector, his servants, agents or employees. Said policy shall contain a clause whereby it cannot be canceled or changed until after written notice has been filed with the city building department at least 30 days prior to the date of cancellation. The building official shall issue a permit for the sign upon determining that the proposed sign meets the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter and any other applicable city ordinance and after payment of the prescribed fees and deposit. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-12. - Administration, enforcement, violations, and penalties. 
(a)  Generally. The regulations of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the city building official or his or her designee. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, maintain, use, display, enlarge, alter, convert, repair, or move, any sign in the city, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter. Each act of violation, and on each day upon which any such violation shall occur, shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Public nuisance per se. Any sign erected, constructed, maintained, used, displayed, enlarged, altered, converted, repaired, or moved in violation of any of the provisions, standards, and regulations of this chapter, including the failure to remove a sign when directed under the authority of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Municipal civil infraction. Any person, firm or corporation determined to have violated or been in violation of the provisions, standards or regulations of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to the penalties and provisions contained in sections 1-13, 1-14, and chapter 2, article VII - municipal civil infractions, sections 2-241 through 2-249 of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(e)  Other relief. 
(1)  In addition to the remedies otherwise provided for, the city may remove and dispose of an unlawful sign on public property. 
(2)  In addition to ordering the defendant determined to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction to pay a civil fine, costs, damages and expenses, the judge or magistrate shall be authorized to issue any judgment, writ or order necessary to enforce or enjoin violation of this chapter. 
(3)  In addition to any remedies provided for by the Code of Ordinances, any equitable or other remedies available may be sought and granted. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-13. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Appeals. Appeal from the ruling of any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, including the building official, concerning the enforcement of the provisions, standards and regulations of this chapter may be made by any aggrieved party within 30 days of the ruling to the zoning board of appeals, sitting as an administrative appeal board under this chapter. 
(b)  Variances. With the exception of requests for variances for multi-tenant ground signs as contemplated in section 70-14, which shall be considered by the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to grant variances from the requirements of this chapter according to the criteria in section 102-85(2). In making a decision on whether a practical difficulty exists, the board may also consider the following for sign variance requests: 
(1)  In determining whether a variance is appropriate, the zoning board of appeals shall study the sign proposal, giving consideration to any extraordinary circumstances, such as those listed below, that would cause practical difficulty in complying with the sign standards. The presence of any of the circumstances listed may be sufficient to justify granting a variance; however, the zoning board of appeals may decline to grant a variance even if certain of the circumstances are present. 
(2)  In granting a variance the zoning board of appeals may attach such conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the proposed sign as it may deem reasonable. In granting or denying a variance, the zoning board of appeals shall state the grounds and findings upon which it justifies granting or denying the variance based on the following criteria: 
a.  Permitted signage could not be easily seen by passing motorists due to the configuration of existing buildings, trees, or other obstructions. 
b.  Permitted signage could not be seen by passing motorists in sufficient time to permit safe deceleration and exit. In determining whether such circumstances exist, the zoning board of appeals shall consider the width of the road, the number of moving lanes, the volume of traffic, and speed limits. 
c.  Existing signs on nearby parcels would substantially reduce the visibility or identification impact of a conforming sign on the subject parcel. 
d.  Construction of a conforming sign would require removal or severe alteration to natural features on the parcel, such as but not limited to: removal of trees, alteration of the natural topography, filling of wetlands, or obstruction of a natural drainage course. 
e.  Construction of a conforming sign would obstruct the vision of motorists or otherwise endanger the health or safety of passers-by. 
f.  Variance from certain sign regulations would be offset by increased building setback, increased landscaping, or other such enhancements, so that the net effect is an improvement in appearance of the parcel, compared to the result that would be otherwise achieved with construction of a conforming sign. 
g.  A sign which exceeds the permitted height or area standards of this chapter would be more appropriate in scale because of the large size or frontage of the parcel or building. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-14. - Ground sign variances for business centers. 
    The dimensional requirements (height and area) of section 70-5, specific sign standards, may be modified by the planning commission for business center or shopping center ground signs with multiple tenants and over 20,000 square [feet] of gross floor area when the following criteria have been met: 
(a)  Where the objectives and intent of this chapter are better served by such modifications, rather than through the strict application of the requirements contained therein. 
(b)  The sign will provide clearer, uncluttered identification to passing motorists than would otherwise be possible under the dimensional requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The requested modification will improve the aesthetics of the site by minimizing the number of individual signs on the property. 
(d)  For larger centers, the sign will identify anchor tenants as opposed to all businesses. 
(e)  The area of a changeable message sign or gasoline price sign still cannot exceed one-third the total area of the sign for which a modification is granted. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-15. - Substitution clause. 
    Notwithstanding any provision, standard, or regulation in this chapter to the contrary, a noncommercial message may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any commercial message on any sign permitted pursuant to this chapter. If a noncommercial message is substituted, the sign must still comply with the provisions, standards, and regulations of this chapter applicable to the original sign prior to any substitution. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech or messages over noncommercial speech or messages. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Sec. 70-16. - Severability clause. 
    If any provision, standard, or regulation of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, shall be found invalid by a court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining portion or application, or validity of the remaining provisions, standards, or regulations of this chapter as a whole, provided such remaining portions are not determined by the court to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent that this chapter would have been adopted, had such invalid provision not been included. 
(Ord. No. 01-14, Pt. II, 2-10-14) 
Chapter 74 - SOLID WASTE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 74-1-74-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GARBAGE AND RUBBISH 

Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means the solid residue of combustion of fuel used in heating and cooking operations, as occurring in households, apartments, offices or other business places, but not to include residue from industrial plants or operations. 
    Commercial rubbish means miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from any business and industrial operations of every kind but excludes construction and trade wastes which have been abandoned as worthless and having no property value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate. 
    Construction waste means miscellaneous waste and materials resulting from construction, alterations, repairs, demolition, renovation, and includes earth, offensive dirt and fill dirt from excavating which has been abandoned as worthless and having no property value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate. 
    Domestic rubbish means waste material and refuse of every character from normal household or living conditions including but not limited to house dirt and trash, except garbage. In general, rubbish is paper, rags, bottles, tin cans, glass, cardboard, plastic, worn-out clothing, furniture, excelsior, offensive dirt, and the like, which waste material and refuse have been abandoned as worthless and having no property value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate. 
    Garbage means every refuse or waste material accumulation of animal, fruit, or vegetable matter, liquid or otherwise, decayed or not, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruit, or vegetables including offal, tin cans and other containers in which foodstuffs are packaged, which refuse has been abandoned as worthless and having no property value or which would constitute a nuisance when allowed to accumulate. 
    Garden rubbish means garden, lawn, or tree trimmings, leaves and dead garden plants from the normal household. It shall not include rubbish from work of landscape gardeners or private companies such as landscaping firms and nurseries. 
    Hazardous material means explosives, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, irritating material, etiologic material, radioactive material, corrosive, or liquified petroleum gas, as defined by MCL 257.19b, and subject to any changes therein. 
    Rubbish means domestic, garden and commercial rubbish unless specifically restricted to mean a particular type of rubbish in a particular section of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.1; Ord. of 9-13-99, § 1) 
Sec. 74-32. - Accumulation of garbage, rubbish, construction waste and ashes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate, permit or allow to be accumulated, to place, dump or permit to be dumped or placed, to scatter, bury or permit to be scattered or buried in or on property or premises owned by him or under his control, any garbage, domestic, commercial, or garden rubbish, ashes, construction waste, manure, or any other form of waste, having no property value or constituting a nuisance when so accumulated, except where such substances are placed in proper receptacles for removal. 
(Code 1988, § 2.2) 
Sec. 74-33. - Dumping of garbage, rubbish, construction waste and ashes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, bury, place, scatter, deposit or cause to be deposited, any garbage, domestic, commercial, or garden rubbish, ashes, manure, construction waste or other forms of waste in any public place or on private property, with or without the owner's permission, except where such substances are dumped in a place designated by the city council for such purpose or except where such substance is sold pursuant to a commercial arrangement for its commercial value and a permit is issued from the city upon a showing that such disposal method will not constitute a nuisance and upon the city setting forth conditions of the permit which will insure that a nuisance will not occur if the permit is issued. When any such permit is issued, a violation of the conditions attached to it will cause the permit to be terminated immediately. 
(Code 1988, § 2.3) 
Sec. 74-34. - Duty of owners, occupants, or other persons in charge of any building or residence or lot. 
    In all business, industrial and residential districts of the city, it shall be the duty of owners, occupants, or other persons in charge of any building or residence or lot to see that no rubbish, either combustible or noncombustible, is placed or permitted to remain in any street, or alley or other public place, or in any private place except a building or other suitable storage place. It shall also be unlawful for any such person to store any inflammable rubbish or other waste material where it would cause a fire hazard. When any such owner, occupant or other person in charge of any premises permits any rubbish or combustible material to accumulate in any public alley, street or other public place, or in any private place, outside of a storage or other approved building, after the last regularly scheduled time for collection in any week by the city vehicles according to the published schedule hereinbefore provided, the city shall have the authority to cause to have collected such rubbish or other material at any time between the last scheduled collection at the end of said week and the first scheduled regular collection in the following week. The cost of said special collections shall be charged to the owners or occupants of the property permitting such rubbish or other material to accumulate. The city shall establish a schedule of charges sufficient to cover the cost of such special collections. It shall be the duty of the director of public safety to enforce the provisions of this article. He shall see that no rubbish or other combustible material is permitted to accumulate on any premises or in any public or private place except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. He shall cooperate with the garbage collection service in determining where special collection of rubbish and waste materials should be made. He shall have the authority to determine where special collections of rubbish and other waste material are required and in otherwise enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 2.4) 
Sec. 74-35. - Alleys, streets and easements. 
(a)  In the case of any alley, street, or easement where any substance has been deposited in violation of this article, it shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any lot or premises to remove from one-half of said alley, or street, or easement, adjoining said lot or premises all such substances. It shall be the duty of every occupant of premises abutting upon an alley, street, or easement to keep his adjoining half of said alley, street, or easement, in a clean, neat and orderly condition and to keep all weeds and grasses removed or cut to a height not to exceed eight inches at all times. 
(b)  If an owner fails to maintain all weeds and grasses in accordance with this section, the procedures set forth in chapter 98, article II shall apply. 
(Code 1988, § 2.5; Ord. of 1-10-11) 
Sec. 74-36. - Collection. 
    Garbage, rubbish, manure, ashes and other forms of waste shall be placed in proper receptacles and shall be collected by the city or by others under public contract to the city pursuant to an established collection schedule and at such charge, tax, or assessment as may be established by the city reasonably commensurate to the cost of such collection. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any other person to collect and dispose of such substances within the city limits. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into and deposit, dump, bury, place, scatter such substances obtained from outside the city limits, even at a place designated by the city council for such purpose unless duly licensed to do so by the city council. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit, or permit another to place or deposit, any garbage, ashes or rubbish, either domestic, garden or commercial, in any refuse dumpster which is either owned by a proprietor or rented from a disposal company by a proprietor or lessee of property within the city unless the refuse is from the premises served by the refuse dumpster, or with the express consent of the person or organization served by said dumpsters. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to use city refuse dumpsters for disposal of any garbage, trash, ashes or rubbish except that refuse generated or collected in city streets, parks, and public lands within the city limits. Refuse from households shall not be placed in city refuse dumpsters nor in privately owned dumpsters. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place refuse or bags of refuse on the ground surrounding these locations. 
(6)  Any person found to be in violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to 90 days in jail and/or a fine of $500.00. 
(7)  Construction waste will not be collected by the city. 
(8)  Industrial waste and refuse will not be collected by the city. 
(9)  This section is drafted pursuant to the amendment procedure in section 1-11. 
(Code 1988, § 2.6; Ord. of 9-9-96(1), § 1) 
Sec. 74-37. - Containers. 
    The occupant of any premises within the city, in which any garbage or rubbish shall be accumulated which is not disposed of by an approved incinerator or approved garbage grinder, shall maintain on said premises the number of containers sufficient to conveniently store the normal accumulation of garbage on said premises over a period of not less than seven days. Every such container shall be kept tightly covered with an impervious cover. Garbage containers shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. The city may approve the use of plastic or waterproof paper bags of a capacity and quality sufficient for the storage and disposal of refuse. 
(Code 1988, § 2.7) 
Sec. 74-38. - Recycling. 
    The recycling center for the City of South Lyon, as designated by the city council, shall be for the exclusive use of the residents of the City of South Lyon, and persons authorized by contract. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person who is not a resident of the City of South Lyon or authorized by contract to utilize the recycling facilties at the recycling center. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit material into any receptacle other than the one for which the receptacle is so designated. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into and deposit, or cause to be deposited at the recycling center any recyclable material obtained from outside the city limits or a contracting municipality. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, bury, place, scatter or deposit any material, recyclable or otherwise, outside of, on, or around any receptacle or on any portion of the premises of the recycling center. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, bury, place, scatter, deposit, or cause to be deposited, any hazardous materials into, on, around or outside of any of the receptacles, or on any portion of the premises of the recycling center. 
(Ord. of 9-13-99, § 1) 
Sec. 74-39. - Violation and penalties. 
    A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 1-10-11) 
Chapter 78 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS 

Sec. 78-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost means and shall include, when referring to any public improvement, the cost of surveys, services, lands, plans, condemnation, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing, construction, and legal fees and all other costs incident to the making of such improvements, the special assessments therefor, and the financing thereof. 
    Engineer means the engineer of the City of South Lyon, or any person, firm or association of registered engineers employed by the City of South Lyon in that capacity. 
    Improvement means any public betterment and/or any improvement upon public property which results in special benefit to the real property in the vicinity of such improvement. 
    Owner means the last recorded title holder(s) of any lot or parcel of land. 
(Code 1988, § 1.251) 
Sec. 78-2. - Initiation of proceedings. 
    Proceedings to provide for any public improvements to be financed in whole or part by a special assessment tax may be initiated by resolution of the council or by a petition signed by the owners of more than 50 percent of the assessable frontage lots or acreage, as the case may be, who may be subject to any such special assessment tax or may be initiated, without such petition being first filed, upon resolution of the council determining that an improvement shall be made and financed in whole or in part by special assessment. All improvements hereunder shall be made at the discretion of the council solely and no petition shall be mandatory or directive in nature. 
(Code 1988, § 1.252) 
Sec. 78-3. - Petitions-Requirements. 
    All petitions for public improvements shall include an affidavit by one or more of the circulators that the signatures appearing thereon are genuine and each signer declares himself to be the owner of the land(s) indicated. Where any lot or parcel is owned by more than one person, each person having an interest must join in the petition. 
(Code 1988, § 1.253) 
Sec. 78-4. - Same-Investigations by the city manager. 
    All petitions for public improvements shall be investigated by the city manager to determine whether a sufficient number of valid signatures have been obtained and, if such investigation discloses a deficiency, the said petition shall be returned to the circulator with notice of that fact. 
(Code 1988, § 1.254) 
Sec. 78-5. - Preliminary report. 
(a)  Whenever the city manager shall determine that a petition containing the required number of valid signatures has been received, or whenever the council shall by resolution so direct, the city manager shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the proposed public improvement and report his findings to the council. 
(b)  The report shall include an analysis of the following: 
(1)  The assessed valuation of all property affected by the proposed improvement, together with the name and address of the last known person or party against whom taxes are currently assessed. 
(2)  The number of parcels which show tax delinquency. 
(3)  The number of parcels owned by public authorities. 
(4)  The number of parcels which are vacant. 
(5)  Prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications therefor, and an estimate of the cost thereof. 
(6)  An estimate and recommendation as to what portion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if any, should be a general obligation of the city. 
(7)  A recommendation concerning the number of installments in which the assessment may be paid. 
(8)  The land which should be included in the special assessment district. 
(9)  And any other facts or recommendations which will aid the council in determining whether the improvement shall be made and how the same shall be financed. 
(10)  The report in total shall be placed on file with the city clerk as soon as same has been prepared. 
(Code 1988, § 1.255) 
Sec. 78-6. - Hearing; notice of same. 
    After filing of the plans and specifications above referred to, the council shall, by resolution, provide for a public hearing before them, which hearing shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been sent by the clerk, by first class mail, to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. The council may also, in addition to personal notice, give notice by publication citing the time, date and place of hearing, however, such publication shall not be mandatory. 
(Code 1988, § 1.256) 
Sec. 78-7. - Public hearing, objections and changes. 
    At the time and place specified in such notice for the public hearing, the council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the proposed public improvement. Such hearing may be scheduled for any regular, special or adjourned meeting of the council. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time by the council, and the council may make any changes in the proposed work or assessment which shall seem reasonable or proper in view of any objections, or for any other reason which may appear to be for the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 1.257) 
Sec. 78-8. - Resolution of determination. 
    After said public hearing the council may, by resolution, determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially benefited in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such resolution the council shall approve the plans and specifications for the improvement, determine the estimated cost thereof, determine what proportion of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city, determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid, not to exceed 25 in number, determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, and not to exceed eight percent, per annum, designate the district or land and premises upon which special assessment shall be levied, direct the assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination, and designate the name by which said assessment roll shall be known and referred to. 
(Code 1988, § 1.258) 
Sec. 78-9. - Limitations on preliminary expenses. 
    No contract or expenditure except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates of cost shall be made for the improvement, nor shall any improvement be commenced until the special assessment roll to defer the cost of same shall have been made and confirmed. 
(Code 1988, § 1.259) 
Sec. 78-10. - Special assessment roll-Preparation. 
    The assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district designated by the council, and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at large. 
(Code 1988, § 1.260) 
Sec. 78-11. - Same-Columns for installments. 
    The assessor in preparing the special assessment roll shall divide the assessment into installments and provide a separate column for each installment. The roll and all installments thereof shall be made and reviewed as an original roll and confirmation of the roll shall be made of each and every installment or installments when due without further review or confirmation. 
(Code 1988, § 1.261) 
Sec. 78-12. - Notice of hearing on roll. 
    Upon receipt of such special assessment roll the council shall order it filed in the office of the clerk for public examination, shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof, specifying the purpose, time and place, has been sent by the clerk by first class mail to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current assessment roll of the city. The council may also, in addition, give notice by publication citing the time, date and place of hearing, however, such publication shall not be mandatory. The special assessment roll shall remain on file in the office of the city clerk for public examination for a period of at least seven days prior to the date and time set for the said hearing. 
(Code 1988, § 1.262) 
Sec. 78-13. - Objections to roll. 
    Any person deeming himself aggrieved by the special assessment roll may file his objections thereto in writing with the clerk at any time prior to the close of said hearing, which written objections shall specify in what respect he deems himself aggrieved. 
(Code 1988, § 1.263) 
Sec. 78-14. - Hearing on objections. 
    The council shall meet and review the said special assessment roll at a time and place appointed or at an adjourned date therefor and shall consider any written objections thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 1.264) 
Sec. 78-15. - Corrections and changes. 
    The council may correct said roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted in the council minutes. 
(Code 1988, § 1.265) 
Sec. 78-16. - Confirmation or rejection of roll. 
    After such hearing and review, the council may confirm such special assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made, if any, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision or may annul it and any proceedings in connection therewith. 
(Code 1988, § 1.266) 
Sec. 78-17. - Vote required. 
    In order to confirm any special assessment roll, such confirmation shall receive an affirmative vote of a majority of the council elect. No special assessment roll shall be finally confirmed except by a four-fifths vote of the council if prior to said hearing written objections to said improvement have been filed with the city clerk by the owners of the property which will be required to bear more than one-half of the special assessment. 
(Code 1988, § 1.267) 
Sec. 78-18. - Certificate of confirmation. 
    The clerk shall endorse the date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll and upon confirmation, such roll shall be final and conclusive. 
(Code 1988, § 1.268) 
Sec. 78-19. - Lien established. 
    All special assessments contained in any special assessment roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall from the date of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or parcels of land assessed until paid. 
(Code 1988, § 1.269) 
Sec. 78-20. - Personal liability of owner. 
    Any special assessment made pursuant to this chapter shall, until paid, be charged against the respective owners of the several lots or parcels of land and shall be a debt owed to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed. 
(Code 1988, § 1.270) 
Sec. 78-21. - Character of lien. 
    All liens above referred to shall be of the same character and effect as the lien created by the city Charter for taxes and shall include accrued interest and penalties. 
(Code 1988, § 1.271) 
Sec. 78-22. - Destruction or impairment of lien. 
    No judgment or decree nor any action of the council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.272) 
Sec. 78-23. - Failure to receive notice. 
    Failure of any owner to receive any notice required to be sent under the provisions of the city Charter and this chapter, shall not invalidate any special assessment or special assessment roll. Nor shall, to the extent permitted by law, any failure on the part of the treasurer to give any required notice cause any invalidation of any special assessment roll of the city or assessment thereupon, nor excuse the payment of interest or penalties. 
(Code 1988, § 1.273) 
Sec. 78-24. - Installments and date due. 
    All special assessments levied hereunder shall become due upon confirmation of the special assessment roll and the annual installments shall not exceed 25 in number as the council may determine at the time of confirmation and if in annual installments, the council shall determine the first installment to be due upon confirmation or on the following July 1 and subsequent installments on July 1 of succeeding years. 
(Code 1988, § 1.274) 
Sec. 78-25. - Publication of notice to pay. 
    The assessment roll shall be transmitted by the clerk to the treasurer for collection immediately after its confirmation and the treasurer shall give notice by one publication in a newspaper which shall meet the requirements of the city Charter, that said special assessment roll (identifying it) has been filed in the city treasurer's office and specifying when and where payments may be made thereon. The council may order the treasurer to send a notice to pay to those persons listed on the special assessment roll, although such notice shall not be required. 
(Code 1988, § 1.275) 
Sec. 78-26. - Treasurer's warrant; acceleration of payments when overdue. 
    Upon confirmation of any special assessment roll, the council shall direct that the city clerk shall attach his warrant to such assessment roll therein commanding the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in said roll the amount of money assessed to and set opposite their names therein, and in case any person named in said roll shall neglect or refuse to pay the assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattels of such person. The city treasurer under such warrant shall be authorized to collect the several installments of any special assessment as and when the same shall become due and payable, together with interest and penalties, as provided in this chapter, and in the event that any such special assessment installment shall remain unpaid for a period of 90 days from and after the due date of such special assessment installment, that, thereupon, the same shall become delinquent and such delinquent installment and all future installments shall become due and payable forthwith and shall be certified by the city treasurer to the city clerk for spreading upon the next succeeding city tax roll in a column designated "special assessments," and there shall be added to such special assessment installments all interest which may have accrued from the date of confirmation of the special assessment tax roll to July 1 of the year in which such city tax roll is made, provided, that any fraction of a month shall be considered a full month. 
(Code 1988, § 1.276) 
Sec. 78-27. - Cash payment; remaining installments. 
    The whole or any part of any such assessment may be paid within 60 days from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll. Such part as may be paid within the said 60 days shall not bear interest or penalty. Not later than 15 days after the end of said 60-day period the treasurer shall transmit such roll to the assessor with all payments upon assessment noted thereon. The assessor shall then divide any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal installments as shall have been fixed by the council, but not into a number of installments which will make any installment less than $10.00. 
(Code 1988, § 1.277) 
Sec. 78-28. - Collection fees. 
    Upon transfer to any delinquent or accelerated delinquent installments of any special assessment to the general city tax roll, there should be added thereto in addition to the interest as hereinbefore provided, a collection fee of four percent of the amount of the delinquent assessment (without interest computed) as shall be so transferred to the general city tax roll. 
(Code 1988, § 1.278) 
Sec. 78-29. - Additional payments by taxpayer. 
    A taxpayer may, at any time prior to the time when special assessment taxes have been transferred to the general city tax roll, pay one or more of such installments, together with accrued interest from the date of confirmation of the special assessment roll to the date of such payment, and in the event that all delinquent and past due installments shall have been paid, thereupon the deferred installments shall be reinstated as such and be considered current and may be paid annually as spread upon the original assessment roll unless and until any subsequent installment shall become delinquent, whereupon the foregoing procedure shall be followed. 
(Code 1988, § 1.279) 
Sec. 78-30. - Collection by suit at law. 
    In addition to any other remedies and without impairing the lien therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and penalties may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city against the person assessed, in any court having jurisdiction of the amount. If in any such action it shall appear that by reason of any irregularities or informalities the assessment has not been properly made against the defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may, nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the city which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such defendant or upon such premises. 
(Code 1988, § 1.280) 
Sec. 78-31. - Contested assessments. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment unless within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice is given to the council of intention to file such suit or action stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal and unless such suit or action shall be commenced within 60 days after confirmation of the roll. 
(Code 1988, § 1.281) 
Sec. 78-32. - Return to county treasurer. 
    All special assessments or installments thereof, which have been transferred to the general city tax roll as being delinquent, or because the delinquency has been accelerated by nonpayment of installments as and when due, shall be collected in all respects as city taxes due upon such general city tax roll, and if uncollected, shall be returned to the county treasurer with unpaid general city taxes, on March 1, following the date upon which such general tax roll shall have been delivered to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Code 1988, § 1.282) 
Sec. 78-33. - Special provisions. 
    Special assessment installments shall become delinquent, if unpaid, 90 days after the due date for such special assessment installment and the delinquency in any one installment shall accelerate the payment of future installments, which, in the event of delinquency of one installment, shall cause all of the remaining special assessment installments to become due and payable forthwith. Delinquent special assessment installment or installments shall be transferred to the general city tax roll for the year commencing July 1 succeeding the date of such delinquency, provided, however, that prior to the time that any delinquent special assessment tax has been transferred to the general city tax roll, the taxpayer shall have the right and privilege of reestablishing future installments of such special assessment tax upon payment of all delinquent special assessment tax installments to the date of such payment, together with accumulated interest thereon as hereinbefore provided. All delinquent special assessment tax installment or installments as certified to the city clerk by the city treasurer shall be spread upon the general city tax roll as hereinbefore provided by the city treasurer, under a column designated "special assessments" to which shall be added all interest upon such special assessment installment or installments accruing from the date of confirmation of the special assessment tax roll to July 1 of the current tax year, and in such computation fractions of the month shall be considered as a full month, together with collection fee as provided in section 78-28. 
(Code 1988, § 1.283) 
Sec. 78-34. - Cost certification. 
    Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof, the city manager shall certify to the council the total cost of said improvement, together with the amount of the original roll for said improvement. 
(Code 1988, § 1.284) 
Sec. 78-35. - Additional assessment. 
    Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to pay the cost of the improvement for which they are made, then the council shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots or parcels of land in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the deficiency. 
(Code 1988, § 1.285) 
Sec. 78-36. - Limitation of additional assessment. 
    Any additional pro rata assessment shall not exceed 25 percent of the assessment as originally confirmed unless a meeting of the council be held to review such additional assessment, for which meeting notice shall be given as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. 
(Code 1988, § 1.286) 
Sec. 78-37. - Excess under five percent. 
    The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed in the general fund of the city if such excess is five percent or less of the assessment. 
(Code 1988, § 1.287) 
Sec. 78-38. - Excess over five percent. 
    Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more than five percent, then the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the owners of the property assessed. 
(Code 1988, § 1.288) 
Sec. 78-39. - Refund procedure. 
    Any excess refund shall be made by credit against future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable to the extent such installments then exist and the balance of such refund shall be made in cash. 
(Code 1988, § 1.289) 
Sec. 78-40. - Illegal or invalid assessment. 
    Whenever any special assessment shall in the opinion of the council be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceeding, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be illegal, the council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made. 
(Code 1988, § 1.290) 
Sec. 78-41. - Proceedings on reassessments. 
    All proceedings on any reassessment and for the collection thereof, shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the original assessment and whenever any sum, or any part thereof, levied upon any premises has been set aside, if the same has been paid and not refunded, any payment made thereon shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied, or if the payments exceed the amount of the reassessment, refund of the excess amount shall be made. 
(Code 1988, § 1.291) 
Sec. 78-42. - Retention of lien. 
    To the extent permitted by law, no judgment or decree nor any act of the council vacating a special assessment shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as by regular mode of proceeding might have been lawfully assessed thereupon. 
(Code 1988, § 1.292) 
Sec. 78-43. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a savings in the cost; provided, however, that for each district there shall be established separate funds in accounts to cover the cost of same. 
(Code 1988, § 1.293) 
Sec. 78-44. - Deferred payment of special assessment. 
    The council may provide for the deferred payment of special assessment from persons who, in the opinion of the council and assessor, by reason of poverty are unable to contribute towards the cost thereof. In all such cases as the condition of granting of such deferred payments, the city shall require mortgage or like security on the real property of the beneficiary, payable on or before his death, or in any event, on the sale or transfer of the property. 
(Code 1988, § 1.294) 
Sec. 78-45. - Hazards and nuisances. 
(a)  When any lot, building, or structure within the city, because of the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening, becomes, in the opinion of the council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health or safety of the inhabitants of the city or those of them residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure, the council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner of the land upon which such hazard or nuisance exists, or the owner of the building or structure itself, specifying the nature of the hazard or nuisance, and requiring such owner to alter, repair, tear down, or remove same promptly and within a time to be specified by the council, which shall be commensurate with the nature of the hazard or nuisance. If at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, said owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known, the council may order such a hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, and the costs of such abatement to be assessed against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which said hazard or nuisance was located. If no such department or agency of the city is qualified to do the work required, then in that event, the council may secure the required results by means of private contractors or individuals upon either bid or force account as practical considerations may dictate, and thereupon assess the costs of such abatement against the lot, premises or description of real property upon which said hazard or nuisance was located. 
(b)  Except in emergencies, no hazard or nuisance shall be abated by the city until the land owner has been afforded a hearing before the council on the question of whether the premises in fact constitute a nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1988, § 1.295) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Housemoving. 
    No person shall move, transport, or convey any building or other similar bulky or heavy object, including machinery, trucks and trailers, larger in width than eight feet eight inches or higher than 13 feet six inches above the surface of the roadway, into, across or along any street, alley or other public place in the city without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. Such permit shall specify the route to be used in such movement and no person shall engage in such movement along a route other than that specified in the permit. No housemoving permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit in the amount of $50.00 and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 82-48. 
(Code 1988, § 4.36) 
Sec. 82-2. - Marquees. 
    No person shall erect or maintain any marquee, canopy, awning, clock or other structure or object so it projects over or upon the limits of any street or alley without first obtaining a permit and filing a liability insurance policy as required by section 82-48. Every liability insurance policy required by this section shall be maintained by the permittee permanently in force. Every such insurance policy shall contain a clause obligating the insurer to give the city clerk, by registered or certified mail, at least ten days written notice before the cancellation, expiration, lapse or other termination of such insurance and such liability policy shall name the City of South Lyon as an additional named insured. No such permit shall be granted unless the proposed plans for the marquee or other structure shall be in conformity with the building code. In the event that the marquee or other structure shall thereafter be found unsafe or is not maintained in a sightly condition, or if the liability insurance policy covering such marquee or other structure is not maintained, such marquee or other structure shall be deemed a street encroachment. The city manager shall notify the permittee to remove or repair such marquee or other structure within ten days or to reinstate said insurance forthwith and upon failure of the permittee to comply with said notice such encroachment shall be removed as provided in this chapter. No such marquee or other structure shall be erected or maintained so as to be less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1988, § 4.41) 
Sec. 82-3. - Trees. 
    No person shall permit the limbs or foliage of any trees or shrubs located on premises owned by him to grow over or upon any sidewalk less than eight feet above the surface of such sidewalk. Every such owner shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. All shrubs or bushes located on the triangle formed by two right-of-way lines at the intersection of two streets and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection of the right-of-way lines on any corner lot, shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than 30 inches above the sidewalk grade. Trees may be planted and maintained in this area provided that all branches are trimmed to maintain a clear vision for a vertical height of eight feet above the roadway surface. Any owner of property failing to trim any trees, shrubs or bushes in conformity with this section shall be notified by the city manager to do so, and such notice shall require trimming in conformity with this section within five days after the date of such notice. Upon the expiration of such period, the city manager may cause the trimming to be done and the cost thereof may be collected from the owner of said property in the manner specified in chapter 78. 
(Code 1988, § 4.42) 
Secs. 82-4-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-31. - Curb cuts. 
    No opening in or through any curb of any street shall be made without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. Curb cuts and sidewalk driveway crossings to provide access to private property shall comply with the following: 
(1)  No single curb cut shall exceed 25 feet nor be less than ten feet. 
(2)  The minimum distance between any curb cut and a public crosswalk shall be five feet. 
(3)  The minimum distance between curb cuts, except those serving residential property, shall be 25 feet. 
(4)  The maximum number of lineal feet of sidewalk driveway crossing permitted for any lot, parcel of land, business or enterprise, shall be 45 percent of the total abutting street frontage up to and including 200 lineal feet of street frontage plus 20 percent of the lineal feet of street frontage in excess of 200 feet. 
(5)  The necessary adjustments to utility poles, light standards, fire hydrants, catch basins, street or railway signs, signals, or other public improvements or installations shall be accomplished without cost to the city. 
(6)  All construction shall be in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 4.15) 
Sec. 82-32. - Temporary street closings. 
    The city manager shall have authority to temporarily close any street, or portion thereof, when he shall deem such street to be unsafe or temporarily unsuitable for use for any reason. He shall cause suitable barriers and signs to be erected on said street, indicating that the same is closed to public travel. When any street or portion thereof shall have been closed to public travel, no person shall drive any vehicle upon or over said street except as the same may be necessary incidentally to any street repair or construction work being done in the area closed to public travel. No person shall move or interfere with any sign or barrier erected pursuant to this section without authority from the city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 4.47) 
Sec. 82-33. - Penalties and violations. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(5), § 1(4.48)) 
Secs. 82-34-82-45. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPENINGS, EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 82-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Street means all of the land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, alleys and boulevards in the city, and includes lawn extensions and sidewalks and the area reserved therefor where the same are not yet constructed. 
    Superintendent shall mean the city superintendent of public works. 
(Code 1988, § 4.1) 
Sec. 82-47. - Damage and obstruction prohibited. 
    No person shall make any excavation in, or cause any damage to any street in the city, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this division. No person shall place any article, thing or obstruction in any street, except under the conditions and in the manner permitted in this division, but this provision shall not be deemed to prohibit such temporary obstructions as may be incidental to the expeditious movement of articles and things to and from abutting premises, nor to the lawful parking of vehicles within the part of the street reserved for vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1988, § 4.2) 
Sec. 82-48. - Permits and bonds. 
(a)  Where permits are authorized in this division, they shall be obtained upon application to the city manager, upon such forms as he shall prescribe, and payment of the established charge for each such permit. Such permit shall be revocable by the city manager for failure to comply with this division, rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, and the lawful orders of the city manager or his duly authorized representative, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this division shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, repair all damage done to the street surface and installations on, over or within such street, including trees, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in such amounts and provide such coverage as shall be required by city council. Additionally, the city manager shall have the discretion to determine whether or not the city shall be named as an insured on any insurance policy that insures against any and all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from the work done under the permit or in connection therewith. 
(b)  A duplicate executed copy or photostatic copy of the original of such insurance policy shall be filed with the city clerk. 
(c)  Where cash deposits are required with the application for any permit hereunder, such deposit shall be in the amount required by city council, and such deposit shall be used to defray all expenses to the city arising out of the granting of the permit and work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Three months after completion of the work done under the permit, any balance of such cash deposit unexpended shall be refunded. In any case where the deposit does not cover all costs and expenses of the city, the deficit shall be paid by the applicant. 
(Code 1988, § 4.3; Ord. of 10-11-04(1)) 
Sec. 82-49. - Street openings. 
    No person shall make any excavation or opening in or under any street without first obtaining a written permit from the city manager. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 82-48. 
(Code 1988, § 4.4) 
Sec. 82-50. - Emergency openings. 
    The superintendent or city manager, may, if the public safety requires immediate action, grant permission to make a necessary street opening in an emergency, provided that a permit shall be obtained on the following business day and the provisions of this division shall be complied with. 
(Code 1988, § 4.5) 
Sec. 82-51. - Backfilling. 
    All trenches in a public street or other public place, except by special permission, shall be backfilled with approved granular material to within 12 inches of the surface. On main thoroughfares, this material shall contain one sack of cement per yard of fill. The remaining portion shall be filled with road gravel as specified by the superintendent. 
(Code 1988, § 4.6) 
Sec. 82-52. - Utility poles. 
    Utility poles may be placed in such streets as the city manager shall prescribe and shall be located thereon in accordance with the directions of the city manager. Such poles shall be removed or relocated as the city manager shall from time to time direct. 
(Code 1988, § 4.7) 
Sec. 82-53. - Maintenance of installations in streets. 
    Every owner of, and every person in control of, any estate hereafter maintaining a sidewalk vault, coal hole, manhole, or any other excavation, or any post, pole, sign, awning, wire, pipe, conduit or other structure in, under, over or upon, any street which is adjacent to or a part of his estate, shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as an agreement on his part with the city to keep the same and the covers thereof, and any gas and electric boxes and tubes thereon, in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership or control thereof, and to indemnify and save harmless the city against all damages or actions at law that may arise or be brought by reason of such excavation or structure being under, over, in or upon the street, or being unfastened, out of repair or defective during such ownership or control. 
(Code 1988, § 4.8) 
Sec. 82-54. - Safeguards. 
(a)  Barricading; warning lights. All openings, excavations and obstructions shall be properly and substantially barricaded and railed off, and at night shall be provided with approved warning lights. Warning lights perpendicular to the flow of traffic shall not be more than three feet apart, and parallel to the flow of traffic not over 15 feet apart. 
(b)  Shoring excavations. All openings and excavations shall be properly and substantially sheeted and braced as a safeguard to workmen and to prevent cave-ins or washouts which would tend to injure the thoroughfare or subsurface structure of the street. 
(Code 1988, §§ 4.31, 4.32) 
Sec. 82-55. - Removal of encroachment. 
    Encroachments and obstructions in the street may be removed and excavations refilled and the expense of such removal or refilling charged to the abutting land owner when made or permitted by him or suffered to remain by him, otherwise than in accordance with the terms and conditions of this division. The procedure for collection of such expenses shall be as prescribed in chapter 78. 
(Code 1988, § 4.46) 
Secs. 82-56-82-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SIDEWALKS 

Sec. 82-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means City of South Lyon or its authorized agents. 
    Improved property means all property on which a structure has or is in the process of being erected, on which a mobile home or similar structure rests, property which city utilities are connected to, or property which is landscaped and has been or will be used for some purpose or activity. 
    Sidewalk means the portion of the street right-of-way designated for pedestrian travel. 
(Code 1988, § 4.61) 
Sec. 82-72. - Duty to construct. 
(a)  Wherever any improved property abuts, runs along side of or touches any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way, the owner of the improved property must construct a sidewalk or sidewalks running parallel to the city street(s) or right(s)-of-way. The number of feet of sidewalk(s) constructed by a property owner must be equal to the number of feet or part thereof that any portion of his or her improved property abuts, runs along side of or touches any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way. 
(b)  Any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way which bisects an individual's improved property must have constructed on each side of the city street(s) or right(s)-of-way sidewalks equal to the number of feet or part thereof that each part of the bisected improved property abuts, runs along side of or touches any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way. 
(c)  Any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way which divides improved property between respective owners must have sidewalks en each owner's side of the city street(s) or right(s)-of-way equal to the number of feet or part thereof that his or her respective improved property abuts, runs along side of or touches any city street(s) or right(s)-of-way. 
(Code 1988, § 4.62) 
Sec. 82-73. - Line and grade. 
    No person shall construct, rebuild or repair any sidewalks, except in accordance with the line, grade, slope and specification established by the city. 
(Code 1988, § 4.63) 
Sec. 82-74. - Permit required. 
(a)  No construction of sidewalks shall be commenced without first obtaining a permit from the city. Permits shall be obtainable from the city upon application. Such a permit shall be revocable by the city for failure to comply with the mandates of this article or other rules and regulations adopted by the city, and shall be valid only for the period of time endorsed thereon. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article shall be deemed an agreement by the applicant to promptly complete the work permitted, observe all pertinent laws and regulations of the city in connection therewith, and protect and save harmless the city from all damages or actions at law that may arise or may be brought on account of injury to persons or property resulting from work done under the permit or in connection therewith. Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in making application for a permit, they shall be in such amounts and provide such coverage as required by city council. 
(b)  Liability insurance shall not be required where a homeowner contracts with a contractor for the repair to sidewalk(s) immediately adjacent to his or her improved property. 
(Code 1988, § 4.64) 
Sec. 82-75. - Responsibility for cost. 
    The cost of constructing the sidewalk(s) shall be paid by the property owner. If the owner of any improved property or premises shall fail to build any sidewalk as required by this article, within 30 days after improvements are completed on the property, the city is authorized to construct such sidewalk(s) at the expense of the property owner. 
(Code 1988, § 4.65) 
Sec. 82-76. - Duty to maintain. 
    No person shall permit any sidewalk(s) which adjoins or runs through property owned by him or her to fall into a state of disrepair or to be unsafe. 
(Code 1988, § 4.66) 
Sec. 82-77. - Notice to repair. 
(a)  Whenever the city shall determine that a sidewalk is unsafe for use, notice may be given to the owner of said improved property through which said sidewalk runs of such determination. Thereafter it shall be the duty of the property owner to repair said sidewalk, thereby making it safe. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time, not less than seven days, within which such work shall be commenced. If the owner of the improved property shall refuse or neglect to repair the sidewalk the city shall have the right to repair the sidewalk and charge the premises for the costs of repair. 
(b)  Notice shall be made by sending to the property owner at his last known address a first class registered letter, return receipt requested, which shall identity the sidewalk in the disrepair and give him a reasonable time, not more than seven days, to commence repairs. 
(Code 1988, § 4.67) 
Sec. 82-78. - Sidewalks to be cleared of snow and ice. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the owner, lessee, or occupier of any developed property to remove accumulations of snow and ice from paved sidewalks in the City of South Lyon; the accumulation of snow or ice or both being a threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public and hereby deemed to be a nuisance. 
(1)  Every owner and every person in charge or control of any building, lot or piece of land fronting or abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, snow and ice from so much of such sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building, lot or piece of land. Except as provided in subsection (2) of this section, snow and ice shall be removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain. 
(2)  In the event that snow and ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in subsection (1) of this section, cause enough sand, or an agent designed to melt the ice without damage to the sidewalk, to be put on the sidewalk to make travel thereon reasonably safe, and shall as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause said sidewalk to be thoroughly cleaned. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
a.  Sidewalk means that paved portion of pedestrian's right-of-way intended for use by the public between the curb or street edge and any lawn, fence, and public or private building. 
b.  Person means and shall include partnerships, corporations, joint stock companies, or any other entity recognized by law. 
(Code 1988, § 4.68; Ord. No. 05-15, Pt. I, 5-26-15) 
Sec. 82-79. - Sidewalk obstructions. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall occupy any street with any materials or machinery incidental to the construction, demolition or repair of any building adjacent to said street, or for any other purpose, without first obtaining a permit from the city manager. No permit shall be granted until the applicant shall post a cash deposit and file a liability insurance policy as required by section 82-48. 
(b)  Pedestrian passage. At least six feet of sidewalk space shall be kept clean and clear for the free passage of pedestrians and if the building operations are such that free passageway is impracticable, a temporary plank sidewalk with substantial railings or sidewalk shelter shall be provided around such obstruction. Sidewalk signs as may be permitted under chapter 70 of this Code shall not be deemed obstructions for purposes of enforcement of this provision. 
(Code 1988, §§ 4.21, 4.22; Ord. of 2-9-09(2)) 
Sec. 82-80. - Penalties and violations. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(6), § 1(4.69)) 
Secs. 82-81-82-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-101. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Chief of police means the director of public safety of the City of South Lyon. 
    City means the City of South Lyon. 
    Parade means any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
    Parade permit means a permit as required by this article. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any land. 
(Code 1988, § 10.41) 
Sec. 82-102. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted. 
(Code 1988, § 10.51) 
Sec. 82-103. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(29), § 1(10.53)) 
Secs. 82-104-82-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 82-121. - Permit required. 
(a)  Generally. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police or city council. 
(b)  Exceptions. This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions. 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities. 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Code 1988, § 10.42) 
Sec. 82-122. - Applications. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such officer. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than ten days nor more than 30 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade. 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization. 
c.  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct. 
d.  The date when the parade is to be conducted. 
e.  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point. 
f.  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type of animals, and description of the vehicles. 
g.  The hours when such parade will start and terminate. 
h.  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed. 
i.  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade. 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas. 
k.  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade. 
l.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf. 
m.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. There shall be paid at the time of filing the application for a parade permit a fee as prescribed in sections 22-57 through 22-59. 
(Code 1988, § 10.43) 
Sec. 82-123. - Standards for issuance. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route. 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city. 
(3)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of areas contiguous to such assembly areas. 
(4)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire. 
(5)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance. 
(6)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(7)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(Code 1988, § 10.44) 
Sec. 82-124. - Notice of rejection. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within five days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Code 1988, § 10.45) 
Sec. 82-125. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within two days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal within two days after its receipt. 
(Code 1988, § 10.46) 
Sec. 82-126. - Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10.47) 
Sec. 82-127. - Notice to city officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the city council and city manager. 
(Code 1988, § 10.48) 
Sec. 82-128. - Contents of permit. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time. 
(2)  Minimum speed. 
(3)  Maximum speed. 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade. 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade. 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to enforce this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10.49) 
Sec. 82-129. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Code 1988, § 10.50) 
Sec. 82-130. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth. 
(Code 1988, § 10.52) 
Chapter 86 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are as follows: 
(1)  To provide for orderly growth and development of the community. 
(2)  To provide for a street framework, adequate for good traffic circulation within the city and with its regional thoroughfares. 
(3)  To provide for the subdivision of lands into home sites with reasonable qualities and design for good living. 
(4)  To provide adequate provisions for water supply, sanitary sewage, drainage and other health problems. 
(5)  To provide for adequate provisions for public facilities, such as school sites, recreation areas and municipal facilities. 
(6)  To provide an orderly method for processing and achieving of these purposes. 
(Code 1988, § 5.401) 
Sec. 86-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Area development plan means a preliminary plan of the section or area of which the proposed subdivision is located and showing the relationship of the subdivision to its surrounding development. 
    Council means the city council of the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 
    Master plan means the general development plan or comprehensive plan for development of the community which shall have been duly adopted by the planning commission and the city council. 
    Master streets and thoroughfares plan means that part of the master plan relating to the existing and proposed major street system of the city. 
    Parking space means an area of not less than 180 square feet, exclusive of drives or aisles giving access thereto, accessible from streets or alleys or from private driveways or aisles leading to streets or alleys, and to be usable for the storage or parking of self-propelled vehicles. 
    Planning commission act means Act 285, Michigan Public Acts of 1931, as amended, which is made a part hereof by this reference. 
    Plat means a map or drawing on which the subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented and which he submits for approval and intends, in final form, to record. 
    Streets and alleys means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, expressway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways means those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
(2)  Collector streets means those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Minor streets means those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
(4)  Marginal access streets means minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to arterial streets and highways and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Alley means a public thoroughfare or way, providing only a secondary means of access to abutting premises, generally located at the rear of the land. 
    Subdivide or subdivision mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his or her heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent and that is not exempted from the platting requirements of the Land Division Act by sections 108 and 109 of said Act. "Subdivide" or "subdivision" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act or the requirements of an applicable ordinance. 
    Subdivider means any individual, firm, association, syndicate, co-partnership, corporation, trust, or any other legal entity commencing proceedings under this chapter to effect the subdivision of land for himself or for another. 
    Subdivision Act means the land division act, Public Act No. 288 of 1967, as amended. 
    Usable lot area means that portion of a lot usable or adaptable to the normal uses made of a residential property, excluding any areas which may be swampy, excessively steep, covered by water, or included in a public easement for surface drainage or a private easement for a high voltage power transmission line. 
    Zoning chapter means chapter 102 of the South Lyon, Michigan, Ordinance Code. 
(Code 1988, § 5.402; Ord. of 4-14-97(1), § 1) 
Sec. 86-3. - Sales contrary to requirements. 
(a)  No person shall sell or convey any lot in any plat by reference thereto until such plat has been duly recorded in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Any sale of or option or contract to sell land subdivided contrary to the provisions of these regulations shall be voidable as provided in the Subdivision Act, as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 5.453) 
Sec. 86-4. - Public water and sewer service. 
    Public sewer or water service shall not be provided for any dwelling or other structure located on a plot subdivided or sold in violation of these regulations, excepting that such service may be installed in any structure when deemed necessary by the health department for the protection of the public health. 
(Code 1988, § 5.454) 
Sec. 86-5. - Variances. 
(a)  Generally. Where the commission finds that extraordinary hardships may result from strict compliance with these regulations, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan or these regulations. 
(b)  Large scale development. The standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the commission in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood unit, which in the judgment of the commission provide adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provide such covenants or other legal provisions and achievement of the plan. 
(c)  Conditions. In granting variances and modifications, the commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(Code 1988, § 5.460) 
Sec. 86-6. - Penalties and violations. 
(a)  Misdemeanor penalties. Any person who shall violate section 86-3 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a maximum fine of $500.00 and/or 90 days in jail. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction penalties. A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(7), § 1(5.470)) 
Secs. 86-7-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLATTING 

Sec. 86-31. - Pre-application procedure. 
(a)  Prior to the submission of a preliminary plat to the planning commission the subdivider, or his appointed representative, shall meet formally with the planning commission to present a general outline of his subdivision proposal. He shall include: 
(1)  Sketch plan and intent regarding land use, street layout and lot arrangement and tentative lot sizes, etc. 
(2)  Proposals regarding utilities and street improvements. 
(3)  General indication of size and general character of proposed buildings. 
(b)  The planning commission shall discuss with the subdivider and advise him of requirements of the subdivision rules and regulations, the zoning chapter and the Subdivision Act and any other information that may bear some relation to the particular piece of property. 
(c)  Before the next meeting of the commission they shall: 
(1)  Inspect the site so as to be familiar with the physical aspects of the site. 
(2)  Determine the need for the preparation of an area development plan prior to the consideration of the preliminary plan. 
(3)  Check the zoning on the site and make recommendations for change if needed. 
(4)  Review school and open space requirements for the area. 
(Code 1988, § 5.411) 
Sec. 86-32. - Area development plan. 
    An area development plan shall be required by the commission when: 
(1)  The subdivision presented is only a part of a large area to be subdivided. 
(2)  Topography and physical conditions, land use and land ownership complicate the subdividing of any part of the area without consideration of the balance of the area. 
(Code 1988, § 5.412) 
Sec. 86-33. - Preparation of plan. 
(a)  The plan shall be prepared at an acceptable scale and commensurate with its purpose and shall include the following. 
(b)  It shall show the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities which serve or influence it; main arterial highways and connecting streets; shopping centers; general location of school sites; parks and playgrounds and other public utilities, such as water supply, sewage disposal and storm drainage. 
(Code 1988, § 5.413) 
Sec. 86-34. - Area development plan approval. 
    At the next meeting of the commission the subdivider shall be notified whether an area development plan must be submitted. The subdivider must submit five copies of the plan to the secretary of the planning commission meeting. The planning commission shall recommend revisions or tentative approval of the plan subject to modification as may be found necessary as additional areas are subdivided. 
(Code 1988, § 5.414) 
Sec. 86-35. - Commission approval, or disapproval of preapplication data. 
    Within 15 days the commission shall inform the subdivider that his sketch plan and area development plan, as submitted, do or do not meet the objectives of these regulations. It shall point out the items in question and suggest means for making them acceptable to the commission. When the sketch plan of the subdivision and the area development plan have been approved the subdivider may proceed with the development of the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1988, § 5.415) 
Sec. 86-36. - Procedure for application preparation and conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Application. An application, in writing, shall accompany the preliminary plat of any proposed subdivision lying in the limits of the City of South Lyon. 
(b)  Preliminary plat. Ten copies of the preliminary plat and the area development plan, if requested, with supplementary material hereunder listed, shall be submitted to the commission at a regular meeting thereof. The preliminary plat shall be at a scale of not more than 200 feet to the inch. 
(1)  Title under which proposed subdivision is to be recorded, description of land to be platted, name and address of owner and technical author of the plan. 
(2)  Location of existing property lines, streets, buildings, water courses, railroads, utilities and other physical features, within the plat. 
(3)  The location of the adjoining streets, utilities, buildings and other physical features which relate to the development of the subdivision. 
(4)  Topography by contours related to the U.S.G.S. survey datum, contour intervals to be five feet where grade exceeds five percent and two feet for lesser grades. 
(5)  The location, name and width of proposed streets, alleys and easements for public utilities. The location of parks, plantings, lots and building lines on the property to be subdivided. 
(6)  The proposed method of water supply and sewage disposal and storm drainage. 
(7)  Proposed use of property. 
(8)  Areas proposed to be dedicated for public purposes. 
(9)  Tentative draft of protective covenants whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land uses in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(10)  Date, north point and graphic scale. 
(c)  Hearings. Any plat submitted to the commission shall contain the names and addresses of persons to whom notice of hearing shall be sent and no plat shall be acted upon by the commission without affording a hearing thereon as provided in section 15 of the Planning Commission Act. Notice shall be sent to said addresses by registered mail of the time and place of such hearing not less than five days before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to the owners of land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear upon the plats in the city clerk's office and their addresses appear in the directory of the city or on the tax records of the county. 
(d)  Conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(1)  Preliminary plats shall be subject to the conditional approval of the commission, who shall take into consideration the city's requirements and the most appropriate use of the land. Particular attention will be given to the standards of design, the justification for the development of public improvements and the subdivision's conformity to the existing street plan. The width, location and arrangements of streets, the dimensions of lots, the location of utilities and other features will be studied. 
(2)  Before approving any preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision, the commission must find that the land covered by the proposed subdivision is suitable both for development and for the type of development proposed in that: 
a.  It can be safely used for building purposes without dangers from flood or from any other menace to health or safety. 
b.  It can be served economically with public facilities and services as are required by the type of development and the circumstances of the particular case, in the opinion of the commission and city engineer or other particular agencies concerned (i.e., Oakland County Road Commission, county health department, superintendent of schools, water and/or sewage departments of districts having jurisdiction, etc.). 
(3)  Following review of the preliminary plat, the area development plan, the master plan and other material submitted for conformity thereof to these regulations and negotiations with the subdivider on changes deemed advisable and the kind and extent of improvements to be made by him, the commission shall within 30 days act thereon as submitted, or modified, and if approved, the commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproved, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(4)  If the preliminary plat meets the approval of the commission, then the subdivider may proceed to make an accurate survey of the property and prepare the final plat. Plans thus conditionally approved by the commission shall bear the signature of the chairman of the commission and one copy shall be filed in the office of the city engineer, one copy shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, one copy in the file of the commission and the fourth signed copy returned to the subdivider. 
(5)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute an acceptance of the subdivision. 
(Code 1988, § 5.416) 
Sec. 86-37. - Procedure for approval of final plat. 
(a)  The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these regulations. 
(b)  Application for approval of the final plat shall be submitted, in writing, to the commission at least ten days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(c)  Five copies of the final plat and other exhibits required for approval shall be prepared as specified below, and shall be submitted to the commission within two years after the date of approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise such approval shall become null and void unless within said two years an extension of time is applied for and granted by the commission. 
(d)  At the time of filing, the subdivider shall deposit with the clerk the required deposit for expenses of inspection of land, meetings and such fees required by the Subdivision Act. 
(e)  The final plat shall be prepared and presented in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Act, as amended, and in addition, shall show: 
(1)  Reference to any private restrictions which shall accompany plat, and shall contain proper acknowledgement of owner and mortgagee accepting said platting restrictions and which shall be in the proper form for recording. 
These restrictions shall include provisions for requiring a grading and sewer plan approved by the city engineer; and which shall be filed with the city clerk. Rear and side yard drainage and grading shall be maintained in accordance with the grades indicated on the approved grading and sewer plan. 
(2)  In addition to the above the commission will require a statement from each subdivider indicating: 
a.  Ownership of the property proposed to be subdivided as evidenced by an abstract of title certified to date, or at the option of the proprietor, a policy of title insurance. 
b.  The improvements and utilities to be installed by the subdivider. 
c.  The streets, alleys and parks, as agreed upon with the commission, with a recital that same are dedicated to the use of the public. 
d.  The total area, in acres of the tract, to be subdivided. 
e.  The net area in lots. 
f.  The area in parks. 
g.  Cross sections and profiles of streets showing grades approved by the city engineer. The profiles shall be drawn to city standard scales and elevations and shall be based on a datum plane approved by the city. 
h.  The plans for yard grading and drainage shall meet the requirements of the city engineering requirements and shall be approved by the city engineer. 
i.  A certificate by the city engineer that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
1.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements of these regulations and with the action of the commission giving conditional approval of the preliminary plat; or 
2.  A bond or certified check or other lawful assurance has been posted, which is available to the city, and in sufficient amount to assure such completion of all required improvements. 
(Code 1988, § 5.417) 
Sec. 86-38. - Approval. 
(a)  The commission shall examine the map for compliance with the preliminary plat and required changes thereof and shall approve, modify or disapprove the plat within 30 days after submission thereof to it, provided that the applicant for the commission's approval may waive this requirement and consent to an extension to such period. 
(b)  Approval of the commission shall be certified on the plat by the secretary pursuant to authorization by the commission and no plat shall be approved by the city council without the prior approval of the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 5.418) 
Sec. 86-39. - Submission to and approval by the city council required. 
    No plat shall be transmitted to any county or state approving authority for official action as required by the state platting procedure until each plat shall have, in the first instance, been approved by the city council in accordance with the regulations of this chapter and the Subdivision Act, as amended. 
(Code 1988, § 5.450) 
Sec. 86-40. - Plat approval deemed amendment. 
    Every plat approved by the commission shall, by virtue of such approval, be deemed to be an amendment of, or an addition to, or a detail of the master plan and a part thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 5.451) 
Sec. 86-41. - Metes and bounds platting. 
    The description of any lot or parcel in a plat of a subdivision, filed hereafter, by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer, is a violation of these regulations, unless the aggregate lot area conveyed meets the required minimum size of lots platted. 
(Code 1988, § 5.452) 
Secs. 86-42-86-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION AND USE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 86-61. - Conformity to the master plan. 
    All subdivisions shall be in harmony with the master plan. 
(Code 1988, § 5.431) 
Sec. 86-62. - Streets. 
(a)  Relation to adjoining street system. 
(1)  The arrangement of streets in a new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of principal existing streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. In general, such streets shall be of a width as great as that of the street so continued or projected. The centerline of such streets shall continue with the centerline of existing streets. 
(2)  In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide the proper access to adjoining property, and provide for proper connection with the highway system for contiguous land. In general, these extensions shall not be more than 1,300 feet apart. 
(3)  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(4)  A tangent at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on arterial and collector streets. 
(5)  Where the commission has adopted an area development plan or plat of a neighborhood or area of which the subdivision is a part and the proposed plat provides coordination with the street systems of the city, different from that of said continuations or projections of existing streets and the subdivider's plat conforms in general to such neighborhood or area development plan of the commission, the commission may approve the subdivider's plat. 
(6)  Where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider's tract, a sketch of a proposed future street system as a part of the area development plan of the unsubmitted part shall be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system of the part not submitted. 
(7)  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed arterial street, 120 feet or more in width, the commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a no access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(8)  Proposed streets shall be so arranged in relation to existing topography as to produce desirable lots and streets of reasonable gradient. 
(b)  Access to property. All lots, parks or public properties must have means of ingress and egress, either by street, land or drive. Building permits shall not be issued for the construction of buildings which do not have access on a public street. There shall be no reserve strips or controlling access to a street, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city. 
(c)  Large allotments. Where the parcel is subdivided into larger tracts than for building lots, the platting shall not be such as to stop the opening of major streets and the extension of adjacent minor streets, which in the judgment of the commission should ultimately be opened and extended. 
(d)  Street intersections. 
(1)  Streets shall be required to intersect each other at as nearly right angles as practicable, and no street shall intersect any other street at less than 60 degrees. Streets converging at one point shall be reduced to the least practicable number. 
(2)  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(3)  Commercial areas located on major and secondary highways shall have access to major and secondary highways not nearer than 300 feet from the intersection of public highways. 
(e)  Streets in relation to railroads. 
(1)  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(2)  Where it seems desirable the commission may require a screen planting along the rear property line along the railroad property in order to properly screen the view and aid in cushioning the noise of passing trains. 
(f)  Dedication of half-streets. The dedication of half-streets will be permitted only where the proposed subdivision adjoins a recorded subdivision and where there already exists a dedicated and recorded half-street, the other half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street complete. 
(g)  Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets. Dead-end or cul-de-sac streets, designed to be so permanently, shall not be longer than 400 feet. 
(h)  Building lines and setback lines. Building lines shall conform to the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the master plan as provided by Act 285, Public Acts 1931, as amended. 
(i)  Street widths. 
(1)  The width for major streets shall conform to the width designated on the master plan. 
(2)  The minimum width for minor streets shall be 60 feet. 
(3)  Boulevard streets shall be 86 feet in width. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac streets shall be 60 feet in width, terminating in a circle 120 feet in diameter. 
(5)  Marginal access streets (where permitted) shall be not less than 30 feet, abutting a major highway right-of-way. 
(j)  Street grades. 
(1)  Profiles may be required of all streets at the discretion of the commission. 
(2)  The minimum grade shall be 0.40 percent for concrete streets and gutters, all other street and gutter surfacing 0.50 percent. 
(3)  The maximum grade for all streets shall be five percent, provided that where essential to reasonable development, seven percent may be permitted for collector and minor streets. 
(4)  The street cross-section shall provide a slope from the property line to the curb. There shall be a minimum grade or wash of one-quarter of an inch per foot for the sidewalk; and a minimum grade of three-eighths inch per foot for the area between the sidewalk and the curb. 
(k)  Corner radii. Curb corners shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 20 feet. Intersections where the interior angle is less than 60 degrees shall have the curb corners rounded with at least a 30-foot radius and when the interior angle is less than 135 degrees it is recommended that the corner be rounded with a minimum radius of ten feet. Property lines at such corners shall be rounded or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(l)  Access to streets across ditches. Subdivider shall provide access to all proposed streets across water courses or ditches in a standard manner approved by the city engineer. 
(m)  Street and subdivision names. All proposed streets obviously in alignment with another already existing and named must bear the same name. New street names shall not duplicate existing street names and all names must be approved by the commission. 
(n)  Sidewalks on private streets. In condominium subdivisions where new streets are not to be dedicated as public streets, sidewalks five feet in width, shall be provided on at least one side of the street. 
(Code 1988, § 5.432; Ord. of 12-10-07(2)) 
Sec. 86-63. - Alleys. 
(a)  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts, except that the commission may waive requirements where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
(b)  The width of an alley shall be not less than 20 feet. 
(c)  Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where necessary, corners shall be cut off sufficiently to permit safe vehicular movements. Such cutoff shall be sufficient to provide a minimum inside turning radius of not less than 30 feet. 
(d)  Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, as determined by the commission. 
(Code 1988, § 5.433) 
Sec. 86-64. - Easements. 
(a)  Easements across lots or centered on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet wide. These easements shall be direct and continuous from block to block. 
(b)  Where subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way channel, or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be adequate for the purpose and as shall be approved by the city engineer and Oakland County Drain Commission. Parallel streets or parkways may be required in connection therewith. 
(Code 1988, § 5.434) 
Sec. 86-65. - Monuments. 
    Monuments shall conform to and shall be placed as required by the Subdivision Act, as amended. The city shall, in addition, require a surveyor's certificate guaranteeing the rechecking and replacing of monuments and bringing them to grade after sidewalks are in place. 
(Code 1988, § 5.435) 
Sec. 86-66. - Blocks. 
(a)  Residential blocks shall not be less than 250 feet wide, they shall not be less than 660 feet long nor more than 1,400 feet. Where lots are one-half acre or more in size, blocks up to 1,800 feet may be approved. Block lengths shall be subject to the discretion of the planning commission. 
(b)  Pedestrian crosswalks, not less than ten feet wide, shall be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Code 1988, § 5.436) 
Sec. 86-67. - Lots. 
(a)  Size of lots. 
(1)  Lot dimensions and areas shall not be less than the minimum required by the zoning chapter for the district in which the plat is located. The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide, by means of a public street, each lot with satisfactory access to an existing public street. 
(2)  When a parcel of land is subdivided into larger lots or parcels, one-half acre or more in size, the depth of such lots or parcels of land shall not be greater than three times the front width. 
(3)  A lot or parcel, classified as business or commercial, shall contain an area sufficient in size so as to provide an area for off-street parking meeting the requirements of chapter 102 (zoning). 
(4)  No lot classified as industrial shall be platted as industrial that is less than 100 feet in width and less than 15,000 square feet in area. 
(5)  The subdivider and the commission shall consider the off-street parking provisions as provided for in the zoning chapter and make adequate allowance for the same. 
(b)  Lot lines. All side lot lines should be at right angles to straight street lines, or radial to curved street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street and lot plan. 
(c)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall have extra width sufficient to permit the maintenance of building lines on both front and side. In normal cases, the width required will not be less than the amount of the established building lines on the side street, plus the irreducible buildable width and such side yard requirements as are provided for in chapter 102 (zoning). 
(d)  Lots abutting major thoroughfares. Where a subdivision abuts upon a major thoroughfare, 120 feet or more in width, the abutting property must be treated according to one of the following methods: 
(1)  When lots face the major thoroughfare, the lots must be large enough to provide a 50-foot setback, with a complete turnaround for autos, on the property. 
(2)  Provide a parallel access roadway along the subdivision. 
(3)  Arrange all lots to back up to the major thoroughfare with sufficient depth to provide and maintain a permanent 20-foot greenbelt along the major thoroughfare. 
(4)  Provide a system of short culs-de-sac leading from a street parallel with the major thoroughfare right-of-way, but connected therewith by a ten-foot pedestrian walkway. 
Where a pattern for any one major thoroughfare has been established, the planning commission shall adhere to that pattern as closely as it is possible to do so. 
(Code 1988, § 5.437) 
Sec. 86-68. - Use. 
(a)  No property shall be subdivided for residential use if such is considered unsuitable for building purposes by the commission. 
(b)  Wherever property is subdivided with the intention that it shall have a use more restricted than that designated in the zoning chapter, such use shall be stated either in an application for amendment to the zoning chapter or in a separate statement filed with the commission. 
(c)  Property use and area restrictions must be in accordance with the zoning chapter. 
(d)  Business lots, when platted, shall bear a reasonable relation in number to the probable future number of families constituting the purchasing power of the neighborhood. The commission will reserve the right to allocate business lots in accordance with its master plan and zoning chapter. 
(Code 1988, § 5.439) 
Sec. 86-69. - Utilities and improvements. 
(a)  Generally. In all subdivision plats, the plat will not be accepted unless the following improvements are made or a surety company bond in sufficient amount is filed with the City of South Lyon to guarantee improvements, to-wit: 
(1)  The paving of all streets and intersections, including curbs on all streets and intersections, to the approved grade to a total width of 33 feet measured from back of curb to back of curb. All curbs shall be of concrete, and streets and intersections may be paved by either concrete or asphalt provided, however, that all curbs and paving shall meet or exceed Michigan State Highway Department specifications for same. 
(2)  The installation of sidewalks, including crosswalks to the curb. 
(3)  The installation of trunk line and lateral storm sewers and storm inlets, and other necessary appurtenances, such as pumping stations, etc. 
(4)  The installation of trunk line and lateral sanitary sewers with house connections to the property line and from the nearest lateral or trunk line sewer, and any other necessary appurtenances, as pumping stations. 
(5)  The installation of water mains, fire hydrants, and any other necessary appurtenances. 
(6)  All plans and specifications of utilities and/or improvements, heretofore mentioned, must be approved by the city council and the construction must be carried out under the direction of the city engineer in strict accordance with the South Lyon Engineering Standard Specifications, designated on the plans for the various kinds of improvements. 
(b)  Yard grading and drainage. 
(1)  All yards in a subdivision shall be graded in such a manner as will avoid, as far as possible, the ponding of stormwater in the rear yards of a subdivision. 
(2)  Each lot shall drain to the street individually wherever possible, and a grade of not less than one percent be maintained to cause the flow of surface water to run away from the walls of the building. 
(3)  Roof drains and foundation drains shall not be connected to sanitary sewers. 
(4)  In general, the front yard of a building shall slope to the street, the rear yard shall slope from the rear property line towards the house, and also from the house towards the rear property line. The valley formed in the rear yard shall slope towards the side yard or to the driveway on the one side of the lot and to the neighboring adjacent driveway or side yard. The driveway or side yards shall be so graded as to carry water from the rear and side yards of the lot to the street. 
(5)  In the event that prevailing grade conditions do not permit draining of rear yards to the street, a minimum longitudinal slope of the rear easement may be permitted, which shall not be more than four-tenths of a foot per 100 feet, with a minimum run from high point to low point not to exceed 600 feet. Low points shall be drained with beehive type inlets and enclosed drain to proper storm drain. Each detail plan shall be prepared by the builder and approved by the city prior to issuance of a permit. 
(6)  No rear yard shall be graded to the adjacent side or rear property line or lines, as to require a slope of more than one foot in two feet, and such slope shall be wholly within six feet of the lot line. 
(7)  The planning commission may require a retaining wall to be placed on the rear or side lot line where excessive cut or fill may interfere with the normal use of the whole lot or adjoining property. 
(8)  On large lots buildings must be located on the lot so as prevent interference with the natural flow of surface water or special means must be provided to care for such drainage. Any grading on the lot shall not divert surface water to adjoining lots. This shall not prevent the use of natural drainage features of the land for surface runoff. 
(c)  Finish grading and workable soil. The city shall require the owner or subdivider to finish grade with a workable soil at least four inches deep on all lots in a residential land development. The finish grade shall mean the fine grading of the workable soil to the final finished grades. A workable soil means a soil which can be raked, without excessive physical exertion, but with sufficient body to retain moisture and fertilizer which can produce a lawn when properly seeded and fertilized by the home owner. 
(d)  Street signs. The subdivider shall provide and erect street signs of the same type and design in general use within the city. 
(e)  Street trees. Street trees shall be provided, and in order to insure continuity of purpose, street trees shall be planted in conformance with the planting plan approved by the City of South Lyon and in accordance with their specifications regarding species to be planted, size, tree spacing and replacement regulations. 
(Code 1988, § 5.440) 
Chapter 87 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of 5-12-03, adopted May 12, 2003, pertained to telecommunications and these provisions were designated as chapter 27, §§ 1-21. For the purpose of classification and to facilitate indexing and reference, the editor has redesignated chapter 27, §§ 1-21 as chapter 87, §§ 87-1-87-21. 

ARTICLE I. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY OVERSIGHT 

Sec. 87-1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this chapter are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of, 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the act by modifying the fees charges to providers and complying with the act. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the act or other applicable law. This act shall not apply to facilities subject to lease agreements for use of city property not defined as public rights-of-way under this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-3. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of South Lyon. 
    City council means the city council of the City of South Lyon or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the city council. 
    City manager means the city manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the act and this ordinance to telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities. 
All other terms used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as defined or, as provided in the act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public rights-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, roadeasement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as cooper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switched, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are use to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services means those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part 1 of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the act and this chapter only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-4. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the city for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit to this chapter. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the city clerk, one copy with the city manager, and one copy with the city attorney. Upon receipt, the city clerk shall make three copies of the application and distribute a copy to the department of wastewater, police and DPW. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The city manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the city manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The application shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the city manager. If the city and the applicant cannot agree on the requirements of additional information requested by the city, the city or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the city under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the city to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this chapter. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the city as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee requirement under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the city manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the city manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under section 87-4(b) of this chapter for access to a public right-of-way within the city. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the act, the city manager shall notify the MPSC when the city manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The city manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the city manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the city manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirements. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) above, the city manager may require that a nod is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the city without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under chapter _______ of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the act or under this chapter does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial complete of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the city, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the city. The route maps should be in [paper or electronic] format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the city, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the city set forth in subsection 87-4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the city's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the city hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to the telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the city also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with the telecommunications facilities in public rights-of-way within the city's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The city shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the city's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the city, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 87-11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the city from the authority shall be used by the city solely for rights-of-way related purposed. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the city from the authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the city under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the city manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the city shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the city may have under a permit issued by the city or under a contract between the city and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-17. - Compliance. 
    The city hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this section is to fully comply with the requirements of the act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 87-4(c) of this chapter; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 87-4(f) of this chapter; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fees, in accordance with section 87-4(g) of this chapter; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the city, in accordance with section 87-5(a) of this chapter; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the city has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 87-5(a) of this chapter; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 87-5(a) of this chapter; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 87-5(b) of this chapter; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 87-5(c) of this chapter; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 87-5(d) of this chapter; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications provider any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 87-6 of this chapter; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the city's right-of-way fees with a copy of this chapter, in accordance with section 87-11 of this chapter; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 87-14 of this chapter; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 87-15 of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this section shall not limit the city's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the city's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-19. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this chapter are hereby declared to be to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this chapter is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality of validity of any remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-20. - Authorized city officials. 
    The city manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized city official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this chapter as provided by the City Code. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
Sec. 87-21. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violated any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to [specify local civil infraction fines or ordinance section referenced here]. [If the city does not have a municipal civil infraction ordinance, a violation of this chapter shall be a violation of the City Code.] Nothing in this section shall be construed to limited the remedies available to the city in the event of a violation by a person of this chapter or a permit. 
(Ord. of 5-12-03) 
ARTICLE II. - WIRELESS FACILITIES IN RIGHTS-OF-WAY 

Sec. 87-51. - Purpose. 
    This article is adopted in response to new and differing state and federal regulations, including Michigan Public Act No. 365 of 2018 (MCL 460.1301-460.1339), 47 USC 1455, Rules adopted by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) as 47 CFR 1.40001 (now 47 CFR 1.6100) and 47 CFR 1.6001-1.6003, and the FCC's Declaratory Ruling and Third Report and Order in FCC 18-133, that infringe on the city's constitutional and proprietary rights and interests in its public right-of-way and the reasonable control thereof under article VII, section 29 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, the city charter, and other applicable laws, which would allow the city to require public right-of-way users to obtain a franchise or permit from the city. Without waiving those city rights, this article is adopted for the purpose of complying with those state and federal regulations by providing for and regulating access to and ongoing use of, public rights-of-way for wireless facilities that are not considered to be telecommunications facilities covered by the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act"), and permits applied for and issued under that Act and article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-52. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the indicated meanings: 
    Applicant means a wireless provider that applies for a permit or approval for wireless facilities, a wireless support structure, or utility pole in a public right-of-way. 
    Collocation or collocate means to place, replace, modify, mount, or install wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole, but does not include make-ready work or the installation of a new wireless support structure or utility pole. 
    Eligible facilities request means a request for modification of a lawfully existing wireless tower or lawfully existing wireless base station in a public right-of-way that involves collocation, removal, or replacement of wireless facilities that will not substantially change the physical dimensions of the wireless tower or based station support structure, with wireless tower, wireless base station, and substantial change defined in section 87-59. 
    Micro wireless facility means a small wireless facility that is not more than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height that does not have an exterior antenna more than 11 inches in length. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, above, or below a public roadway, highway, street, alley, bridge, sidewalk, or utility easement dedicated for compatible uses, whether owned or controlled by, or under the jurisdiction of, the city or county, state, or federal government but does not include a private right-of-way, limited access highway, land owned or controlled by a railroad, and railroad infrastructure. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets each of the following requirements: 
(1)  Each antenna is enclosed or would fit within an enclosure of not more than six cubic feet in volume. 
(2)  All other wireless facilities associated with all antennas at a single location are not more than 28 cubic feet in volume, with electric meters, telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer and cut-off switches, vertical cable runs, and concealment elements required by the city excluded from that calculation. 
    Utility pole means a pole or similar structure other than a wireless support structure, that is or may be fully or partially used for cable or wireline communications, electric distribution, lighting, traffic control, signage if the pole is at least 15 feet in height above ground level, or a similar function, or that is designed to support small wireless facilities. 
    Wireless facility or facilities means equipment and components at a fixed location that enables or facilitates the provision of wireless services, including antennas, transmitters, receivers, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, equipment shelters or cabinets, power supplies, comparable equipment, and miscellaneous hardware, but excluding structures or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated, telecommunication facilities as defined in section 87-3, and a wireline backhaul facility. 
    Wireless provider means a person or entity that provides wireless services and a person or entity that builds wireless facilities or support structures for a disclosed provider of wireless services. 
    Wireless service means a wireless communication service that is permitted or authorized by the Federal Communications Commission, which includes but is broader than personal wireless services as defined in 47 USC § 332. 
    Wireless service provider means a person or entity that provides wireless services. 
    Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure designed to support or capable of supporting small wireless facilities, but does not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-53. - Required permits and approvals to be applied for and complied with. 
(a)  Wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles shall not be installed, used, operated, or maintained in a public right-of-way without complying with the applicable regulations in this article and first obtaining and thereafter complying with the terms and conditions of all of the following permits or approvals to be applied for from the indicated city department or division: 
(1)  A right-of-way permit from the department of public works to be applied for, reviewed, and issued or denied under article II of chapter 82 of the Code and the standards and regulations in this article. 
(2)  Required building, electrical, and other construction code permits from the building department to be applied for, reviewed, and issued or denied under article II of chapter 18 of the Code. 
(3)  Any approvals or permits required through the department of planning and zoning to be applied for, reviewed, and issued or denied under the zoning ordinance in chapter 102 of the Code. 
(b)  A permit or approval shall not be required and fees or rates shall not be payable for: 
(1)  Replacement of a small wireless facility with a small wireless facility that is not larger or heavier and complies with applicable codes. 
(2)  Routine maintenance of small wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles. 
(3)  The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of a micro wireless facility that is suspended on cables strung between utility poles or wireless support structures in compliance with applicable codes. 
(c)  Any construction code and zoning ordinance permits or approvals for wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles shall be conditioned on the issuance of and compliance with the right-of-way construction or engineering permit and permit conditions for those facilities, support structures, or utility poles. 
(d)  The time period for the city to act on a wireless provider permit or approval application for wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles under this article shall not commence until the city has complete applications for all of the required city permit or approvals listed in subsection (a) for those wireless facilities, support structures, and utility poles. 
(e)  In addition to city permits and approvals, any required permits from other governmental entities that also have an ownership, control, or jurisdictional interest in the public right-of-way must be obtained prior to construction, and thereafter complied with. Obtaining a permit for wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles from another governmental entity who share the public right-of-way with the city does not relieve a wireless provider from the need to comply with the standards in this article and the city reserves the right to require that a right-of-way permit under this article and article II in chapter 82 of the Code be applied for, obtained, and complied with. 
(f)  To the extent applicable and allowed under existing franchises, permits, and applicable law, the permit requirements under this article shall apply to all new installations in the public right-of-way by electric and gas public utilities, incumbent or competitive local exchange carriers, fiber providers, and cable television video services providers. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-54. - Types of wireless facilities and applicable standards. 
(a)  The following types of wireless facilities, support structures, and utility poles in the public right-of-way are addressed and subject to the application, review, and other standards and regulations in the indicated section of this article: 
(1)  Section 87-58 for collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing wireless support structure or utility pole. 
(2)  Section 87-59 for collocation of a small wireless facility on a new or replacement wireless support structure or utility pole. 
(3)  Section 87-60 for eligible facilities requests. 
(4)  Section 87-61 for collocation of wireless facilities other than small wireless facilities and eligible facilities requests. 
(5)  Section 87-62 for replacement and new wireless support structures or utility poles not involving small wireless facilities or eligible facilities requests. 
(b)  An application for a permit or approval required under this article shall conspicuously identify the type of wireless facilities proposed and the ordinance section(s), as listed in subsection (a), the applicant believes to be applicable. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-55. - Permit applications for right-of-way construction or engineering permit. 
(a)  Applications for a right-of-way permit under article II of chapter 82 of the Code and the standards and regulations in this article shall be filed with the department of public works and shall include plans for the proposed wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles in a quantity, form, size, and scale required by the city's applicable engineering design standards and applicable ordinances, with the department of public works allowed to waive or relax a standard to the extent it is not applicable or necessary for review of the application. The plans shall include a cover sheet with the project name, wireless provider applicant name and contact information, a general location map and sheet index, and detailed scaled location and elevation drawings for each site for which the permit is requested that show, describe, and include the following: 
(1)  The sides of and specific locations on named streets, with geographic information system (GIS) coordinates. 
(2)  The location and edges of the public right-of-way and portion used for vehicular travel, and the location and dimensions of existing above-ground structures, utilities, sidewalks, driveways, buildings, signs, traffic lights and signs, poles, curbs, buildings, utility cabinets, utility pole guy wires, shelters, benches, storm drains, wireless support structures, utility poles, other improvements, and trees within 75 feet of the proposed location. 
(3)  Existing below ground structures including but not limited to water, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, electric, gas, cable, communication lines, and conduit. 
(4)  Information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the public, utility, and traffic safety and protection standards in section 87-56. 
(5)  Information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the aesthetic, spacing, and undergrounding standards in section 87-57. 
(6)  Information necessary to demonstrate compliance with the applicable standards for the type of wireless facilities, support structure, or utility poles for which approval is requested under sections 87-58 through 87-62. 
(b)  In addition to identification of the type of proposed wireless facility and applicable ordinance section as required in subsection 87-54(b) and the plans described in subsection (a), applications shall include: 
(1)  Certified documentation that each proposed wireless support structure or utility pole can structurally accommodate the proposed wireless facilities and documentation of its ability to accommodate the proposed and any future wireless facilities. 
(2)  Manufacturer, model number, height, width, depth, weight, and volume in cubic feet of all proposed wireless facilities individually and collectively, specifically including the total cubic feet of each antenna and the total cubic feet of all other wireless facilities. 
(3)  The identity of the wireless provider applying for the permit and the owners of and wireless providers that will use the wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles for which the permit is requested, and for each of those entities the following: 
a.  Legal and any assumed names, and resident agent name, if any. 
b.  Local, mailing, and registered office addresses. 
c.  Name, title, and authority of signatory for that entity. 
d.  Contact person name, address, phone numbers and email address. 
(4)  Documentation that the owner of the proposed wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles has approved what is disclosed in the plans for the requested permit. 
(5)  A written certification by the applicant that the wireless facilities for which the permit is requested will be operational within one year after permit issuance. 
(6)  A certificate of compliance with FCC rules related to radio frequency emissions from the proposed wireless facilities. 
(7)  Copies of any required permits from other governmental entities that also have an ownership, control, or jurisdictional interest in the public right-of-way or documentation that those permits have been properly applied for. 
(8)  Documentation of the date when complete applications for construction code permits and any required zoning ordinance permits or approvals were or will be made. 
(9)  Identification of contractors who will be working in the public right-of-way and contact persons and information for those contractors. 
(10)  A construction schedule indicating the period of time for the work from commencement to completion and restoration of all public right-of-way disturbed by the work. 
(11)  A traffic control plan for when work is being performed in the public right-of-way. 
(12)  Photo simulations of existing and proposed conditions. 
(13)  A video recording of the location showing the staging and work areas where construction machinery will be driven or positioned off the traveled roadway. 
(14)  Documentation of the applicant's ability to provide any required bond under section 87-65. 
(15)  Payment of any application, review, or processing fee established by resolution of the city council under section 87-66. 
(16)  For applications that would involve exceeding the height limits under Public Act No. 365 of 2018, to the height limits allowed by 47 CFR 16.001-16.003, a statement of whether the applicant agrees to pay the annual recurring fees recognized as presumptively valid under the Declaratory Ruling and Order in FCC 18-133. 
(c)  An application may be for up to 20 collocations by the applicant of substantially similar small wireless facilities for placement on similar types of wireless support structures or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-56. - Public, utility, traffic, and pedestrian safety protection standards. 
(a)  Wireless facilities, wireless support structures, utility poles, and any related equipment shall be designed, installed, used, and maintained in compliance with the following standards that are intended to avoid material interference with the safe operation of traffic equipment, sight lines and clear vision areas, Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) compliance regarding pedestrian access or movement, and the maintenance and full unobstructed use of public utility and drainage infrastructure: 
(1)  Shall have a separation distance of at least five feet from a sidewalk and the back of a curb, or if there is no curb, from the edge of the improved public right-of-way improved used for motor vehicle travel. 
(2)  Shall have a separation distance of at least five feet from the edge of any driveway and not be positioned to obstruct the ability to view traffic on the road from a vehicle exiting a driveway. 
(3)  Shall be located outside the corner clearance area under the zoning ordinance and comply with any other traffic safety clear vision standard under any city or other governmental ordinance, code, standard, rule, or regulation. 
(4)  Shall not cause a physical or visual obstruction or safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
(5)  Shall comply with any setback, separation, or isolation distance requirement from existing or planned public utilities and lawful structures in the public right-of-way under any city ordinance, code, or design standards. 
(6)  The lowest part of wireless facilities shall be located at a height that is at least ten feet above existing grade or higher as necessary to not pose a hazard or obstruction to persons or vehicles and to provide sufficient separation distance from power lines and similar facilities. 
(7)  Wireless support structures and utility poles shall not have more collocated wireless facilities than the structure or pole is designed and constructed to safely accommodate as documented by a certified structural analysis. 
(8)  Construction and traffic control during construction shall be in accordance with the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, Michigan Vehicle Code, and the directives of the city public safety department. 
(9)  Shall not interfere or prevent compliance with ADA standards regarding pedestrian access and movement. 
(10)  Shall comply with all conditions of any required permits from other governmental entities. 
(11)  Wireless facilities shall be designed to be resistant to unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism and other activities that result in hazardous situations, in reception of communications or attracted nuisances. 
(b)  To provide compliance with one or more of the standards in subsection (a), the city may require that a proposed collocation involving a new or replacement utility pole be moved by up to 75 feet for collocation on a designated existing wireless support structure or utility pole or to a designated location for the new or replacement utility pole. The applicant may request a waiver of this requirement by demonstrating in writing that the applicant cannot secure the right to comply with the city's requirement on reasonable terms and conditions and that compliance imposes unreasonable technical problems or significant additional costs. 
(c)  An applicant may request a waiver or modification of one or more of the standards in subsection (a) by demonstrating in writing that compliance will prevent a disclosed wireless service provider that would be using the proposed wireless facilities, support structure, or utility pole, from providing personal wireless services in violation of 47 USC § 332. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-57. - Aesthetic, location, spacing, and undergrounding standards. 
(a)  Wireless facilities, wireless support structures, utility poles, and any related equipment shall be designed, installed, used, and maintained in compliance with the following standards that are intended to conceal such facilities, structures, and poles to the extent technically feasible in an effort to avoid or remedy the tangible and intangible public harm of installations in the public right-of-way that are unsightly, out-of-character with the surrounding area, or could result in the direct or indirect removal of trees and other aesthetically desirable features and appearances: 
(1)  Shall be strictly limited to the location and what is shown on the approved plans. 
(2)  The city disfavors exterior mounted wireless facilities and equipment, including antennas, brackets, wires, cables, conduit, and the city prefers that wireless facilities be installed internal to the wireless support structure or utility pole such as a monopole or smart pole unless technically infeasible. 
(3)  Wireless facilities shall be treated and colored to be visually compatible with the wireless support structure or utility pole they are collocated on or associated with by painting or other coating. 
(4)  Wireless facilities shall be compatible in scale and proportion to the structure or pole upon which they are to be attached, using the smallest and least intrusive technology available, with the diameter of top mounted antennas to not exceed twice the diameter of the top of the structure or pole. 
(5)  Antennas shall be top mounted and aligned with the centerline of wireless support structures or utility poles, or side mounted with the vertical centerline of the antenna parallel with the support structure or utility pole. There must be a smooth transition between the support structure or pole and the antenna and related equipment or attachments. 
(6)  All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future co-location by the same or other service providers, operators or carriers. 
(7)  If not installed internal to the support structure or pole, which is preferred, all cables and wires shall be placed in conduit or otherwise properly secured and concealed on the wireless support structure or utility pole. 
(8)  No more than three antennas may be collocated on a support structure or utility pole and only if that number of antennas can be designed and accommodated in a manner that complies with all requirements of this section. 
(9)  Existing trees in the public right-of-way shall not be removed or trimmed to facilitate the installation, use, or maintenance of wireless facilities. 
(10)  Wireless facilities, support structures, and utility poles shall not be located within the drip line (critical root zone) of an existing tree in or adjoining the public right-of-way. 
(11)  Ground mounted wireless facilities, including equipment cabinets and enclosures, shall be located as close as legally and technically feasible to the wireless support structure or utility pole they are associated with. 
(12)  Ground mounted wireless facilities or associated equipment such as equipment cabinets and enclosures, shall be installed underground unless technically or physically infeasible, and if permitted to be installed above-ground such equipment shall be camouflaged and concealed to the maximum extent technically feasible by matching color and materials to existing above-ground structures, landscaping, and placement to take advantage of concealment provided by the proposed structure or pole, existing landscaping, or above-ground improvements. 
(13)  Externally installed wireless facilities shall not project more than two feet from any side of the utility pole or wireless support structure upon which they are collocated. 
(14)  Wireless facilities shall not be illuminated unless required by law or integral to a concealment design such as appearance as or on a street light pole. 
(15)  New and replacement utility poles shall be located in alignment with existing utility poles on either side. 
(16)  New and replacement utility poles shall be located equidistance from existing utility poles on either side. 
(17)  All new and replacement support structures and poles shall be of monopole or smart pole design and construction capable of containing and housing the wireless facilities and associated equipment within the structure or pole unless the city manager approves an alternative design. All conduit, wires, cable, fiber and other hardware shall be located internal to the structure or pole. Disguising, camouflaging, or stealthing support structures or poles is encouraged. 
(18)  Unless a greater height is approved under this article as required by state or federal law, wireless support structures and utility poles shall not be taller than the existing utility poles on either side. 
(19)  In a public right-of-way abutting residentially used or zoned property, new wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles shall only be located in line with a side lot line. 
(20)  New wireless facilities shall not be collocated on an existing wireless support structure or utility pole that is directly in front of an existing residential dwelling or that is along the frontage of a property containing a building of historic significance under federal, state, or other laws. 
(21)  New wireless facilities, wireless support structures, and utility poles shall not be located in front of an existing residential or commercial structure. 
(22)  In a public right-of-way abutting residentially used or zoned property, wireless facilities that require a cooling system shall use a passive system, or if a motorized system is technologically required, shall use a system and fan with the lowest available noise level. 
(23)  Except for a label containing the name and emergency contact telephone number for the wireless provider responsible for the wireless facilities and wireless support structure or utility pole, information that identifies them and their location, and any information required to be displayed by state or federal law, no signage shall be allowed, with all manufacturer decals that are not needed for safety reasons to be removed or painted over. 
(24)  Regardless of the number of antennas that are collocated on a utility pole or wireless support structure, the other wireless facilities associated with those antennas shall not exceed 28 cubic feet in volume. 
(25)  Collocations on and replacement or new utility poles or wireless support structures in a public right-of-way that has been specifically designated or identified by ordinance or city council resolution for a program of improvement, redevelopment, beautification, regulation, or other planning goals, shall be subject to city review and approval of the design, appearance, and method and height of attachment to assure consistency, compatibility, and uniformity with the standards, objectives, installations and streetscape appearance planned for that public right-of-way under the program. 
(26)  Wireless facilities shall not be located in the public right-of-way of a designated natural beauty road or street under MCL 324.35701 through MCL 324.35706. 
(27)  Wireless facilities are prohibited on downtown decorative light poles. 
(28)  New wireless support structures and utility poles shall not be installed or located on Lake Street and Lafayette Street within the South Lyon Downtown Development Authority District boundaries. 
(29)  Location preferences. The most desirable location for new wireless facilities is collocation on existing support structures and utility poles. All wireless facilities shall be sited to avoid or minimize land use conflicts in compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Preferred locations. The following list of preferred locations for wireless facilities is in order of preference from most to least preferred: Industrial, non-DDA business and commercial areas, and office zoning districts, public or quasi-public. 
b.  Less preferred locations. The following less preferred locations are listed in order of preference from most to least preferred: Parks or open space, DDA business and commercial areas, Lake and Lafayette Streets, residential zoning districts. 
(30)  Avoid residential and DDA Areas. New support structures and utility poles shall not be located within residential areas (right-of-way bordered by property zoned R-1A, R-1, R-2, or R-3) and the city downtown development authority district unless sufficient technical and other information is provided to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city manager that location in such areas is appropriate, subject to the following findings: 
a.  The location of the proposed facility site is essential to meet the service demands of the carrier and no other alternative co-location, or type of support structure or utility pole is feasible. This shall be documented by the applicant providing a list of the locations of preferred technically feasible sites, the good faith efforts and measures taken by the applicant to secure these preferred sites, and the specific reasons why these efforts and measures were unsuccessful. 
b.  The use of a new support structure or utility pole for the proposed facility by itself or in combination with other existing, approved, and proposed facilities will avoid or minimize adverse effects related to land use compatibility, visual resources, and public safety. 
(b)  To provide compliance with one or more of the standards in subsection (a), the city may require that a proposed collocation involving a new or replacement utility pole be moved by up to 75 feet for collocation on a designated existing wireless support structure or utility pole or to a designated location for the new or replacement utility pole. The applicant may request a waiver of this requirement by demonstrating in writing that the applicant cannot secure the right to comply with the city's requirement on reasonable terms and conditions and that compliance imposes unreasonable technical problems or significant additional costs. 
(c)  Above ground wireless facilities and support structures and utility poles shall not be allowed in an area designated by the city council solely for underground or buried cable and utility facilities if all of the following apply: 
(1)  The city has required all cable and utility facilities, other than city, street light, and traffic signal poles and attachments, to be placed underground by a date that is not less than 90 days before the submission of the application. 
(2)  The city does not prohibit the replacement of city poles by a wireless provider in the designated area. 
(d)  An applicant may request a waiver or modification of one or more of the standards in subsections (a) and (c) by demonstrating in writing that compliance will prevent a disclosed wireless service provider that would be using the proposed wireless facilities, support structure, or utility pole, from providing personal wireless services in violation of 47 USC § 332. 
(e)  To the extent applicable and allowed under existing franchises, permits, and applicable law, the permit requirements under this article shall apply to all new installations in the public right-of-way by electric and gas public utilities, incumbent or competitive local exchange carriers, fiber providers, and cable television video services providers. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-58. - Collocation of small wireless facilities on existing structures and poles. 
(a)  This section applies to the collocation of small wireless facilities on existing wireless support structures or utility poles. 
(b)  For collocations where the applicant wants the annual rate limited to what is allowed by MCL 460.1313, wireless facilities shall not extend more than five feet above the height of the wireless support structure or utility pole they are collocated on. 
(c)  If the applicant has agreed to pay the annual recurring fee recognized as presumptively valid under the Declaratory Ruling and Order in FCC 18-133, subject to compliance with subsection (b), the collocation shall not result in a height that exceeds the greater of the following overall heights of the structure or pole and collocated wireless facilities: 
(1)  Fifty feet. 
(2)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of the existing structure or pole. 
(3)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of immediately adjacent wireless support structures or utility poles in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Subject to the possible time adjustments in MCL 460.1315 and 47 CFR 1.6003 that are included in the shot clock appendix to this article, the city shall approve or deny an application for a permit under this section within 60 days of all applications for the requested facilities being submitted and complete. 
(e)  A permit application under this section may only be denied for reasons listed in subsection 87-63(b). 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-59. - Collocation of small wireless facilities on replacement/new structures and poles. 
(a)  This section applies to the collocation of small wireless facilities on new or replacement wireless support structures or utility poles. 
(b)  For collocations where the applicant wants the annual rate limited to what is allowed by MCL 460.1313, wireless facilities shall not extend more than five feet above the height of the wireless support structure or utility pole and the new or replacement wireless support structure or utility pole used for collocation shall not exceed 40 feet in height above ground level. 
(c)  If the applicant has agreed to pay the annual recurring fee recognized as presumptively valid under the Declaratory Ruling and Order in FCC 18-133, the collocation shall not result in a height that exceeds the greater of the following overall heights of the new or replacement structure or pole and collocated wireless facilities: 
(1)  Fifty feet. 
(2)  For a replacement structure or pole, a height that is ten percent more than the height of the structure or pole being replaced. 
(3)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of immediately adjacent wireless support structures or utility poles in the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Subject to the possible time adjustments in MCL 460.1315 and 47 CFR 1.6003 that are included in the shot clock appendix to this article, the city shall approve or deny an application for a permit under this section within 90 days of all applications for the requested facilities being submitted and complete. 
(e)  A permit application under this section may only be denied for reasons listed in subsection 87-63(b). 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-60. - Eligible facilities requests. 
(a)  This section applies to eligible facilities requests as defined in section 87-52. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  Wireless tower means a structure in a public right-of-way, the sole or primary purpose of which is to support antennas and associated wireless equipment for the provision of wireless services. 
(2)  Wireless base station means equipment or a structure (other than a wireless tower), that at the time of the application supports or houses wireless facilities at a fixed location that enables wireless service between user equipment and a communications network. 
(c)  An eligible facilities request application shall include the documents, plans, specifications, and statements necessary to establish that: 
(1)  The wireless tower or base station is existing. 
(2)  The wireless tower or base station to be modified is in compliance with all applicable city, state, and other local zoning, siting, and regulatory reviews, permits, and approvals. 
(3)  Modification is limited to collocation, removal or replacement of wireless equipment. 
(4)  There will be no "substantial change" to the wireless tower or base station. 
(d)  For purposes of this section substantial change means any of the following: 
(1)  Increasing the height over the height approved as of February 22, 2012, by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Adding wireless facilities that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet. 
(3)  The installation of new ground equipment cabinets if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets. 
(4)  If there are existing ground equipment cabinets, the installation of ground cabinets that are ten percent larger in height or overall volume than the existing cabinets. 
(5)  Excavation or deployment outside the perimeter of the area occupied by the wireless tower or base station and existing wireless facilities. 
(6)  A modification that does not comply with prior approval conditions for the wireless support structure or base station unless the noncompliance is limited to a modification that would not be a substantial change under the above standards in subsections (1) through (5). 
(7)  A modification that would defeat or be incompatible or inconsistent with existing elements of a wireless tower or base station designed to conceal or minimize its appearance as a wireless tower or base station. 
(e)  Subject to the possible time adjustments under 47 CFR 1.6100 that is included in the shot clock appendix to this article, the city shall approve or deny an application for a permit under this section within 60 days of all applications for the requested facilities being submitted and complete. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-61. - Collocation of wireless facilities other than small wireless facilities and eligible facilities requests. 
(a)  This section applies to the collocation of wireless facilities that are not described in sections 87-58, 87-59, or 87-60. 
(b)  Collocations shall comply with all standards in sections 87-56 and 87-57. 
(c)  For collocations where the applicant wants the annual rate limited to what is allowed by MCL 460.1313, wireless facilities shall not extend more than five feet above the height of the wireless support structure or utility pole they are collocated on. 
(d)  If the applicant has agreed to pay the annual recurring fee recognized as presumptively valid under the Declaratory Ruling and Order in FCC 18-133, subject to compliance with subsection (c) and the applicant's demonstration that a disclosed wireless provider will be prohibited from providing personal wireless services without the increased height, the collocation shall not result in a height that exceeds the greater of the following overall heights of the structure or pole and collocated wireless facilities: 
(1)  Fifty feet. 
(2)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of the existing structure or pole. 
(3)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of immediately adjacent wireless support structures or utility poles in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Subject to the possible time adjustments in MCL 460.1315 and 47 CFR 1.6003 that are included in the shot clock appendix to this article, the city shall approve or deny an application for a permit under this section within 90 days of all applications for the requested facilities being submitted and complete. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-62. - Replacement and new wireless support structures and utility poles not involving small wireless facilities or eligible facilities requests. 
(a)  This section applies to the new and replacement wireless support structures and utility poles not involving collocation of wireless facilities under sections 87-58, 87-59, or 87-60. 
(b)  Wireless support structures and utility poles shall comply with all standards in sections 87-56 and 87-57. 
(c)  For wireless support structures and utility poles where the applicant wants the annual rate limited to what is allowed by MCL 460.1313, the height shall not exceed 40 feet above ground level and wireless facilities shall not extend more than five feet above the height of the wireless support structure or utility pole. 
(d)  If the applicant has agreed to pay the annual recurring fee recognized as presumptively valid under the Declaratory Ruling and Order in FCC 18-133, subject to the applicant's demonstration that a disclosed wireless provider will be prohibited from providing personal wireless services without a height greater than in subsection (c), the wireless support structure or utility pole may be increased to a height that does not exceed the greater of the following overall heights of the structure or pole and collocated wireless facilities: 
(1)  Fifty feet. 
(2)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of the existing structure or pole. 
(3)  A height that is ten percent more than the height of immediately adjacent wireless support structures or utility poles in the public right-of-way. 
(e)  For new and replacement wireless support structures and utility poles under this section, the city may specify and require relocation from what is proposed to a new location in the same general public right-of-way area based on any standard listed in sections 87-56, 87-57, or permit conditions listed in subsection 87-64(e). 
(f)  Subject to the possible time adjustments in MCL 460.1315 and 47 CFR 1.6003 that are included in the shot clock appendix to this article, the city shall approve or deny an application for a permit under this section within 150 days of all applications for the requested facilities being submitted and complete. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-63. - Review and decisions on permit applications. 
(a)  Within the time allowed for approval or denial of a permit application, the city shall issue a written notice to the applicant that either denies the requested permit for specified reasons with citations to sections of this article or applicable codes or provides notice that the application has been approved and the requirement for the permit to be issued. 
(b)  An application under sections 87-58 and 87-59 for wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles described in and complying with those sections may only be denied if the facilities, structures, or poles would do one or more of the following: 
(1)  Materially interfere with the safe operation of traffic control equipment. 
(2)  Materially interfere with sight lines or clear zones for transportation or pedestrians. 
(3)  Materially interfere with compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Public Law 101-336, or similar federal, state, or local standards regarding pedestrian access or movement. 
(4)  Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed use of public utility infrastructure under the jurisdiction of the city. 
(5)  With respect to drainage infrastructure under the jurisdiction of the city or other governmental entity, either of the following: 
a.  Materially interfere with maintenance or full unobstructed use of the drainage infrastructure as it was originally designed. 
b.  Not be located a reasonable distance from the drainage infrastructure to ensure maintenance under the Drain Code of 1956, 1956 PA 40, MCL 280.1 to 280.630, and access to the drainage infrastructure. 
(6)  Fail to comply with the one or more spacing standards in sections 87-56 and 87-57 that do not prevent a wireless provider from serving any location. 
(7)  Fail to comply with applicable codes. 
(8)  Fail to comply with the aesthetic, spacing, or undergrounding standards in section 87-57 in a historic, downtown, or residential district unless such compliance is demonstrated by the applicant to prohibit use of the wireless service provider's technology. 
(9)  Fail to meet the aesthetic, spacing, and undergrounding standards in section 87-57 unless such compliance is demonstrated by the applicant to prohibit the provision of personal wireless services. 
(c)  If an application is denied, the applicant may attempt to cure the reasons for denial by submitting a revised application with amended or supplemental information within 30 days of the denial without payment of an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days, limiting its review to the reasons for denial, and provide notice of that decision as provided in subsection (a). 
(d)  Before issuance of a permit, any bond required by section 87-65 shall be provided and the annual fee established by resolution of the city council for the approved wireless facilities under section 87-66 shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-64. - Permit terms and conditions. 
(a)  Repair. Every right-of-way permit issued under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article shall be considered to include a condition that all wireless providers using the wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles are responsible for repairing all damage to the public right-of-way caused by the activities of one or more of those providers while occupying, constructing, installing, mounting, maintaining, modifying, operating, or replacing wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles, and to restore the public right-of-way to the condition that existed prior to the damage. If the wireless providers fail to perform the repairs and restoration within 60 days of the city's written notice to do so, the city may perform the repairs and restoration, with the wireless providers responsible for paying the city its reasonable and documented costs within 30 days of the city's invoice or billing for those costs. 
(b)  Electricity. Every right-of-way permit issued under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article shall be considered to include a condition that all wireless providers using the wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles shall be responsible for arranging and paying for all electricity used for the wireless facilities. 
(c)  Indemnification. Every right-of-way permit issued under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article shall be considered to include a condition that all wireless providers using the wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees against any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees resulting from the installation, construction, repair, replacement, operation, or maintenance of any wireless facilities, wireless support structures, or utility poles to the extent caused by the applicant, wireless providers using the facilities, structures, or poles, and their contractors, subcontractors, and the officers, employees, or agents of any of these. This obligation does not apply to any liabilities or losses due to or caused by the sole negligence of the city or its officers, agents, or employees. 
(d)  Insurance. Every right-of-way permit issued under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article shall be considered to include a condition that all wireless providers using the wireless facilities, support structures, or utility poles obtain insurance naming the city and its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds against any claims, demands, damages, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, and attorney fees in amounts required by the city. A wireless provider may meet all or a portion of the city's insurance coverage and limit requirements by self-insurance. To the extent it self-insures, a wireless provider is not required to name additional insureds under this section. To the extent a wireless provider elects to self-insure, the wireless provider shall provide to the city evidence demonstrating, to the city's satisfaction, the wireless provider's financial ability to meet the city's insurance coverage and limit requirements. 
(e)  Every right-of-way permit issued under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article shall be considered to include the following conditions which are based on the substantive terms and conditions of the current unilateral form of permit approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission for use under the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act, Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, as amended: 
(1)  No burden on public right-of-way. Permittee, its contractors, subcontractors, and the wireless facilities, structures, and poles shall not unduly burden or interfere with the present or future use of any of the public right-of-way. The Wireless facilities, structures, and poles shall be installed and maintained so as to not endanger or injure persons or property in or about the public right-of-way. If city reasonably determines that any portion of the wireless facilities, structures, and poles constitutes an undue burden or interference, due to changed circumstances, Permittee, at its expense, shall modify the wireless facilities, structures, and poles or take such other actions as city may determine is in the public interest to remove or alleviate the burden, and permittee shall do so within a reasonable time period. City shall attempt to require all occupants of a pole or conduit whose wireless facilities, structures, and poles are a burden to remove or alleviate the burden concurrently. 
(2)  No priority. This permit does not establish any priority of use of the public right-of-way by permittee over any present or future permit holder or parties having agreements with city or franchises for such use. In the event of any dispute as to the priority of use of the public right-of-way, the first priority shall be to the public generally, the second priority to city, the third priority to the State of Michigan and its political subdivisions in the performance of their various functions, and thereafter as between other permit, agreement or franchise holders, as determined by city in the exercise of its powers, including the police power and other powers reserved to and conferred on it by the State of Michigan. 
(3)  Marking. Permittee shall mark the wireless facilities, structures, and poles in compliance with applicable federal and state law requirements, with each location at which wireless facilities, structures, and poles are located to have a written sign that is readable from ground level that at a minimum states permittee's name and a toll-free telephone number to call for assistance, and if wireless facilities, structures, and poles are underground, a statement that there is buried equipment at the site. 
(4)  Installation and maintenance. The construction and installation of the wireless facilities, structures, and poles shall be performed pursuant to plans approved by city, and together with the maintenance of the wireless facilities, structures, and poles, shall be done in a clean, good, and workmanlike manner. Permittee shall install and maintain the wireless facilities, structures, and poles in a reasonably safe condition, free from workmanship and product defects. Permittee may perform maintenance on the wireless facilities, structures, and poles without prior approval of city, provided that permittee shall obtain any and all permits required by city in the event that any maintenance will disturb or block vehicular traffic or are otherwise required by city. 
(5)  Coordination. Permittee shall coordinate its construction and all other work in the public right-of-way with any city programs or projects permittee was notified of in the city's review comments on construction permit application. 
(6)  Compliance with laws. Permittee shall comply with all governmental laws, statutes, ordinances, rules, resolutions, tariffs, administrative orders, certificates, permits, orders, regulations, and other legal requirements regarding the construction, installation, use, and maintenance of its wireless facilities, structures, and poles, whether federal, state or local, now in force or which hereafter may be promulgated or become effective. Permittee shall comply with all zoning and land use ordinances and historic preservation ordinances as may exist or may hereafter be amended. 
(7)  Street vacation. If city vacates or consents to the vacation of public right-of-way within its jurisdiction, and such vacation necessitates the removal and relocation of wireless facilities, structures, and poles in the vacated public right-of-way, permittee does, as a condition of this permit, consent to the vacation and remove its wireless facilities, structures, and poles at its cost and expense when and within the reasonable time ordered by city or a court of competent jurisdiction. If permittee fails to satisfy this obligation, city may take all reasonable actions it deems necessary to secure timely completion of the required work. 
(8)  Relocation. If city requests permittee to relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its wireless facilities, structures, and poles because of street or utility work, or other public projects, permittee shall relocate, protect, support, disconnect, or remove its wireless facilities, structures, and poles, at its cost and expense, including where necessary to such alternate location as city and permittee mutually agree, applying reasonable engineering standards. The work shall be completed within a reasonable time period. If permittee fails to satisfy this obligation, city may take all reasonable actions it deems necessary to secure timely completion of the required work. 
(9)  Public emergency. City shall have the right to sever, disrupt, dig-up or otherwise destroy wireless facilities, structures, and poles of permittee if such action is necessary because of a public emergency. If reasonable to do so under the circumstances, city shall attempt to provide notice to permittee. Public emergency shall be any condition which poses an immediate threat to life, health, or property caused by any natural or man-made disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents, explosions, water main breaks, hazardous material spills, and similar events. Permittee shall be responsible for repair at its cost and expense of any of its wireless facilities, structures, and poles damaged pursuant to any such action taken by city. 
(10)  Miss dig. If eligible to join, permittee shall subscribe to and be a member of "MISS DIG," the association of utilities formed pursuant to Act 174 of the Public Acts of 2013, as amended, MCL 460.721 et seq., and shall conduct its business in conformance with the statutory provisions and regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(11)  Underground relocation. If permittee has its wireless facilities on poles of a utility or telecommunications provider and such utility or telecommunications provider relocates its system underground, this permit shall terminate as to any such pole that is no longer used except by permittee for its wireless facilities. Permittee shall remove any such pole described in this subsection at its cost and expense within a reasonable time period specified by the city in a written notice. If permittee fails to satisfy this obligation, city may take all reasonable actions it deems necessary to secure timely completion of the required work. 
(12)  Identification. All personnel of permittee and its contractors or subcontractors who have as part of their normal duties contact with the general public shall wear on their clothing a clearly visible identification card bearing permittee's name, their name and photograph. Permittee shall account for all identification cards at all times. Every service vehicle of Permittee and its contractors or subcontractors shall be clearly identified as such to the public, such as by a magnetic sign with permittee's name and telephone number. 
(f)  Compliance with permit conditions is required, with a violation of permit conditions being a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-65. - Bond. 
    A bond may be required to be posted prior to issuance of a right-of-way permit under article II in chapter 82 of the Code and this article in an amount not exceeding $1,000.00 for each wireless facility at a location to provide for removal of abandoned or improperly maintained facilities, repair and restore the public right-of-way, and recoup rates or fees that have not been paid within 12 months of when they were due. The city may not require the bond to be cash unless the wireless provider has failed to obtain or maintain a required bond in a form other than cash or the surety has defaulted or failed to perform on a bond given on behalf of the wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-66. - Fees. 
    Application, review, inspection, and recurring annual rates or fees shall be payable to the city in amounts established by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Sec. 87-67. - Shot clock appendix. 
    The attached shot clock appendix [2] containing MCL 460.1315, 47 CFR 1.6003, and 47 CFR 1.40001 is part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The shot clock appendix is not codified herein, but can be inspected upon request at the city clerk's office. 

Sec. 87-68. - Violations. 
    A violation of any section in this article or permit condition shall be a municipal civil infraction. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the city under a permit or otherwise by law for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 03-19, Pt. II, 4-8-19) 
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of January 11, 1999 enacted a new section 9.35, snow emergencies. At the discretion of the editor said section has been redesignated as 90-1, to better fit the format of the Code. 

Sec. 90-1. - Snow emergencies. 
    No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any portion of any roadway within any area within the city during a snow emergency, or park or allow to remain parked any vehicle in violation of any parking restriction instituted as part of a declared snow emergency as provided in this section. The registered owner of any such vehicle shall be responsible for the cost of removal and other applicable penalties. 
(a)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section: 
1.  Roadway means that portion of a street or highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder or berm. 
2.  Street or highway means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
3.  Superintendent means the City of South Lyon Superintendent of the Department of Public Works. 
(b)  Procedure for declaring snow emergency. 
1.  Whenever the superintendent finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or freezing rain or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather Bureau or other weather services that weather conditions will make it necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on the city streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the superintendent shall put into effect a parking prohibition on parts of or all city streets by declaring it in a manner prescribed in this section. 
2.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (i) of this subsection (b), a parking prohibition on all city streets shall automatically go into effect on any street on which there has been an accumulation of snow or ice of four (4) inches or more for any one hour or more. 
(c)  Notice. The superintendent, upon declaring a snow emergency, shall cause public announcement of such parking prohibitions and/or restrictions and the areas designated by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from various commercial stations serving the city and on the public access channel or any cable television franchise servicing the city and he may cause such declaration to be further announced in newspapers of general circulation and on the city website and through other methods where feasible. 
(d)  Record. The superintendent shall prepare such declaration of snow emergency and cause it to be posted in the city hall for such period of time as the snow emergency regulations are in effect. 
(e)  Enforcement. 
(1)  Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle that obstructs or otherwise impedes traffic on any street in the city. Such vehicle may be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the police department by means of towing to a vehicle pound. The police chief is authorized to engage the services of any private towing operator to remove vehicles under the direction of a member of the police department where such vehicles are found in violation of snow emergency regulations, traffic ordinances and regulations of the city. 
(2)  Before the owner or person in charge of such vehicle shall be permitted to remove the same from the custody of the police department, he shall furnish evidence of his identity and ownership; he shall sign a receipt and shall pay a fee to cover the costs of removal plus the costs of storage; and he shall pay an additional storage fee for each day the vehicle is stored in the vehicle pound in excess of the first 24 hours the vehicle is impounded. 
(3)  Whenever this section is alleged to have been violated, the police chief, or his designees shall have the authority to issue and serve an appearance ticket upon the violator if they have reasonable cause to believe that a violation has occurred. Such appearance ticket shall be in the form subscribed by state law. 
(f)  Termination. Once in effect, a prohibition or regulation under this section shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the superintendent in accordance with this section, except that any street area which has become substantially clear of snow and ice from curb to curb for the length of the entire block shall be automatically excluded therefrom. 
(g)  Stalled vehicles. Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in violation of this section, on any city street on which there is a parking prohibition in effect, the person operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed or pushed off the roadway. No person shall abandon or leave his vehicle in the roadway, regardless of whether he indicates by raising the hood or otherwise that the vehicle is stalled, except for the purpose of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of assistance and return without delay. 
(h)  Exemptions. Motor vehicles with handicapped permits and stickers shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(i)  Relationship to other laws. Any provision of this section which becomes effective by declaration of the superintendent or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall, while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a police officer. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other provision of law. 
(j)  Penalty. A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 1-11-99, § 1; Ord. No. 11-13, Pt. I, 10-28-13) 
Sec. 90-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 12, 2005, did not specifically amend the Code. However, such ordinance has repealed § 90-2 at the editor's discretion, in order to add similar provisions as §§ 90-35-90-38. Formerly, § 90-2 derived from Ord. of 1-27-03. 
Secs. 90-3-90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAFFIC CODE AND VEHICLE CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted September 12, 2005, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 90-39-90-42. However, similar provisions are set out as §§ 90-31-90-34. Therefore, this ordinance has been included as amending in its entirety §§ 90-31-90-34 at the editor's discretion. Formerly such sections derived from §§ 10.1-10.4 of the 1988 Code; Ord. of 1-13-92, § 1; Ord. of 12-12-94, § 1; Ord. of 4-14-97(2), § 1; Ord. of 7-28-97(1), § 1; Ord. of 10-11-99, § 1. 

Sec. 90-31. - Traffic Code-Adopted. 
    The Uniform Traffic Code for cities, townships and villages promulgated by the Director of State Police published in the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administration Code and amendments as published in the Quarterly Supplement No. 5 to the 1979 edition of the Michigan Administrative Code, in accordance with Public Act 62 of 1956, State of Michigan, is hereby adopted by reference as in this ordinance modified. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(1); Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 90-32. - Same-References in code. 
    References in the Uniform Traffic Code for Michigan Cities, Townships and Villages to "governmental unit" shall mean the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(1); Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 90-33. - Same-Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall at the same time publish a supplementary notice setting further the purpose of the said Uniform Traffic Code and of the fact that a complete copy of the Code is available at the office of the clerk for inspection by the public at all times. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(1); Ord. of 3-26-07) 
Sec. 90-34. - Same-Penalties. 
    The penalties provided by the Uniform Traffic Code for Cities, Townships, and Villages are adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(1)) 
Sec. 90-35. - Michigan Vehicle Code-Adopted. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, MCL 257.1 to 257.923, as amended and all future amendments and revisions to the Michigan Vehicle Code when they are effective in this state are incorporated and adopted by reference. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(2)) 
Sec. 90-36. - Same-References in Code. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(2)) 
Sec. 90-37. - Same-Notice to be published. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Michigan Vehicle Code and the fact that a complete copy of the code is available to the public at the office of the clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(2)) 
Sec. 90-38. - Penalties. 
    Violations of any code or regulation adopted in this article for which the maximum period of imprisonment exceeds 93 days shall not be enforced by the city as an ordinance violation; except for a violation of MCL 257.625(1)(c), which the city adopts by reference in section 90-35 of the City Code of Ordinances in conformity with the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, as amended, and which shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by one or more of the following: community service for not more than 360 hours, imprisonment for not more than 180 days, and a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00. 
(Ord. of 9-12-05(2); Ord. No. 02-13, Pt. I, 1-14-13) 
Sec. 90-39. - Motor Carrier Safety Act. 
    The Motor Carrier Safety Act, Public Act 181 of 1963, as amended (MCL 480.11 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference including all sections, regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, definitions, and terms as if fully set forth herein. References in the Motor Carrier Safety Act to the terms "local units of government", "local authorities", and "governmental units" shall mean the City of South Lyon. 
    The city clerk shall publish this ordinance in the manner required by law and shall publish at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the Motor Carrier Safety Act and that a complete copy of the article is available to the public at the office of the city clerk for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 08-13, Pt. I, 8-19-13) 
Secs. 90-40-90-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-51-90-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 90-66. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and cited as the "City of South Lyon Parking Violations Bureau Ordinance". 
(Code 1988, § 9.901) 
Sec. 90-67. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is: 
(1)  To establish a parking violations bureau within the City of South Lyon to accept civil infraction admissions in parking violation cases and to collect and retain civil fines and costs for such violations. 
(2)  To prescribe fines and costs for parking violations. 
(Code 1988, § 9.902) 
Sec. 90-68. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bureau means the City of South Lyon Parking Violations Bureau. 
    City means the City of South Lyon. 
    Civil infraction means an act or omission which is prohibited by law which is not a crime as defined in section 5 of Act No. 328 of the Public Acts of 1931 as amended, being MCL 750.5, and for which sanctions may be ordered. 
    Civil infraction admission means an admission of responsibility for a civil infraction. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but which is not operated upon rails. 
    Parking means standing a vehicle, whether occupied or not, upon a highway when not loading or unloading except when making necessary repairs. 
    Parking violation means a violation of any law relating to the parking or standing of motor vehicles. 
    Parking violations notice means a notice other than a citation, directing a person to appear at the City of South Lyon Parking Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs prescribed by this chapter for the parking or standing of a motor vehicle in violation of any law relating to the parking of motor vehicles. 
    Vehicle means every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a highway except devices which are moved exclusively by human power or which are used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks and except for a mobile home as defined in section 2 of Act No. 419 of the Public Acts of 1976 as amended, being MCL 125.1102. 
(Code 1988, § 9.903) 
Sec. 90-69. - Establishment of parking violations bureau. 
    Pursuant to section 8395 of Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, being MCL 600.8395, there is hereby established within the City of South Lyon a parking violations bureau to be known as the City of South Lyon Parking Violations Bureau. 
(Code 1988, § 9.904) 
Sec. 90-70. - Operation of bureau. 
(a)  Hours. The bureau shall be open for business 8:30 a.m. through 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(b)  Expense. The expense of operating the bureau shall be borne by the city. 
(c)  Personnel. The personnel of the bureau shall be city employees. 
(Code 1988, § 9.905) 
Sec. 90-71. - Powers and duties of bureau. 
    The bureau established herein is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To accept civil infraction admissions in parking violation cases. 
(2)  To collect and retain civil fines and costs for parking violations as prescribed by this chapter. 
(3)  To accept pleas of guilty in parking violation cases if the violation occurred before August 1, 1979, and to collect and retain fines and costs in such cases as prescribed by ordinance at the time the violation occurred. 
(Code 1988, § 9.907) 
Sec. 90-72. - Fines and costs. 
(a)  Handicapped parking. The fines and costs for unauthorized parking of a vehicle in a parking space designated for handicapped parking shall be as follows: 
(1)  One hundred dollars if paid within seven days after issuance of the parking violation notice. 
(2)  One hundred twenty five dollars if the ticket is paid after seven days but before the ticket is sent to the appropriate court. 
(b)  Other parking violations. The fines and costs for all parking violations other than handicapped parking violations shall be as follows: 
(1)  Ten dollars if paid within seven days after issuance of the parking violation notice. 
(2)  Twenty dollars if not paid within seven days after issuance of the parking violation notice. 
(Code 1988, § 9.908; Ord. of 10-11-04(2)) 
Sec. 90-73. - Severability. 
    If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this division shall be held invalid, the same shall not affect any other part of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 9.909) 
Sec. 90-74. - Repeal. 
    All ordinances and resolutions or parts thereof insofar as the same may be in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. 
(Code 1988, § 9.910) 
Secs. 90-75-90-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PARKING METERS 

Sec. 90-91. - Zones designated. 
(a)  The following described streets and parking areas in the City of South Lyon are hereby designated and established as parking meter zones, to wit: 
Lafayette Street between Detroit Street and McHattie Street; 
Lake Street between Washington and Wells Streets; 
Wells Street between Detroit and Liberty Streets; 
Liberty Street between Lafayette and Wells Streets; 
Whipple Street between Lafayette and the South Lyon Fire Station; 
Washington Street from Liberty to Lake Streets; and 
City-owned property designated as a municipal parking lot. 
(b)  All of these streets and parking areas, upon which limited parking is now permitted under authority and by virtue of all limited parking ordinances now effective, and the parking limits and restriction therein provided are hereby incorporated in this division for all uses and purposes applicable to the conditions, terms and enforcement hereof. 
(Code 1988, § 10.81) 
Sec. 90-92. - Short title. 
    This division shall be known and may be designated as "The City of South Lyon Parking Meter Ordinance." 
(Code 1988, § 10.82) 
Sec. 90-93. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Loading zone means the space or section of the street next to the curb which has been set aside for the exclusive use of loading or unloading persons or property. 
    Parking means allowing a vehicle to stand or remain, attended or not, except when obeying traffic signals or regulations. 
    Vehicle means any device by means of which persons or property may be transported upon a highway except such as are operated exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Code 1988, § 10.83) 
Sec. 90-94. - Installation of parking devices. 
    Wherever by reason of traffic congestion or other cause the public safety is imperiled and the convenience of the public cannot be adequately enforced without the assistance to be secured through the installation and maintenance of parking meters and collection boxes, such parking meters or parking devices and collection boxes may be installed under and in accordance with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1988, § 10.84) 
Sec. 90-95. - Action of council. 
    The city council may, by resolution, fix the fees to be charged for parking of vehicles in any place where such devices are placed and for any period of time. Whenever, in the opinion of the director of public safety, traffic conditions in any particular location or any particular street seem to require the aid of such parking devices and collection boxes, he shall make or cause to be made by proper departmental employees and officers, a survey of such situation, and shall report the same, together with his recommendation thereon and the facts upon which his opinion is based to the city council, who may, by resolution authorize and require the installation thereof and designate the location and fix the time that parking is permitted. 
(Code 1988, § 10.85) 
Sec. 90-96. - Parking zones and time limit. 
    Notice of parking reservation and the limited parking permitted shall be given by the City of South Lyon by paint of distinguishing color and/or signs or devices of uniform character, indicating the distance, place and space, and no person shall park a vehicle in violation of such limitation, restriction or prohibition. The city shall also provide for the erection of uniform and suitable signs or the painting of curbs, giving notice thereon of the parking reservations and the limited parking permitted. 
(Code 1988, § 10.86) 
Sec. 90-97. - Place of parking devices. 
    Such parking devices, when installed, shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk alongside of or next to the parking device zones to be designated as hereinafter provided. Each of said parking devices shall be so set as to show or display a signal that the parking space alongside of the same is not occupied. 
(Code 1988, § 10.87) 
Sec. 90-98. - Operation of parking devices. 
(a)  The director of public safety shall provide for the installation, regulation, control, operation and use of the parking devices and collection boxes provided for in this division and shall maintain said devices and collection boxes in good working condition. 
(b)  Each device shall be so set as to display a signal showing legal parking upon the deposit of a one-cent, five-cent or a ten-cent coin, money of the United States, therein, for a period of time conforming to the parking limit set out in appropriate resolutions passed by the city council for the part of street or the municipal parking lot upon which said devices are placed. Each device shall by its mechanism clearly set out and continue operation from the time of depositing such coin until the expiration of the time fixed by said schedules for parking in said resolutions, as the parking limit for that part of the street or municipal parking lot upon which said device is placed. Each device shall also be so arranged that upon expiration of said parking time limit, it will indicate by a mechanically operated sign and the dropping of a proper signal that the lawful parking period as fixed by the resolution has expired, and in such cases the right of the said vehicle to occupy such space shall cease, and the owner, driver, possessor or manager thereof shall be subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(c)  In order to determine the length of time any vehicle has been parked in any zone, a parking time device shall be erected immediately adjoining every space so designated; the owner, operator, manager or driver parking a vehicle in said parking device zone shall immediately deposit a one-cent, five-cent or a ten-cent coin, money of the United States, in the parking device alongside of or next to said parking device zone as designated by the parking device controlling the parking zone to be occupied and the said parking device zone may then be used by such vehicle and the driver, owner, possessor or manager thereof, during the time of the parking limits as provided for by the resolutions of the city council for that part of the street or municipal parking lot in which said parking device zone is limited. When any vehicle shall remain in any such parking device zone beyond the parking limit as fixed by resolution of said city council for such parking device zone, then the parking device shall display a sign showing a violation, and in that event such vehicle and the driver, owner, possessor or manager thereof shall be considered and determined as parking "overtime," and shall be in violation of this division and subject to the penalties hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1988, § 10.88) 
Sec. 90-99. - Duties of the city treasurer. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause regular collections to be made of the money deposited in said parking devices. Such collections shall be made by the use of sealed devices. It shall be the duty of the city treasurer to break the seals on such devices, to count the money collected and to deposit in the appropriate fund in the presence of the director of public safety or other person or persons designated by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 10.89) 
Sec. 90-100. - Duties of public safety director. 
    It shall be the duty of the public safety director to cause regular collections to be made of the original written and printed notices with envelopes attached, and money therein, deposited in said collection boxes and to keep a record thereof as in this division hereinafter provided, to count the money collected, to credit the violator with a record of purging the violation on the records of his office, and to account for and pay the money over to the city treasurer. 
(Code 1988, § 10.90) 
Sec. 90-101. - Purpose of fees. 
    The one-cent, five-cent or ten-cent coins required to be deposited as provided in this division, are levied under police authority. The fees deposited under this division shall be used to defray the cost of parking devices; all excess monies shall be deposited in a fund to be known as a city building fund. 
(Code 1988, § 10.91) 
Sec. 90-102. - Loading zones. 
    The city may establish and maintain loading zones to omit parking devices from such loading zones, if it should find it advisable and necessary from the standpoint of safety, traffic conditions and for the conduct of business and use of property by the abutting property owner or his lessees or assignees. Provided, no vehicle may remain in a loading zone for a period of time longer than is necessary to unload or load either passengers or property, nor while the operator thereof is engaged otherwise than in loading or unloading of the vehicle, except that a reasonable time shall be allowed to secure a receipt for delivery of property. Provided further, that the use of a parking device zone for loading or unloading of property will be permitted before the hour of 10:00 a.m. without the depositing of a coin in the parking devices of such parking device zone, provided, that the vehicle is properly parked in the manner hereinbefore described. The provisions for loading zones are in addition to and not in derogation of regulations now or hereafter adopted in pursuance of existing ordinances. 
(Code 1988, § 10.92) 
Sec. 90-103. - Vehicle remaining over-parked. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person who is the driver, owner or person in charge of a vehicle to permit such vehicle in any parking device zone where said device is displaying a signal showing that such vehicle shall have already been parked beyond the period of time fixed by the city council for such parking. 
(Code 1988, § 10.93) 
Sec. 90-104. - Parking outside of designated lines. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicles across any line or marker designating a parking device zone or to park a vehicle in such a way that the same shall not be fully within the area so designated by lines or markings designating a parking zone. 
(Code 1988, § 10.94) 
Sec. 90-105. - Substitutes for coins. 
    It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking device, collection box or money changer a slug or other metal substitute for a one-cent, a five-cent or a ten-cent coin of the denomination of the United States. 
(Code 1988, § 10.95) 
Sec. 90-106. - Defacement of meters and equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful and in violation of this division for any person not so authorized, to deface, injure, tamper, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any parking device, collection box, money changer, or other receptacle, installed under the terms of this division, or aid or abet in doing same. 
(Code 1988, § 10.96) 
Sec. 90-107. - Parking violations, duty of police officers. 
    It shall be the duty of police officers to take the number of any device alongside of which any vehicle is parked "overtime" as provided in this division, and also the license number of such vehicle, the time and date of such overtime parking, the make of said vehicle, and to give written and printed notice of violation of overtime parking to the owner, manager or driver of said vehicle, as in this division provided. 
(Code 1988, § 10.97) 
Sec. 90-108. - Procedure; impounding and nuisance. 
    A vehicle parked or occupying any portion of the street or municipal parking lot in violation of the terms of this division is hereby declared to be a nuisance which may be abated by any police officer, by impounding said vehicle either by placing a printed and written notice thereon which shall indicate the nature of the violation, or by removing and conveying such vehicle to the vehicle pound. If the vehicle is impounded by means of a printed and written notice a copy of such printed and written notice shall be transmitted to the police department where a record shall be made showing the kind of vehicle, the license number thereof, the nature of the violation, the date and time of day of the violation and the name of the police officer. The owner or operator of such vehicle may have the same removed from the impoundment by paying the sum of $1.00 plus towing charges within 48 hours of the time stated on said written and printed notice by inserting same in the money envelope attached to and made a part of the original notice placed on said vehicle, and depositing said original notice and envelope with said $1.00 therein attached in a meter collection box located on or near the parking device alongside the parking space. If the owner, operator or manager of a vehicle which has been impounded by the attachment of such a notice and envelope thereto, fails to so pay or cause to be paid said sum of $1.00 plus towing charges in the manner aforesaid, or in any manner at the police department, within the said period of 48 hours from the time of violation stated on said notice, removal of said impoundment of said vehicle shall then be removed upon the payment of the sum of $5.00 plus towing charges to the police department within five days after said 48-hour period from the time stated on said notice. If the owner or operator of a vehicle which has been impounded by written and printed notice shall not pay or cause to be paid the fees aforesaid, any police officer of the city may seize such vehicle at any time thereafter, anywhere within the city and convey such vehicle to the vehicle pound the same as if the vehicle had thus been impounded in the first instance. In order that the owner or operator may remove any vehicle which has been thus impounded by the printed and written notice and seizure, he shall pay to the police department all impounding fees which have accrued against such vehicle during the time of his ownership and in addition thereto the sum of $10.00 for storage and towing charges. 
(Code 1988, § 10.98) 
Sec. 90-109. - Sale of vehicle impounded. 
    Any vehicle impounded by seizure under this Code, may after one month from the date of seizure, be sold by the police department either at private or public sale, to the highest bidder after first giving the owner of the car as is shown to be in the office of the secretary of state of the state in which the car is licensed on the day of seizure, a notice of seizure and proposed sale in writing, delivered in person at the owner's place of business or residence as shown in said secretary of state's office. 
(Code 1988, § 10.99) 
Sec. 90-110. - Complaint and warrant. 
    In all cases of violation of this division, either the registered owner or the operator of such vehicle may be proceeded against by complaint and warrant in district court which shall be in addition to the right to impoundment heretofore given, and the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of violation shall be presumed to be a violator as well as the vehicle itself and the actual operator thereof. 
(Code 1988, § 10.100) 
Sec. 90-111. - Penalties. 
(a)  Misdemeanor penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates section 90-105 or 90-106, or who shall aid, abet, or assist in a violation of any of those provisions, shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, and/or imprisonment of not more than 90 days. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction penalties. A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 10.101; Ord. of 11-28-94(31), § 1) 
Secs. 90-112-90-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - BICYCLES 

Sec. 90-131. - General traffic laws. 
(a)  Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the responsibilities applicable to the driver of a motor vehicle by the laws of this state declaring rules of the road applicable to motor vehicles or by article II of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except as to special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of law and article II of this chapter which by their nature can have no application. 
(b)  Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official traffic control signals, signs and other traffic control devices applicable to motor vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(c)  No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building, or in such manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing such pedestrian. 
(e)  Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear, of a type which shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. 
(f)  Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement. 
(Code 1988, § 10.61) 
Sec. 90-132. - Registration. 
(a)  Every owner of a bicycle within the City of South Lyon shall list and register with the public safety department his name and address, the name of the manufacturer of his bicycle, its number, style and general description. 
(b)  He shall pay a fee as prescribed in sections 22-57 through 22-59 upon registration of a bicycle. 
(c)  Upon such registration and payment of registration fee, a suitable license tag, upon which will be stamped a distinguishing number, shall be furnished to the owner of each bicycle when registered. 
(d)  The owner shall cause such license to be firmly attached to the frame of the bicycle for which issued. 
(e)  No tag shall be transferred from one bicycle to another and no person shall attach to any bicycle a tag not issued thereon. 
(f)  A designated public safety officer shall inspect each bicycle before licensing the same and shall refuse a license for any bicycle which he determines to be in unsafe mechanical condition. 
(Code 1988, § 10.62) 
Sec. 90-133. - Rental agencies. 
    A rental agency shall neither rent nor offer for rent any bicycle unless the bicycle is licensed by the City of South Lyon, and a license is attached thereto as provided herein and such bicycle is equipped with the lamps and other equipment required in this article unless such bicycle will not be rented during the hours of darkness. 
(Code 1988, § 10.63) 
Sec. 90-134. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(30), § 1(10.64)) 
Secs. 90-135-90-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SNOWMOBILES 

Sec. 90-151. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the sale, lease or rental of snowmobiles as a regular business. 
    Highway or street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
    Operate means to ride in or on and be in actual physical control of the operation of a snowmobile. 
    Operator means any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a snowmobile. 
    Owner means any of the following: 
(1)  A person who holds the legal title to a snowmobile. 
(2)  A vendee or lessee of a snowmobile which is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional vendee or lessee. 
(3)  A person renting a snowmobile or having the exclusive use of a snowmobile for more than 30 days. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, the state and any of its agencies or subdivisions, and any body of persons whether incorporated or not. 
    Right-of-way means that portion of a highway less the roadway and any shoulder. 
    Roadway means that portion of a highway improved, designated or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" refers to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively. 
    Shoulder means that portion of a highway on either side of the roadway which is normally snowplowed for the safety and convenience of vehicular traffic. 
    Snowmobile means any motor driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on snow or ice of a type which utilizes sled type runners or skis, or an endless belt tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with the surface upon which it is operated. It is not a vehicle which must be registered under Act No. 300 of the Public Acts of 1949, as amended, being MCL 257.1-257.923. 
(Code 1988, § 10.21) 
Sec. 90-152. - Certificate required. 
    This article requires that: 
(1)  No snowmobile shall be operated in the City of South Lyon unless registered by the owner as provided in Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of 1971 and a certificate of registration obtained pursuant to said state law. 
(2)  Registration is not required for a snowmobile operated exclusively on lands owned or under control of the snowmobile owner. 
(3)  The display of a registration decal or other device on the snowmobile in the manner as required by state law is also required and made a part of this article. 
(Code 1988, § 10.22) 
Sec. 90-153. - Place of operation. 
    No person shall operate and no owner or dealer shall permit the operation of any snowmobile under the following conditions, circumstances, or at the following locations: 
(1)  Upon a public highway, land used as an airport or street or any public or private parking lot not specifically designated for the use of snowmobiles except for the following circumstances: 
a.  When it is impractical to gain immediate access to an area adjacent to a public highway, a snowmobile may be operated on a right-of-way adjacent and parallel to the roadway for the sole purpose of gaining access to and from the area of operation by the most direct route. Loading or unloading of a snowmobile shall be accomplished with due regard to safety at the nearest possible point of the area of operation. 
b.  A duly constituted law enforcement officer of the City of South Lyon may authorize use of a snowmobile on a public highway or street within his jurisdiction when an emergency occurs and conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for transportation due to snow or other extreme highway conditions. 
c.  A snowmobile may be operated on a street or highway for a special event of limited duration conducted according to a prearranged schedule only under permit from the City of South Lyon. The event may be conducted on the frozen surface of public waters only under permit from the department of natural resources pursuant to state law. 
(2)  On private property not owned, leased, or under the control of the operator unless the operator has the express consent of the owner lessee, or other person in control of said property, except in case of an emergency when other means of travel are not feasible or possible, and then only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(3)  On public school grounds, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses and other public lands (other than state-owned lands where such operation is authorized by statute) without the express consent of the public authority in charge of such lands or premises, except where such other operation is absolutely necessary in an emergency when other means of travel are not feasible or possible. 
(Code 1988, § 10.23) 
Sec. 90-154. - Operation by minors. 
(a)  A parent or legal guardian shall not permit his child who is under the age of 12 to operate a snowmobile without the direct supervision of an adult except on land owned or under the control of the parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  A person who is at least 12 but less than 16 years of age may operate a snowmobile if: 
(1)  He is under the direct supervision of a person who is 18 years of age or older; or if 
(2)  He has in his immediate possession a snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to state law; or 
(3)  He is on land owned or under the control of his parent or legal guardian. A person who is operating a snowmobile pursuant to subdivision (b)(2) of this section shall present the snowmobile safety certificate to any police officer upon demand. 
(c)  Notwithstanding section 90-153, an operator who is under 12 years of age shall not cross a highway or street. An operator who is at least 12 years of age but less than 16 years of age may cross a highway or street only if he has a valid snowmobile safety certificate in his immediate possession. 
(d)  The owner of a snowmobile shall not permit his snowmobile to be operated contrary to this section. 
(e)  Snowmobiles shall not be used to hunt, pursue, worry or kill a wild bird or animal. 
(f)  When a judge of a juvenile court determines that a person who is less than 16 years of age has violated this chapter, the judge shall immediately report the determination to the department of natural resources. The director of natural resources upon receiving a notice of a determination pursuant to this subsection may suspend the certificate without a hearing. 
(Code 1988, § 10.24) 
Sec. 90-155. - Equipment required. 
    A snowmobile shall not be operated unless it has at least one headlight, one taillight and adequate brakes capable of one of the following while the snowmobile travels on packed snow and carries an operator who weighs 175 pounds or more: 
(1)  Stopping a snowmobile in not more than 40 feet from an initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour; or 
(2)  Locking the snowmobiles traction belt or belts. 
(Code 1988, § 10.25) 
Sec. 90-156. - Operating regulations. 
    A person shall not operate a snowmobile: 
(1)  At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper having due regard for conditions then existing; 
(2)  While under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug, barbital or any derivative of barbital; 
(3)  During the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and a lighted taillight; 
(4)  In any forest nursery, planting area, or public land posted or reasonably identifiable as an area of forest reproduction when growing stock may be damaged; 
(5)  On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet of a person, including but not limited to a skater, not in or upon a snowmobile or within 100 feet of a fishing shanty or shelter except at the minimum speed required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile or on an area which has been cleared of snow for skating purposes unless the area is necessary for access to the public water; 
(6)  Unless it is equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation from which noise emission at 50 feet at right angles from vehicle path under full throttle does not exceed 86 DBA (decibels on the "A" scale) on a sound meter having characteristics defined by American Standard Association S1, 4-1966 "general purpose sound meter"; 
(7)  Within 100 feet of a dwelling between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. at a speed greater than minimum required to maintain forward movement of the snowmobile; 
(8)  In or upon or remain unlawfully on premises which is fenced, otherwise enclosed in a manner to exclude intruders, posted in a conspicuous manner or when notice against trespass is personally communicated to him by the owner or an authorized person. A person shall not operate a snowmobile in or upon farmlands, farm wood lots or platted property in the city without permission of the landowner; 
(9)  In an area on which public hunting is permitted during the season open to the taking of deer with firearms from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency, for law enforcement purposes, to go to and from a permanent residence or hunting camp otherwise inaccessible by a conventional wheeled vehicle or for the conduct of necessary work functions involving land and timber survey, communication and transmission line patrol and timber harvest operations, or on his own property or property under his control or as an invited guest; 
(10)  On or across a cemetery or burial ground; 
(11)  While transporting thereon a bow unless unstrung or a firearm unless securely encased or equipped with and made inoperative by a manufactured keylocked trigger housing mechanism; 
(12)  Within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area. A snowmobile may enter such an area for the purpose of servicing the area or for medical emergencies; 
(13)  On a railroad or railroad right-of-way, except railroad, public utility or law enforcement personnel while in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1988, § 10.26) 
Sec. 90-157. - Notification requirements. 
    The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in injuries to or death of any person, or property damage in an estimated amount of $100.00 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of communication notify a state police officer or the sheriff's office of the county or to the office of the police department of the City of South Lyon wherein the accident occurred. The police agency receiving the notice shall complete a report of the accident on forms prescribed by the director of the department of state police and forward the report to the department of state police. 
(Code 1988, § 10.27) 
Sec. 90-158. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A peace or police officer may issue appearance tickets for violation of this chapter pursuant to sections 9a to 9e of chapter 4 of Act No. 175 of the Public Acts of 1927 as amended, being MCL 764.9a-764.9e. 
(b)  In a proceeding for a violation of this chapter involving prohibited operations or conduct, the registration number displayed on a snowmobile constitutes prima facie evidence that the owner of the snowmobile was the person operating the snowmobile at the time of the offense. 
(c)  An operator of a snowmobile who is given by hand, voice, emergency light or siren visual or audible signal by a peace, police or conservation officer, acting in the lawful performance of his duty, directing the operator to bring his snowmobile to a stop, and who willfully fails to obey the direction by increasing speed, extinguishing his lights, or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the officer, is guilty of a misdemeanor. The officer giving the signal shall be in uniform. A vehicle or snowmobile which is used by an officer at night for purposes of enforcing this chapter shall be identified as an official law enforcing vehicle or snowmobile. 
(Code 1988, § 10.28) 
Sec. 90-159. - Unattended vehicles. 
    No operator or owner shall allow a snowmobile: 
(1)  To remain unattended on public property while the motor is running; or 
(2)  To remain unattended on public property with the keys for starting the snowmobile left in the ignition or otherwise in open view. 
(Code 1988, § 10.29) 
Sec. 90-160. - Violation a misdemeanor; penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 and costs of prosecution or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  Any person guilty of a violation of this article shall also be subject to civil proceedings for damages and/or injunctive relief by the city or by any person, firm or corporation injured or damaged by such violation. 
(c)  Both criminal and civil proceedings may be commenced against a person violating this article and commencement of any such proceedings shall not constitute an election of remedies preventing the commencement of the other proceeding against the violation. 
(Code 1988, § 10.30) 
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 94-1-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-31. - Emergency contact number. 
    All persons who apply for a permit for the construction of sewer and/or water lines or any utility distribution system shall, as a condition of receiving such permit, provide the city with an emergency contact telephone number of a person to be contacted in the event of any emergency situation involving any sewer and/or water line and/or utility distribution system which has been installed but not yet accepted by the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 9-10-01, § 1) 
Sec. 94-32. - Emergency repairs. 
    In the event of an emergency situation with regard to an unaccepted water and/or sewer line or utility distribution system, the City of South Lyon shall contact the builder and/or developer at the emergency contact telephone number provided pursuant to the preceding section. In the event there is no response to the notification within three hours, the City of South Lyon shall be authorized to enter upon any property where the emergency situation exists and shall repair, or have its agents repair, the water and/or sewer line and/or utility distribution system. All costs associated with the repairs done by the city or its agent shall be assessed to the builder and/or developer or other person responsible for the construction and/or installation of said sewer and/or water line and/or utility distribution system. In addition to the costs for material, equipment, and/or labor to be assessed for repairs made by the city, there will also be a $3,000.00 mobilization charge assessed against the responsible person or entity. At the conclusion of the repair and/or repairs made by the city, the builder, developer, or other responsible person or entity shall complete full restoration of the subject property, including repair of roads, sidewalks, driveways, and anything else requiring restoration. In the event such restoration is not made within a reasonable period of time, the City of South Lyon shall cause said restoration to take place and shall assess all costs to the build and/or developer or other person responsible for the installation and construction of the sewer and/or water line and/or utility distribution system. 
(Ord. of 9-10-01, § 1) 
Secs. 94-33-94-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WATER SERVICE 

Sec. 94-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Department means the water department of the city. 
    Water connection means that part of the water distribution system connecting the water main with the premises served. 
    Water main means that part of the water distribution system located within easement lines or streets designed to supply more than one water connection. 
(Code 1988, § 2.21) 
Sec. 94-52. - Service connection. 
    Applications for water connections shall be made to the department on forms prescribed and furnished by it. Water connections and water meters shall be installed in accordance with rules and regulations of the department and upon payment of the required connection fee meter installation fee and tap-in fee. The connection fee shall not be less than the costs of materials, installation and overhead attributable to the construction of the water line from the water main to the property line. The department shall be notified 24 hours in advance, and all work shall be left uncovered until inspected. The cost of all repairs, maintenance and replacements to water service connections from the building to the property line shall be borne by the property owner. Water meters shall remain the property of the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.22) 
Sec. 94-53. - Turning on water service. 
    No person, other than an authorized employee of the department, shall turn on or off any water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on water service for testing his work (when it must be immediately turned off) or upon receiving a written order from the department; provided, that upon written permit from the department, water may be turned on for construction purposes upon payment of the charges applicable thereto. 
(Code 1988, § 2.23) 
Sec. 94-54. - Water meters. 
    All premises using water shall be metered, except as otherwise provided in this Code. No person except a department employee shall break or injure the seal or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any water meter. 
(Code 1988, § 2.24) 
Sec. 94-55. - Access to meters. 
    The department shall have the right to shut off the supply of water to any premises where the department is not able to obtain access to the meter. Any qualified employee of the department shall at all reasonable hours have the right to enter the premises where such meters are installed for the purpose of reading, testing, removing, or inspecting same and no person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with such employee in the lawful discharge of his duties in relation to the care and maintenance of such water meter. 
(Code 1988, § 2.25) 
Sec. 94-56. - Reimbursement for damage. 
    Any damage which a meter may sustain resulting from carelessness of the owner, agent, or tenant or from neglect of either of them to properly secure and protect the meter, as well as any damage which may be wrought by frost, hot water, or steam backing from a boiler, shall be paid by the owner of the property to the city on presentation of a bill therefor; and in cases where the bill is not paid, the water shall be shut off and shall not be turned on until all charges have been paid to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.26) 
Sec. 94-57. - Meter failure. 
    If any meter shall fail to register properly, the department shall estimate the consumption on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(Code 1988, § 2.27) 
Sec. 94-58. - Inaccurate meters. 
    A consumer may require that the meter be tested. If the meter is found accurate, a charge will be made. If the meter is found defective, it shall be repaired or an accurate meter installed and no charge shall be made. 
(Code 1988, § 2.28) 
Sec. 94-59. - Accuracy required. 
    A meter shall be considered accurate if, when tested, it registers not to exceed two percent more to two percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of two percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of two percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, it shall be considered "slow" to that extent. 
(Code 1988, § 2.29) 
Sec. 94-60. - Bill adjustment. 
    If a meter has been tested at the request of a consumer and shall have been determined to register "fast" the city shall credit the consumer with a sum equal to the percent "fast" multiplied by the amount of all bills incurred by said consumer, within the three months prior to the test, and if a meter so tested is determined to register "slow," the department may collect from the consumer a sum equal to the percent "slow" multiplied by the amount of all the bills incurred by the consumer for the prior three months. When the department on its own initiative makes a test of a water meter, it shall be done without cost to the consumer, other than his paying the amount due the city for water used by him as above provided, if the meter is found to be "slow." 
(Code 1988, § 2.30) 
Sec. 94-61. - Hydrant use. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall open or use any fire hydrant except in case of emergency, without first securing a written permit from the department and paying such charges as may be prescribed. 
(Code 1988, § 2.31) 
Sec. 94-62. - Water scarcity. 
    Whenever the amount of city water being used is disproportionate to the amount of water available for distribution when other demands upon such available water supply are taken into consideration, the city manager may declare that a water emergency exists, and may enforce rules regulating the use of water from the city water distribution system as approved by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2.32) 
Sec. 94-63. - Rules and regulations. 
    The rules and regulations now in effect shall continue until changed in accordance with this section. The city manager may make and issue additional rules and regulations concerning the water supply and sewage disposal system not inconsistent herewith which shall become effective upon approval by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2.33) 
Sec. 94-64. - Injury to facilities. 
    No person, except an employee of the city in the performance of his duties, shall wilfully or carelessly break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the city water distribution system. 
(Code 1988, § 2.34) 
Sec. 94-65. - Cross connections. 
(a)  The city adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection rules of the Michigan Department of Health, Rule 325.1104 and any amendment thereto as authorized by Public Act 399 of 1976. 
(b)  The city water department shall inspect all properties served by the public water supply where cross connection with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of the inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be established by the South Lyon Water Department and approved by the Michigan Department of Public Health. 
(c)  A representative of the City of South Lyon shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purposes of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. On request the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(d)  The City of South Lyon is hereby authorized to discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this section exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection(s) has been eliminated. 
(e)  The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified herein and by the state and city plumbing codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING. 
(Code 1988, § 2.35; Ord. of 6-11-07(1)) 
Sec. 94-66. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this division shall be enforced by the superintendent of the water and wastewater department, his deputies or authorized subordinates, who are hereby specifically empowered and authorized to prepare, issue and serve appearance tickets violation and notices as provided in section 1-7. 
(Code 1988, § 2.36) 
Sec. 94-67. - Fire hydrants. 
    It is the intent of the ordinance that all fire hydrants in new or redeveloped subdivisions shall be owned, and the inspection, maintenance and repair shall be the responsibility of the city. 
(a)  Fire hydrant is defined as a discharge valve and spout at which water may be drawn from a water main as well as the pipes leading from the main water lines under the ground from the lead and shut off valve to the spout. It does not include industrial fire protection systems or interior industrial hydrant and fire suppression systems. 
(b)  For any new development or any redevelopment, it shall be required of the owner to dedicate the fire hydrant and a corresponding easement to the city allowing the city and its agents to enter onto the premises in order to perform all duties incident to inspecting, maintaining and repairing any fire hydrant located on the property. The owner shall also provide an effective description of the fire hydrant including the location of leads and shut off valves to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 2-8-10(1)) 
Secs. 94-68-94-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SEWER SERVICE 
Subdivision I. - In General 

Sec. 94-81. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    BOD (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed in parts per million by weight. 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drain pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    Combination sewer or combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface run-off and sewage. 
    Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, processing and sale of produce. 
    Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes, solids, or semi-solids from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of water, either surface or ground water. 
    Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or group. 
    pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the cooking, preparation and dispensing of food that has been cut or shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting property have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    Sewage means any combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business and commercial buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
    Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    Sewer means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    Shall is mandatory. May is permissive. 
    Storm sewer or storm drain means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage but which excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
    Suspended solids means the solids that either float on the surface of, or are suspended in water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    SWRC means the state water resources commission. 
    Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1988, § 2.41) 
Secs. 94-82-94-100. - Reserved. 
Subdivision II. - Public Sewers 

Sec. 94-101. - Waste deposits. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon any public or private property within the city or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(Code 1988, § 2.42) 
Sec. 94-102. - Water pollution. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural watercourse or any storm sewer, within the City of South Lyon or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial waste, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with the standards established by the SWRC. 
(Code 1988, § 2.43) 
Sec. 94-103. - Privies and septic tanks. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Code 1988, § 2.44) 
Sec. 94-104. - Sewer connection required. 
    The owners of all dwellings, buildings, structures or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the city and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the city is hereby required at their own expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly to the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 90 days after notice by the city manager to do so, provided a public sewer is at the property line of said premises. 
(Code 1988, § 2.45) 
Sec. 94-105. - Unpolluted water. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, ground-water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters into any sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged into such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet approved by the city manager and/or the SWRC. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, upon approval of the city manager, into a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(Code 1988, § 2.59) 
Sec. 94-106. - Prohibited uses. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public sewer: 
(1)  Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Any water or waste which may contain more than 100 parts per million, by weight, of fat, oil or grease. 
(3)  Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas. 
(4)  Any garbage which has not been properly shredded. 
(5)  Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, egg shells, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, wood pulp, paunch manure, or any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage works. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than 10.5 or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazards to the structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works. 
(7)  Any waters or wastes containing a toxic or poisonous substance in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, fish or aquatic life or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant. 
(8)  Any waters or wastes containing in excess of three parts per million by weight of cyanide, chrome or copper wastes. 
(9)  Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character or quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage disposal plant. 
(10)  Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 2.60) 
Sec. 94-107. - Intercepters. 
    Grease, oil and sand intercepters shall be provided when in the opinion of the city manager and/or the SWRC they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any inflammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients, except that such intercepters shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All intercepters shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager and/or the SWRC and shall be located so as to be readily accessible for cleansing and inspection. Grease and oil intercepters shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be substantially constructed, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in place shall be gastight and watertight. 
(Code 1988, § 2.61) 
Sec. 94-108. - Intercepter maintenance. 
    Where installed, all grease, oil and sand intercepters shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 2.62) 
Sec. 94-109. - Preliminary treatment facilities. 
(a)  The admission into the public sewers of any waters or wastes: 
(1)  Having a five-day BOD greater than 300 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Containing more than 350 parts per million by weight of suspended solids; or 
(3)  Containing any quantity of substances having the characteristics described in section 94-106; or 
(4)  Having a daily average flow greater than two percent of the average daily sewage flow of the city; 
shall be subject to the review and approval of the city council and/or the SWRC. 
(b)  Where necessary in the opinion of the city and/or the SWRC, the owner shall provide, at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to: 
(1)  Reduce the BOD to 300 parts per million and the suspended solids to 350 parts per million by weight; or 
(2)  Reduce objectionable characteristics or constituents to within the maximum limits provided for in section 94-106; or 
(3)  Control the quantities and rates of discharge of such waters or wastes. 
(c)  Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the city council and/or of the SWRC of the State of Michigan and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained in writing. 
(Code 1988, § 2.63) 
Sec. 94-110. - Maintenance of preliminary facilities. 
    Where preliminary treatment facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained in satisfactory and effective operation, by the owner at his expense. 
(Code 1988, § 2.64) 
Sec. 94-111. - Control manholes. 
    When required by the city council or the SWRC, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the city council. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(Code 1988, § 2.65) 
Sec. 94-112. - Measurements and tests. 
    All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in sections 94-106 and 94-109 shall be determined in accordance with "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" and shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in section 94-111 or upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
(Code 1988, § 2.66) 
Sec. 94-113. - Agreements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to the payment by the industrial concern of the estimated cost of such treatment, provided that payments under such agreements shall at all times be adequate to avoid impairing the rights of the holders of any sewer revenue bonds of the city which may then be outstanding and unredeemed. 
(Code 1988, § 2.67) 
Sec. 94-114. - Protection from damage. 
    No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the municipal sewage system or treatment plant. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-14. 
(Code 1988, § 2.68) 
Secs. 94-115-94-130. - Reserved. 
Subdivision III. - Private Sewers 

Sec. 94-131. - Private sewer systems. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of section 94-104, the building sewer shall be connected with a private disposal system complying with the regulations and orders of the SWRC and the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2.47) 
Sec. 94-132. - Discontinuance of system. 
    At such times as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in section 94-104, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with the provisions of this division, and any septic tank, privy, privy vault, cesspool or similar private sewage disposal facility shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Code 1988, § 2.48) 
Sec. 94-133. - Maintenance of system. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no expense to the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.49) 
Sec. 94-134. - Additional requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the city council or the SWRC with respect to private sewage disposal. 
(Code 1988, § 2.50) 
Secs. 94-135-94-139. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IIIA. - Private Sewer Systems Approved Pursuant to Part 41 of Public Act 451 of 1994 as Amended 

Sec. 94-140. - Conditions of approval by the City of South Lyon. 
    A person or entity which receives approval for a construction permit for a private sanitary sewer system pursuant to Part 41 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of 1994, being MCL 324.4105, et seq., as amended, which approval is subject to the City of South Lyon co-signing with said person or entity on the documents regarding said permit and/or subject to the City of South Lyon agreeing to be responsible for and to take control of the system if it is not operated properly, shall be required to comply with the following: 
(a)  Said person or entity must enter into a written agreement with the City of South Lyon agreeing to be responsible for all costs associated with the private sewer system, and further to be responsible for any costs incurred by the City of South Lyon if the city is required to take control of the system, including the cost to upgrade said system so it meets city standards. The written agreement must also provide the person or entity will defend, indemnify, and save harmless the City of South Lyon from and against any and all claims, costs, damages, or expenses the City of South Lyon may suffer, incur, sustain, or become liable for on account of any injury to or death of any person or persons, or any damage to or destruction of any real or person's property caused by the construction, use, state of repair, and operation and maintenance of the private sewer system proposed by said person or entity. 
(b)  The person or entity proposing the private sewer system approved pursuant to Part 41 of Act 451 of Public Acts of 1994 may not initiate construction until first a resolution is adopted and passed by the city council for the City of South Lyon approving the written agreement set forth in subsection (a). 
(Ord. of 12-13-99, § 1) 
Sec. 94-141. - Operation and maintenance. 
    Any person or entity operating a private sewer system approved pursuant to Part 41 of Act 451 of Public Acts of 1994 as amended who fails to properly maintain and operate the private sewer system and all facilities constructed in connection with said private sewer system in accordance with city standards shall be notified by the water and waste water superintendent for the City of South Lyon that said person or entity is in default of its obligations, and upon said default continuing for a period of 30 days after receipt of such notice, the City of South Lyon will have the right to take control of the operations of the system and assess costs as set forth in this subdivision. 
(Ord. of 12-13-99, § 1) 
Sec. 94-142. - Collection of costs. 
    If the person or entity fails to comply with the notice set forth in the preceding subsection, and if, in the opinion of the water and waste water superintendent for the City of South Lyon, said person or entity has failed to properly maintain or operate the private sewer system in accordance with the applicable requirements, the City of South Lyon may take control over and maintain the private sewer system, and the person or entity who obtained the permit for the system shall be required to pay to the City of South Lyon all costs incurred to take over operation and for maintenance and equipment, plus any additional costs necessary to bring the system into compliance with city standards. All such costs, if not voluntarily paid to the City of South Lyon upon request, may be recovered by the city, through an appropriate action in any court having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. of 12-13-99, § 1) 
Secs. 94-143-94-150. - Reserved. 
Subdivision IV. - Building Sewers 

Sec. 94-151. - Permit required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city clerk. 
(Code 1988, § 2.52) 
Sec. 94-152. - Permit fees. 
    All connections with the sanitary or combined sewers of the city shall be made only on written authorization and permits issued by the said city on such forms and on payment of tap-in and connection fees as shall be established by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2.53) 
Sec. 94-153. - Installation costs. 
    All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of said property. The owner shall indemnify the city from all loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(Code 1988, § 2.54) 
Sec. 94-154. - Plans and specifications. 
    All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within such building or premises and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the plumbing regulations of the city, and all orders, rules and regulations of the SWRC or state department of health. When such plans and specifications have been approved by the city manager or by such official as he may designate, a temporary construction permit shall be issued, subject to final inspection and approval when construction is completed and ready for connection with the city sewer system. 
(Code 1988, § 2.55) 
Sec. 94-155. - Inspection. 
    The applicant for a building sewer permit shall notify the city in advance when they are ready for connection to the sewer system. The building sewer from the main to the property line shall be inspected by the sewer department. The building sewer from the property line to the building shall be inspected by the plumbing inspector or his designate. All work shall be left uncovered until inspected. 
(Code 1988, § 2.56) 
Sec. 94-156. - Repairs. 
    The cost of repairs, maintenance, and replacement of existing sewer lines and equipment between a user's building or other collection point and the point where said sewer line enters the property of the city or land over which the city possesses an easement for use by its municipal sewer system, shall be borne by the owner of said property. The owner shall perform and pay for such work as may be required after making application and receiving a permit to perform such work from the city. 
(Code 1988, § 2.57) 
Secs. 94-157-94-170. - Reserved. 
Subdivision V. - Enforcement and Penalties 

Sec. 94-171. - Inspectors. 
    The city council and duly authorized officials or employees of the city and agents of the SWRC bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this division at any time during reasonable or unusual business hours. Any person guilty of refusing or obstructing such entry shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1988, § 2.76) 
Sec. 94-172. - Notice to cease violation. 
    Any person found to be violating any provision of this division except sections 94-114 and 94-171 shall be served by the superintendent of the water and wastewater department with written notice stating the nature of such violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, take such corrective action as may be necessary. 
(Code 1988, § 2.77) 
Sec. 94-173. - Continued violation. 
(a)  Misdemeanor violations. Any person who shall violate sections 94-105, 94-106, or 94-114 shall, upon conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $25.00 nor more than $500.00, or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. Each day or fraction of a day in which such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense. Any officer, agent, or employee guilty of aiding or abetting such violation or who, being responsible therefore, refuses or neglects to take corrective action shall be guilty as a principal. 
(b)  Municipal civil infraction violations. Any person who violates any other section of this division other than 94-105, 94-106 or 94-114 shall be subject to penalties set forth in this Code for a municipal civil infraction. 
(Code 1988, § 2.78; Ord. of 11-28-94(4), § 1) 
Sec. 94-174. - Civil liability. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage occasioned to the city by reason of such violation, and recovery therefor may be had in an appropriate action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1988, § 2.79) 
Sec. 94-175. - Abatement. 
    Any continued violation, after due notice as provided in section 94-172, shall be deemed a public nuisance, and may be abated by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. This remedy shall be in addition to those heretofore provided for. 
(Code 1988, § 2.80) 
Secs. 94-176-94-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 94-191. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this division shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Definitions under division 3 of this article shall also apply to this division. 
    Business day means each day of any month in which the business offices of the City of South Lyon shall be open. This definition shall exclude Saturdays, Sundays, and official holidays. 
    Department means the city department of water. 
    Person means any individual, firm, association, public or private corporation or public agency or instrumentality. 
    Premises means each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having any connection to the water supply and sewage disposal system of the city, herein called the "system." 
    Superintendent means the superintendent of the department. 
(Code 1988, § 2.111; Ord. of 4-22-96(1)) 
Sec. 94-192. - Fixing rates. 
    The rates to be charged for water and sewage disposal service furnished by the system shall be as prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1988, § 2.112) 
Sec. 94-193. - Water rates. 
    Except as herein otherwise provided, water to be furnished by the system to each premises shall be measured by a meter owned, installed and controlled by the city. Charges for water services to each premises connected with city water supply system shall be as established by city council action. 
(Code 1988, § 2.113) 
Sec. 94-194. - City water and hydrant charges. 
    The City of South Lyon shall pay for all water used by it at the foregoing rates. 
(Code 1988, § 2.114; Ord. of 1-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 94-195. - Sewer service rates. 
(a)  Generally. Charges for sewer services to each premises connected with the sewage system shall be as established by city council action. 
(b)  Surcharges. If the character of the sewage of any manufacturing or industrial plant or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose any unreasonable burden upon the sewers of the system or upon the sewage treatment plant in excess of a maximum limit prescribed in this chapter, then an additional charge shall be made over and above the regular rates for those loadings in excess of the maximum regular rates for those loadings in excess of the maximum limits, or the city shall require that such sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible therefor being emptied into the sewer or the right to empty such sewage shall be denied, if necessary, to protect the system or any part thereof. Surcharges required shall be computed as the prorated share of the annual costs of operating and maintenance, including replacement, attributable to treating a substance in excess of that of domestic sewage. Unit charges to compute the surcharges are as follows: 
(1)  SS unit rate equals annual cost allocated to SS divided by the total annual weight of SS in raw sewage; 
(2)  BOD unit rate equals annual cost allocated to BOD divided by the total annual weight of BOD in raw sewage. 
(c)  Charges related to removal of prohibited material. Additional charges equal to the actual expense incurred by the city of removing prohibited material discharged or caused or allowed to be discharged by the user, and/or for the handling and/or treating of said material in the wastewater system. 
(d)  Charges related to cleaning and repair of wastewater system. Additional charges equal to the actual expense incurred by the city for cleaning or repairing the wastewater system or any part thereof as required by a discharge by or caused or allowed by a user. 
(e)  Laboratory charge. There shall be an additional charge for laboratory testing of wastewater samples. The laboratory charge shall be for the cost thereof and will be determined for any user. 
(Code 1988, § 2.115) 
Sec. 94-196. - Billing. 
    No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city to any other person, firm, or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality. Charges for services furnished by the system shall be billed and collected not less often than on a quarterly (three months) cycle, as shall be determined by the city council by resolution. Such charges shall become due on the last business day of the month following the quarterly billing (January, April, July, and October). If such charges are not paid on or before said due date, then a penalty of ten percent shall be added. 
(Code 1988, § 2.116; Ord. of 4-22-96(1); Ord. of 1-25-10(1)) 
Sec. 94-197. - Collection. 
    The department is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of charges for water services to any premises by discontinuing the water service to such premises and the payment of charges for sewage disposal service to any premises may be enforced by discontinuing either the water service or the sewage disposal service to such premises, or both, and such action of assumpsit may be instituted by the city against the customer. The charges for water service and sewage disposal service, which under the provisions of Act 451 of Public Acts of 1994 of the State of Michigan, as amended, are made a lien upon the premises to which furnished and are hereby recognized to constitute such a lien, and the city treasurer shall annually certify such charges for such services furnished to any premises, which, on March 31 preceding, have remained unpaid for a period of six months, to the city assessor, who shall place the same on the next tax roll of the city. Such charges so assessed shall be collected in the same manner as general city taxes. All charges for water service and/or sewage disposal service to any premises shall be the responsibility of the owner of such premises unless a written lease has been legally executed containing a provision stating the owner's tenant is responsible for payment of such charges, and the city is provided a true copy of such lease and an affidavit signed by the tenant indicating the tenant is responsible for such charges. The affidavit shall contain a notation of the expiration date of the lease. The owner of the premises shall give 20 days notice of any cancellation, change in, or termination of the lease. The owner of any premises shall be responsible for water and/or sewer disposal service charges accruing until after the city has received a true copy of the lease and has approved the form of the affidavit. Once the city has received a true copy of the lease and has approved the form of the affidavit, no further sewer or water services shall be commenced or continued to such premises until there has been deposited with the department, a sum sufficient to cover two times the average quarterly bill for such premises as estimated by the city. Where the water service to any premises is turned off to enforce the payment of water service charges or sewage disposal service charges, the water service shall not be recommenced until all delinquent charges have been paid and a deposit as in the case of tenants is made, and there is paid such shutoff charges and turn-on charges as shall be established by city council action. In any other case, where in the discretion of the city treasurer, the collection of charges for water and sewage disposal service may be difficult or uncertain, the city may require a similar deposit. Such deposits may be applied against any delinquent water or sewage disposal service charges of the depositor, and the application thereof shall not affect the right of the department to turn off the water service and/or sewer service to any premises for any delinquency thereby satisfied. No such deposit shall bear interest, and such deposit, or any remaining balance thereof, shall be returned to the customer who made the deposit when he or she shall discontinue receiving water and sewage disposal service or, except as to tenants as to whom notice of responsibility for such charges has been filed with the city pursuant to this section, when any eight successive quarterly bills have been paid by said customer with no delinquency. 
(Code 1988, § 2.117; Ord. of 4-22-96(1)) 
Sec. 94-198. - Special rates. 
    Special rates for water or sanitary sewer service may be fixed by resolution of the city council for customers outside the city, customers not having a metered water supply, customers using large quantities of water not discharged into the sanitary sewers, and in other cases where special considerations are applicable in the discretion of the city council, anything contained in this division to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Code 1988, § 2.118) 
Sec. 94-199. - Fiscal year for system. 
    The sewerage system shall be operated on the basis of a fiscal year commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30. 
(Code 1988, § 2.119) 
Sec. 94-200. - Use of proceeds; revisions of rates. 
(a)  The rates hereby fixed are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of any or all indebtedness, to provide for the expenses of administration and operation and such expenses of maintenance of such system as are necessary to preserve the same in good repair and working order, to build up a reasonable reserve for equipment replacement thereof. Such rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time as may be necessary to produce these amounts. An annual audit shall be prepared. Based on said audit, rates for sewage services shall be reviewed annually and revised as necessary to meet system expenses and to insure that all user classes pay their proportionate share of operation, maintenance and equipment replacement cost. 
(b)  If any of the replacement funds are spent before the 20-year period and where the replacement funds are based on the sinking fund method, the annual cost must be reviewed to compensate for the loss in principal. 
(Code 1988, § 2.120) 
Chapter 98 - VEGETATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 98-1-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WEEDS 

Sec. 98-31. - Unlawful to permit noxious weeds. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant or any person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of any lot or parcel of land within the City of South Lyon to permit or allow to grow thereon any weeds of any kind (including grasses and similar plants exceeding eight inches in height) scattered among which are noxious weeds such as Canada thistles, dodders, mustards, wild carrot, bindweed, perennial sowthistles, hoary alyssum, ragweed, poison ivy, poison sumac, or any other plant or varieties of plant which are recognized as inducing hay fever or other diseases, or being in any other way deleterious to the health or comfort of the community. The presence of such weeds upon any lot or parcel of land within the limits of the City of South Lyon is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1988, § 9.31; Ord. of 2-8-10(2)) 
Sec. 98-32. - Duty to cut weeds. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the owner or occupant of land or any person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of any lands within the limits of the City of South Lyon upon which weeds, as described in section 98-31, are growing or standing, to cause to be cut or destroyed by spray all such weeds growing or standing on said premises during the first half of the month of May and during the last half of the month of September of each year, or more often if necessary to prevent them from going to seed. If any owner or occupant of land or any person or persons, firm, or corporation having charge of lands in this city shall knowingly suffer any weeds described in section 98-31 to grow upon said lands to a height of eight inches or shall suffer the weeds to ripen so as to cause or endanger the spread thereof, he or they shall, upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction, be liable to the penalty prescribed in chapter 1. 
(Code 1988, § 9.32; Ord. of 2-8-10(2)) 
Sec. 98-33. - Duty of clerk to give notice. 
(a)  It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk to give general notice in the following manner to every owner or occupant of land and to every person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of any lands in this city wherein noxious weeds are growing, to cut and destroy the same, to wit: Notices shall be mailed to the owner of record of the property as the same shall appear in the records of the City of South Lyon, and similar notice shall also be published once in the official newspaper. These notices shall set forth in effect that all noxious weeds must be cut on or before a certain date, which date shall be fixed by the city clerk. The posting and publication of such notices shall take place at least ten days prior to the date upon which the weeds must be cut, and such notice may read as follows: 
"To the owners or occupants or any person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of any lands in the City of South Lyon: Notice is hereby given that all noxious weeds growing on any land in the City of South Lyon, Oakland County, Michigan, must be cut down and destroyed on or before the ________ day of ________, A.D. 19___. 
Failure to comply with this notice on or before the date mentioned shall make the parties so failing liable for the actual costs for cutting by City personnel or contractor plus an additional administrative fee as set by the City of South Lyon Fee Schedule to be levied and collected against the property in the manner provided by law. 
South Lyon, Michigan 
________ 19___ 
Clerk, City of South Lyon" 
(b)  In case the owner or occupant or the person or persons, firm or corporation having charge of any land in the City of South Lyon shall refuse or neglect to cut the weeds on or before the date stated in such notice, the City of South Lyon, through its employees, may enter upon the land and to cause all such noxious weeds to be cut down with as little damage to other vegetation as may be and to charge the cost thereof, together with the administrative fee as set forth by the city's fee schedule, against the owner or occupant of said premises and sunset the property itself. The minimum charge for such work on any lot or parcel of land shall be not less than $30.00. Nothing in this chapter shall apply to weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crop such as wheat, oats, barley or rye. 
(Code 1988, § 9.33; Ord. of 1-25-10(2)) 
Sec. 98-34. - Cost to be charged against owner. 
    The city clerk shall keep a record of the cost of cutting the weeds upon each separate lot and parcel of land by the city, and shall notify the owner or occupant of the said premises by ordinary mail or otherwise, if the address of such owner or occupant be known, that the city has cut or caused to be cut and destroyed the weeds upon said premises in accordance with the provisions of this article, together with a statement of the amount due the city. If the cost and charges due the city for cutting and destroying weeds upon any lot or parcel of land in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not have been collected on or before December 31 of the year in which the expense was incurred by the city, the same shall be reported by the city clerk to the council to be collected by a special assessment, in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the City of South Lyon and chapter 78. 
(Code 1988, § 9.34) 
Sec. 98-35. - Violations and penalties. 
    In addition to the costs that may be assessed against a person pursuant to section 98-34, any person, firm, or corporation violating a provision of this article shall be deemed responsible for committing a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 11-28-94(26), § 1(9.35)) 
Secs. 98-36-98-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-61. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as the municipal tree ordinance of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.010) 
Sec. 98-62. - Purpose and intent. 
(a)  It is in the best interest of the city and the citizens and public thereof that a comprehensive master plan for planting and maintenance of city-owned trees within the city be adopted, and that uniform and standard laws be adopted for the purpose of regulating, developing and providing for the planting, maintenance and removal of trees and stumps in any street, park or public place within the city, or under its jurisdiction and control, in order to better control problems of soil conservation, air pollution, and noise, and to provide necessary funding for a uniform, continuous city tree program for the purpose of beautifying and maintaining property values. 
(b)  The intent of this article is to protect and encourage the protection of trees, plants and shrubs, to provide for public health, safety and general welfare and to promote and preserve the city's aesthetic value. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.020) 
Sec. 98-63. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in plural include the singular, and words in the singular include the plural. The word "shall" is mandatory and not merely directory. 
    City DPW superintendent means the designated official of the City of South Lyon, lying within the County of Oakland, State of Michigan, assigned to carry out the enforcement of this article. 
    Department of public works means the department under whose jurisdiction park and/or street trees fall. 
    Large trees means trees designated as those attaining a height of 45 feet or more. 
    Medium trees means trees designated as those attaining a height of 30 to 45 feet. 
    Municipality means the City of South Lyon, lying within the County of Oakland, State of Michigan. 
    Park means all public parks having individual names. 
    Parkway means that part of a street or highway, not covered by sidewalk or other paving, lying between the property line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular traffic. 
    Person means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, or organization of any kind. 
    Plants means all "nonwoody" vegetation now or hereafter growing on any public street, highway, alley, or public place. 
    Property line means the outer edge of a street or highway and does not pertain to the traveled pavement surface itself. 
    Property owner means the person owning such property as shown by the records on file at the county register of deeds office. 
    Public places means all other grounds owned by the City of South Lyon, lying within the County of Oakland, State of Michigan, or under its control or supervision whether owned, leased, or under contract of the city. 
    Public trees means all trees now or hereafter growing on any street or any public areas where otherwise indicated. 
    Small trees means trees designated as those attaining a height of 20 to 30 feet. 
    Street highway means all land lying between the so-called property lines on either side of all public streets, roads, boulevards, alleys, or parts thereof. 
    Street or highway means the entire width of every public way or right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the use of the public, as a matter of right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
    Trees and shrubs means all woody vegetation now or hereafter growing on any public street, highway, alley, or public place. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.030) 
Sec. 98-64. - Regulation generally. 
    The city council shall have full power and authority over all trees, plants, and shrubs planted or hereafter planted in the streets, parks and public places of the city. The maintenance of such trees, plants and shrubs shall be subject to the provisions of this article, and such rules and regulations as the city council may from time to time hereafter adopt, and as it deems necessary to properly control and regulate the planting, maintenance, protection and removal of trees, plants and shrubs on public areas of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.040) 
Sec. 98-65. - DPW superintendent. 
    Subject to the direction of the city council and the city manager, it shall be the duty of the DPW superintendent to superintend, regulate and encourage the preservation, culture and planting of shade and ornamental trees, plants and shrubs, and to direct the method and time for trimming the same; to advise, without charge, owners and occupants of lots regarding the kind of trees, plants and shrubs and the method of planting best adapted to or most desirable on particular streets and public highways; and to take such measure as may be deemed necessary for the control and extermination of insects, pests and plant diseases which may injuriously affect trees, plants or shrubs that are now growing or may be hereafter growing in the streets, parks, public highways, or boulevards of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.050) 
Sec. 98-66. - Loss of public trees; value recovery. 
(a)  Whenever the DPW superintendent shall determine that a tree in any street, park or public place has been impaired, damaged, broken, severed, destroyed, or removed in a manner which shall cause immediate or future removal of the tree, which is deemed premature and untimely based on the condition, vigor, location, kind and age of the trees, and the DPW superintendent shall have knowledge of the person causing the damage, then the DPW superintendent shall assess against the responsible person the value of the tree as determined by use of the Michigan Forestry and Parks Association Shade Tree Evaluation Chart. 
(b)  This shall not construe that the value received by the city shall be less than the cost of the removal of the damaged tree and replacement of a comparable tree, as determined by the DPW superintendent, of not less than 21/2-inch trunk diameter measured at a height of six inches above the ground, nor shall the DPW superintendent be restricted in his choice of the replacement planting site. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the police department having knowledge of such damage or persons causing damage to immediately report same to the DPW superintendent for investigation. 
(d)  It shall be the duty of the DPW superintendent to notify the city manager and city attorney of any of the tree damage which shall dictate value recovery to the city. 
(e)  The full amount of the value recovered for the damaged tree shall be conveyed to the DPW superintendent for future tree planting purposes notwithstanding the deduction of the removal cost of the damaged tree and replacement of the tree. 
(f)  The DPW superintendent shall determine the time of the removal of the damaged tree, but it shall not be required that all the damaged trees must be immediately removed if found to be in safe condition in order for value recovery to take place. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.120) 
Sec. 98-67. - Public nuisance. 
(a)  Any tree or shrub or parts thereof growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street, park, public improvement, or public place of the city that in the opinion of the DPW superintendent endangers the life, health, safety, or property of the public shall be declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  Any such trees located in streets, parks, or public places shall be removed at city expense and under the direction of the DPW superintendent. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.130) 
Sec. 98-68. - Enforcement; interference with DPW superintendent. 
    No person shall prevent, delay, or interfere with the DPW superintendent or any of his assistants in the execution of enforcement of this article; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be construed as an attempt to prohibit a public hearing or any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of any property within the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.140) 
Sec. 98-69. - Violations and penalties. 
    A violation of this article shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.150; Ord. of 11-28-94(3), § 1) 
Secs. 98-70-98-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 98-91. - Permits generally. 
    It is unlawful for any person to perform or undertake, or cause to be performed or undertaken, any such work or activity covered by and included within this article without first filing an application for and procuring a permit from the DPW superintendent or his designated agent. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.060) 
Sec. 98-92. - Permit required-Planting generally. 
(a)  No trees, plants or shrubs shall be planted in any of the streets, highways, parks or other public areas in the city unless and until the DPW superintendent shall have first approved the kind, size and variety of the same, designated the location thereof, and granted a permit in accordance with the provisions of section 98-91 for the planting of same. 
(b)  Any trees, plants or shrubs authorized for planting within the triangle formed by the intersection of right-of-way lines and extending for a distance of 25 feet each way from the intersection on any corner within the city shall not be permitted to grow to a height of more than three feet above the surface of the intersecting roadways. 
(c)  The DPW superintendent shall have the authority to plant trees, plants or shrubs in any public street, highway, park or other public areas in the city which he, in his sole discretion, deems adequate for this purpose. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.070) 
Sec. 98-93. - Same-Planting in new subdivision. 
(a)  Plan and permit application. The City of South Lyon requires street trees to be planted by the property owner, developer or subdivider on all street, parks and public places abutting lands henceforth developed and/or subdivided within the city. A proposed planting plan and permit application shall be submitted by the property owner, developer, or subdivider to the DPW superintendent for approval and issuance of a planting permit prior to final plat clearance by the city. The DPW superintendent shall provide planting specifications to the property owners of the proposed development and/or subdivision within seven days of receipt of written request therefor. 
(b)  Bond. The DPW superintendent, upon approval of the proposed planting plan but prior to the issuance of a planting, may require the property owner to post bond with the city for an amount not less than $10.00 for each tree required by the DPW superintendent to be planted. Upon notification of planting completion to the DPW superintendent by the land owner, and certification as to satisfactory workmanship and completion of the tree planting, the DPW superintendent shall direct the city to release the bond. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.080) 
Sec. 98-94. - Same-Maintenance. 
    No person shall hereafter move, spray, brace, trim, do surgery work, or cut above or below ground any branch or root therefrom or otherwise disturb any tree, plant or shrub in any highway, park or public place of the city, nor cause such acts to be done by others without first obtaining a written permit from the DPW superintendent who shall issue the permit if in his judgment the proposed work is necessary and the proposed method of workmanship thereof is of a satisfactory nature. The person receiving such permit shall abide by the specification and standards of practice in this article and on any regulation as may be hereafter from time to time adopted by the city council, and shall as a condition of such permit agree to hold the city harmless from any and all liability which might result from the work or activity authorized. In addition, the DPW superintendent may require the person receiving such permit to provide such insurance coverage and in such amounts as he deems necessary to protect the interest of the city. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.090) 
Sec. 98-95. - Same-Certain acts. 
    No person shall, without first obtaining a written permit from the DPW superintendent: 
(1)  Fasten any sign, card, poster, wire rope or other material to, around or through, any tree, plant, or shrub or its guard; 
(2)  Permit any fire to burn where such fire or its heat, smoke or fumes will injure any portion of any tree, plant, or shrub; 
(3)  Permit any toxic chemical to seep, drain, or to be emptied on or about any tree, plant, or shrub; 
(4)  Deposit, store, place or maintain, on any street, highway, or other public place, any brick, sand, stone, concrete or other material which may impede free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any tree, plant, or shrub growing therein; 
(5)  Fail to erect a suitable protective barrier around trees or shrubs apt to be injured during any building construction; 
(6)  Fail to repair or stop any leak existing or occurring in any gas pipe or main within a radius of 40 feet of any tree or shrub; 
(7)  Knowingly permit any electrical wires to come into contact with or be attached to any tree or shrub; 
(8)  Excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or lay any drive within a radius of 30 feet from any tree or shrub; 
(9)  Move any building or other large object along any street without furnishing any bond deemed necessary or cash sufficient to cover damage as a result of moving; 
(10)  Drive, park, haul or store any automobile, truck, trailer, boat, motorcycle, snowmobile, motor home, or other motorized and/or wheeled vehicle within 25 feet of an existing tree in any street, park, or public place except while within the clearly delineated travel or parking zones of any roadway, alley, or parking lot. This shall not be construed as to preclude parking on any gravel, concrete or bituminous driveway or entryway, or operating a motor vehicle on any gravel-surfaced roadway within 25 feet of such tree. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.100) 
Sec. 98-96. - Nature of permit. 
    Every permit issued shall specifically describe the location and nature of the work or other activity to be performed under it and shall contain such other information as may be required by such regulations as may be hereafter adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.060(A)) 
Sec. 98-97. - Enforceability. 
    Any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article and in accordance with applicable regulations adopted by the city council shall automatically become null and void upon expiration of the permit period or at any time the permit holder violates the provisions of this article, the permit, or the regulations applicable thereto. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.060(B)) 
Sec. 98-98. - Fees/costs. 
    No charge shall be made for the issuance of any permit unless it is determined necessary by the DPW superintendent, or such person as he may designate, to assign an inspector to supervise the work or other activity to be performed under the permit to be issued. In the event an inspector is determined to be necessary, the department shall determine the charge for such inspection services on an actual cost basis, and such actual cost shall be paid by the person seeking the permit as a prerequisite to its issuance. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.060(C)) 
Sec. 98-99. - Notice. 
    Notice of commencement and completion of work or other activity authorized by the permit shall be made to the DPW superintendent as stated on the permit issued. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.060(D)) 
Sec. 98-100. - Condition precedent for removal of tree or shrub. 
    As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit to remove any tree or shrub, the DPW superintendent may require the permit holder to plant, at his expense, a similar tree or shrub to replace the removed tree or shrub. 
(Ord. of 3-28-94(1), § 12.16.110) 
Chapter 102 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 102-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the City of South Lyon Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.1) 
Sec. 102-2. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this chapter: 
(1)  The particular shall control the general. 
(2)  In the case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this chapter and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
(3)  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for." 
(7)  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity. 
(8)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either...or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
c.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
(9)  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.5) 
Sec. 102-3. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use or accessory means a use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and located on the same zoning lot, unless otherwise specified, as the principal use to which it is related. When "accessory" is used in this text, it shall have the same meaning as accessory use. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following examples: 
(1)  Residential accommodations for servants and/or caretakers. 
(2)  Outdoor swimming pools, hot tubs and saunas for the use of the occupants of a residence, or their guests. 
(3)  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room or similar accessory building or other structure. 
(4)  A newsstand primarily for the convenience of the occupants of a building, which is located wholly within such building and has no exterior signs or displays. 
(5)  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(6)  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
(7)  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(8)  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as but not limited to: offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
(9)  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(10)  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
(11)  Common household gardening in a residential district when located only in the rear yard and/or nonrequired side yard areas. 
(12)  Solar panels, wind generators, television reception antenna and air conditioning units. 
    Alley means any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartments means a suite of rooms in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment, efficiency means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining and necessary sanitary facilities. 
    Arcade means a building or structure, or any part thereof, which is devoted to the commercial use of amusement devices, pinball machines, electronic tables featuring pool, billiards, bowling, basketball, football, or the like, or electronic games of skill or dexterity utilizing videotapes or video screen or TV adaptations, etc., automatic sport devices or tables or similar activities for hire, or for amusement. 
    Architectural features means steps, window sills, belt courses, brick and/or wrought iron wing walls, chimneys, architraves, pediments. 
    Automobile repair, major means the general repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening and repair; and painting of automobiles. 
    Automobile repair, minor means repairs other than major repair including engine tune-up, muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, undercoating shops and tire stores. 
    Basement means that portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Bed and breakfast operations means a use which is subordinate to the principal use of a dwelling unit as a single-family dwelling unit and a use in which transient guest are provided a sleeping rooms and board in return for payment. 
    Berm, obscuring means an earthen mound of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring device in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Block means the property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets (crossing or terminating), or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality. 
    Board means the zoning board of appeals as established under this chapter. 
    Building means any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
    Building height means the vertical distance from the established sidewalk grade at the center of the front of the building to the highest point of the roof surface of a flat roof, to the deck line for mansard roof and the mean height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. Penthouses, towers cupolas, steeples and antennas used only for mechanical operation of the building shall not be included as the height of the building. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
    Building line means a line formed by the face of the building, and for the purposes of this chapter, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
    Building, main or principal means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. 
    Care center dependent housing means housing units for elderly or infirmed adult persons that provide living and sleeping space with a central kitchen and dining facility. 
    Care center independent housing means housing units for elderly or infirmed adult persons that provide all facilities for independent living in a self sufficient manner. 
    Club means an organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Collector street (secondary thoroughfare) means a street used primarily to carry traffic from minor (local) streets to major thoroughfares. 
    Condominium subdivision plan means the site, survey and utility plans; floor plans; and sections, as appropriate, showing the existing and proposed structures and improvements including the location thereof on the land. 
    Condominium subdivision (site condominium) means a method of subdivision where land ownership of sites is regulated by the Condominium Act (P.A. 59 of 1978 as amended, MCL 559.101) as opposed to the Subdivision Control Act of 1967 (MCL 560.101). 
    Condominium subdivision shall be equivalent to the term subdivision as used in this chapter and chapter 86. 
    Convalescent or nursing home means a structure with sleeping rooms, where persons are housed or lodged and are furnished with meals, nursing and limited medical care. 
    Day care center means a group facility for more than six children which gives care to children away from their homes. 
    Day care home (family) means a one-family dwelling which receives not more than six children for care during the day. 
    Day care home for elderly adults means a one-family dwelling which receives not more than six elderly or infirmed adults, for care during the day. 
    Day care home (group) means a one-family dwelling which receives not more than 12 children for care during the day. 
    Development means the construction of a new building or other structure on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    District means a portion of the incorporated area of the municipality within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Drive-in means an establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are sold to the customers in a ready-to-consume state and where the customer consumes food, frozen desserts or beverages in an automobile parked upon the premises or at other facilities provided for customers which are located outside the building. 
    Drive-through means an establishment so developed that some portion of its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a driveway approach and staging area specifically designed for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons while in their motor vehicles, rather than within a building or structure, for carrying out and consumption or use after the vehicle is removed from the premises. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family means a building, or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, one-family means a building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family means a building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling density or dwelling unit density means total land area of all phases of a project created under the open space option, cluster housing option, or multiple family developments as set forth herein excluding any existing road rights-of-way and wetlands, divided by the number of units. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
    Elderly housing, dependent means a multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each dwelling unit. Each dwelling unit may not contain cooking facilities, but must contain sanitary facilities. 
    Elderly housing, independent means a multiple-family housing form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual dwelling unit. 
    Erected. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage and the like shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential services means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance of railroads, public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals and hydrants in connection herewith, but not including buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety or welfare. 
    Excavation means any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family means a single individual or individuals, domiciled together whose relationship is of a continuing, nontransient, domestic character and who are cooking and living together as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit, but not including any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, coterie, organization, or group of students or other individuals whose relationship is of a transitory or, seasonal nature or for anticipated limited duration of school terms, rental period, or other similar determinable period of time. 
    Farming means the carrying on of any agricultural activity or the raising of livestock or small animals as a source of income. 
    Fence means a manmade structure constructed for the purpose of or to have the effect of enclosing the area it is constructed upon. 
    Fence, ornamental means a manmade structure the surface area of which is more than 75 percent open. Ornamental fences do not include chainlink fences or fences of wire construction. 
    Floor area, residential. For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two dwellings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable means, for the purposes of computing parking, that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area." Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
FLOOR AREA 
    Garage, private means an accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar vehicles and such other lawn and home care equipment owned and used by the occupant of the building to which it is accessory. 
    Garage sale means any sale of personal effects, jewelry, or household items, furnishings and equipment belonging to the owner or occupant of the property held in any district by the owner, occupant or his personal representative. 
    Gasoline service station means a place for the dispensing, sale or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles, together with the sale of minor accessories and services for motor vehicles but not including major automobile repair. 
    Grade means the ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Greenbelt means a planting of trees and shrubs to serve as a screening device between abutting land uses. 
    Guarantee means a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or such other instrument acceptable to the city. 
    Hardship means situations created by circumstances unique to an individual property that do not generally occur to land or buildings in the neighborhood or zoning district of the property in question and which circumstances make the use of such property infeasible under conditions imposed by the zoning ordinance. Hardship shall not include personal or financial hardship or economic disadvantage nor shall it constitute circumstances that are self-created. 
    Home occupation means an occupation carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly subservient to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
    Hospice means a lodging place for the ill where persons are housed and furnished meals and attendant care. 
    Hotel means a building or part of a building, with a common entrance, or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy, and in which one or more of the following services are offered: maid service, furnishing of linen, telephone, secretarial, or desk service, and bellboy service. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms or meeting rooms. 
    Improvements means those features and actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the municipality to protect natural resources or the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city, and future uses or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including parking areas, landscaping, roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project which is the subject of zoning approval. 
    Junk yard means an area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including but not limited to: scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any open area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk. 
    Kennel, commercial means any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets are either permanently or temporarily boarded or bred and raised for remuneration. 
    Loading space means an off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Local street means a street of limited continuity used primarily for access to abutting properties. 
    Lot means a parcel of land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this chapter. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. Lot shall mean the same as homesite and condominium unit in site condominium developments. 
    Lot area means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot, corner means a lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this chapter if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
DOUBLE FRONTAGE, INTERIOR AND CORNER LOTS 
    Lot coverage means the part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings and including but not limited to: patios, decks, pools and similar structures. 
    Lot depth means the horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior means any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines means the lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 
(1)  Front lot line means, in the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, or corner lot, means that line separating said lot from each street. 
(2)  Rear lot line means that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
(3)  Side lot line means any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from a street is a exterior side lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line. 
    Lot of record means a parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by municipal or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through means any interior lot having frontage on two or more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. All yards of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yard setbacks shall be provided as required. 
    Lot width means the horizontal straight line distance between the side lot lines, measured between the two points where the front setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
    Lot, zoning means a single tract of land, located within a single block which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 
A zoning lot shall satisfy this chapter with respect to area, size, dimensions and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot, therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the county register of deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
LOT WIDTH AND SETBACK 
    Main building means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Main use means the principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Major thoroughfare means an arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond, and is designated as a major thoroughfare, parkway, freeway, expressway or equivalent term on the major thoroughfare plan to identify those streets comprising the basic structure of the major thoroughfare plan. 
    Master plan means the comprehensive community plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Mechanical amusement device means any machine or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, currency, slug, token, plate or disc, operates or may be operated as a game of contest of skill or amusement when the element of skill in such operation predominates over chance or luck. It shall include mechanical, electrical, or electronic video games, mechanical grabbing devices, pinball games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic baseball, football, basketball, hockey and similar sports-type games, mechanical, electrical, or electronic card games, shooting games, target games, or any other machine, device or apparatus which may be used as a game of skill and wherein the player initiates, employs or directs any force generated by such machine, including all games of chance authorized by the State of Michigan. 
    Mezzanine means an intermediate floor in any story occupying not less than one-third of the floor area of such story. 
BASIC STRUCTURAL TERMS 
    Mini storage units means storage buildings for lease to the general public for storage of personal and household effects and for dry storage of office and business effects not including the warehousing of products or supplies. 
    Mobile home means any building or structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a chassis and designed to be sold as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the structure. Mobile home does not include recreational equipment. 
    Mobile home park means a parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more mobile homes are located on a continual nonrecreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a mobile home and those regulated by the State of Michigan Mobile Home Commission. 
    Motel means a series of attached, semi-detached or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. This definition does not include apartments. 
    Municipality means the City of South Lyon, Michigan. 
    Nonconforming structure means a structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the provisions of the chapter in the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of ordinance from which this chapter is derived, or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonconforming use or structure, class A means a nonconforming use or structure which has been designated to be allowed to be perpetuated and improved under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nonconforming use or structure, class B means a nonconforming use or structure which has been designated to be allowed to be continued within the restricted provisions of this chapter. 
    Nuisance factors means an offensive, annoying, unpleasant or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affects a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Noise; 
(2)  Dust; 
(3)  Smoke; 
(4)  Odor; 
(5)  Glare; 
(6)  Fumes; 
(7)  Flashes; 
(8)  Vibration; 
(9)  Shock waves, heat; 
(10)  Electronic or atomic radiation; 
(11)  Objectionable effluent; 
(12)  Noise of congregation of people, particularly at night; 
(13)  Passenger traffic; 
(14)  Invasion of nonabutting street frontage by traffic; 
(15)  A burned structure; 
(16)  A condemned structure. 
    Nursery, plant materials means a space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this chapter does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nursery school means a facility which has as its main objective a development program for pre-school children and whose staff meets the educational requirements established by the state. 
    Nursing home. See definition of Convalescent home. 
    Off-street parking lot means a facility providing off-street vehicular parking spaces and drives or aisles for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open storage means the storage of any materials or objects outside the confines of a building. 
    Parking means, for the purpose of this chapter, the parking of a motor vehicle for short duration, and possessing the element of a vehicle in use, being temporarily parked or placed until it is about to be again put into service or use. Temporary for the purpose of this definition shall be measured by hours or at most by not more than three days. 
    Parking space means an area of definite length and width; said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Performance standards means criteria developed to control nuisance factors. 
    Pet means a domesticated animal kept, other than for commercial use, as a companion, for protection, or play. 
    Planned commercial center means a business development consisting of two or more retail outlets characterized by a unified grouping of stores, under common architecture, served by a common circulation and parking system. 
    Planned development (PD) means a specific parcel of land or several contiguous parcels of land, under single ownership and control, for which a comprehensive physical plan has been developed establishing functional use areas, density patterns, and a fixed system of streets, provisions for public utilities, drainage and other essential services, all in accord with the South Lyon Master Plan, and subject to review and approval by the planning commission and city council and which has been, or will be, developed in full accordance with the approved plan. 
    Plot plan means a plan drawn for use in applying for a building permit as required by this chapter. 
    Principal use means the main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public utility means a person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation or water. 
    Recreational equipment means travel trailers, pick-up campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, boats, and boat trailers, snowmobiles, horse trailers, dune buggies, and other similar equipment and conveyances. 
    Room. For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a multiple-family district, a room is a living room, dining room or bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways and storage. 
Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Satellite earth station means a structure designed, intended or used to receive communications or other signals from geostationary, communications satellites or other extraterrestrial sources. 
    Setback means the distance required to obtain minimum front, side or rear yard open space provisions of this chapter. Setbacks for buildings shall be measured from the foundation wall. 
    Sign definitions. The following definitions (1) through (8) are related to signs: 
(1)  Sign means any announcement, declaration, display, billboard, illustration and insignia when designed and placed so as to attract general public attention. Such shall be deemed to be a single sign whenever the proximity, design, content or continuity reasonably suggests a single unit, notwithstanding any physical separation between parts. "Sign" shall include any banner, bulbs or other lighting devices, streamer, pennant, inflated or deflated membrane device, propeller, flat (other than the official flag of any nation or state) and any similar device of any type or kind whether bearing lettering or not. 
(2)  Accessory sign means a sign which pertains to the principal use of the premises. 
(3)  Sign area means the gross surface area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign, and in no case passing through or between any adjacent elements of same. Such perimeter shall not include any structural or framing elements, lying outside the limits of such sign, and not forming an integral part of the display. For computing the area of any wall sign which consists of letters mounted or painted on a wall, the area shall be deemed to be the area of the smallest rectangular figure which can encompass all the letters and descriptive matter. 
(4)  Billboard means a nonaccessory sign used for outdoor advertising purposes. 
(5)  Ground sign means a permanent display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces or mounted directly in and upon the ground surface and having a height not in excess of five feet. 
(6)  Nonaccessory sign means a sign which does not pertain to the principal use of the premises. 
(7)  Pylon sign means a display sign supported by one or more columns, uprights or braces in the ground surface and having a height in excess of five feet. 
(8)  Wall sign means a display sign which is painted on or attached directly to the building wall. 
  
    Single housekeeping unit means all of the associated rooms in a dwelling unit available to and occupied by all of the occupants with an single set of cooking facilities also available to and utilized by all of the occupants of the dwelling unit. 
    Site condominium definitions, The following definitions (1) through (12) are related to site condominiums: 
(1)  Condominium Act means Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended. 
(2)  Condominium documents means the master deed, recorded pursuant to the Condominium Act, and any other instrument referred to in the master deed or bylaws which affects the rights and obligations of a co-owner in the condominium. 
(3)  Condominium subdivision plan means the drawings and information prepared in accordance with section 66 of the Condominium Act. 
(4)  Condominium unit means the portion of a condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed. 
(5)  Condominium master deed means the final amended master deed for a contractible or expandable condominium project, or a condominium project containing convertible land or convertible space, which final amended master deed fully describes the condominium project as completed. 
(6)  Contractible condominium means a condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or buildings may be withdrawn in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act. 
(7)  Conversion condominium means a condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the filing of a notice of taking reservations under section 7 of the Condominium Act. 
(8)  Expandable condominium means a condominium project to which additional land may be added in accordance with this chapter and the Condominium Act. 
(9)  Master deed means the condominium document recording the condominium project to which are attached as exhibits and incorporated by reference the bylaws for the project and the condominium subdivision plan for the project, and all other information required by section 8 of the Condominium Act. 
(10)  Notice of proposed action means the notice required by section 71 of the Condominium Act, to be filed with the city and other agencies. 
(11)  Site condominium means a condominium development containing residential, commercial, office, industrial, or other structures for uses permitted in the zoning district in which located, in which each co-owner owns exclusive rights to a parcel of land herein defined as a condominium unit, as described in the master deed, as well as a described space in a building located on a condominium unit. 
(12)  Yards, condominium subdivisions (site condominiums) : 
a.  Front yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the front yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
b.  Rear yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the rear yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
c.  Side yard setback shall be equal to the distance between the side yard area line and the condominium dwelling. 
SITE CONDOMINIUM TERMINOLOGY 
    Story means that part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. A basement shall not be counted as a story. 
    Story, half means an uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet in area with a clear ceiling height of seven feet six inches. For the purposes of this chapter, the usable floor area is only that area having at least five feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street means a dedicated public right-of-way, other than an alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Subdivision means the partitioning or dividing of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in area; or five or more parcels of land, each of which is ten acres or less in area, are created by successive divisions within a period of ten years. 
    Temporary use or building means a use or building permitted to exist during a specified period of time. 
    Transition or transitional means, for the purposes of this chapter, a zoning district which may serve as a district of transition; i.e., a buffer zone between various land use district or land use types. 
LAND USE TRANSITION AS PROVIDED THROUGH USE OF ZONING DISTRICT 
    Tree and woodlands definitions: 
(1)  Activity means any use operation or action including but not limited to filing, dredging, constructing or excavating material and/or structures. 
(2)  Diameter breast height (DBH) means the diameter of a tree measured at four feet above the natural grade. 
(3)  Drip line means an imaginary vertical line that extends downwards from the outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground. 
(4)  Landmark tree. A tree, regardless of location, which stands apart from its neighbors by size, form or species and has a health/condition factor based on the standards established by section 102-492(13); trees of species and diameters shown on the landmark tree list; and any tree 24 inches DBH or greater which meets the health/condition standard are considered landmark trees. 
(5)  Tree means any woodplant having at least one well defined stem at least six inches DBH. 
(6)  Department means the building department of the City of South Lyon. 
(7)  Caliper means the diameter of a tree trunk measured six inches above ground level up to and including four-inch caliper size and measured 12 inches above ground level for larger trees. 
(8)  Hardship means circumstances unique to a property making tree removal necessary due to physical features of the site such as parcel shape, exceptional topography or the inability to utilize the property for a use allowed in the district and where no alternative location for structures exists making such property unusable. 
    Use means the principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Wall, obscuring means a structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this chapter. 
    Yards means the open spaces on the same lot with a main building unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and as defined herein: 
(1)  Front yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. All yards abutting on a street shall be considered as front yards for setback purposes. 
(2)  Rear yard means an open space extending the full width of the lot the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard shall be opposite the front building facade side of such lot. 
(3)  Side yard means an open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), §§ 5.10-5.50; Ord. of 1-26-09(2)) 
Sec. 102-4. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Whenever any provision of this chapter imposes more stringent requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or required by the provisions of any other requirements of this Code or other law or ordinance, then the provisions of this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this chapter, then the provisions of such ordinance shall govern. 
Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.460) 
Sec. 102-5. - Scope. 
    No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered and maintained, and no new use or change shall be made or maintained of any building, structure or land, or part thereof, except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.465) 
Sec. 102-6. - Amendments. 
(a)  The city council may, from time to time on recommendation from the planning commission or on petition, or on its own motion, amend, supplement or change the district boundaries or the regulations herein, or subsequently established herein pursuant to the authority and procedure established in Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006 as amended. 
(b)  Amendments or supplements to the zoning ordinance may be made in the same manner as provided in Act 110 of 2006 as amended for the enactment of the original ordinance. If an individual property or several adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, the city planning commission shall give a notice of a proposed rezoning to the owner of the property in questions, to all persons to whom any real property within 300 feet of the premises in question is assessed, and to the occupants within 300 feet. The notice shall be delivered personally or by mail to the respective owners and tenants at the address given in the last assessment roll. If the tenant's name is not known, the term "occupant" may be used. If the notice is delivered by mail, an affidavit of mailing shall be filed with the planning commission before the hearing. The notice of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be made not less than 15 days before the hearing. The notice shall 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. 
(3)  Include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property, if such addresses exist. 
(4)  State when and where the request will be considered. 
(5)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
An amendment for the purpose of conforming a provision of the zoning ordinance to the decree of a court of competent jurisdiction as to any specific lands may be adopted by the city council and the notice of the adopted amendment published without referring the amendment to any other board or agency provided for in this act. 
(c)  An individual, government agency, corporation or business, etc., requesting a zoning change shall be responsible for all fees and administrative expenses for mailing. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.755; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-7. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
    The zoning ordinance previously adopted by the City of South Lyon prior to the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived and all amendments thereto are hereby repealed. The repeal of the above ordinance and its amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued, or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), art. XXVI) 
Sec. 102-8. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, morals, safety, comfort, convenience or general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way to impair or interfere with any existing provision of law or ordinance, or with any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to the law relating to the use of buildings or premises; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater restriction than is required by other provisions of this Code or by rules, regulations or permits, the provisions of this chapter shall control. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.760) 
Sec. 102-9. - Vested rights. 
    Nothing in this chapter should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.765) 
Sec. 102-10. - Enforcement, penalties and other remedies. 
(a)  Municipal civil infraction penalties. A violation of this chapter shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Public nuisance per se. Any building or structure which is erected, altered or converted, or any use of premises or land which is begun or changed subsequent to the time of passage of this chapter and in violation of any of the provisions thereof is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se, and may be abated by order of any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Fines, imprisonment. The owner of any building, structure or premises or part thereof, where any condition in violation of this chapter shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation, shall be guilty of separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable to the fines and imprisonment herein provided. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), §§ 5.770-5.780; Ord. of 6-22-98, § 1) 
Sec. 102-11. - Protest petition. 
(a)  An amendment to a zoning ordinance by the city is subject to a protest petition. If a protest petition has been filed, the petition must be presented to the city council and it must approve the amendment by a vote of no less than two-thirds of its voting members for the amendment to pass. 
(b)  The protest petition shall be presented to the city council before final legislative action on the amendment, and shall be signed by one or more of the following: 
(1)  The owners of at least 20 percent the area of land included in the proposed change. 
(2)  The owners of at least 20 percent of the area of land included within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of the land included. 
If the land is publicly owned, it shall be excluded in calculating the 20 percent. 
(Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Secs. 102-12-102-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-31. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building inspector or by such deputies of his department as the building inspector may delegate to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.625) 
Sec. 102-32. - Duties of building inspector. 
(a)  The building inspector shall have the power to grant zoning compliance with occupancy permits, to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for the building inspector to approve any plans or issue any permits or certificates of occupancy for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in detail and found them to conform with this chapter. 
(b)  The building inspector shall record all nonconforming uses existing at the effective date of this Code for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of article V of this chapter. 
(c)  Under no circumstances is the building inspector permitted to make changes to this chapter nor to vary the terms of this chapter in carrying out his duties as building inspector. 
(d)  The building inspector shall not refuse to issue a permit when conditions imposed by this chapter are complied with by the applicant despite violations of contracts, such as covenants or private agreements, which may occur upon the granting of said permit. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.630) 
Sec. 102-33. - Plot plan. 
    The building inspector shall require that all applications for building permits for uses not covered by section 102-131 shall be accompanied by plans and specifications including a plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
(1)  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
(2)  The shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other structure already on the lot. 
(3)  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
(4)  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.635) 
Sec. 102-34. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any permit: 
(1)  Permits not to be issued. No building permit shall be issued for the erection alteration or use of any building or structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Permits for new use of land. No land heretofore vacant shall hereafter be used or an existing use of land be hereafter changed to a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(3)  Permits for new use of buildings. No buildings or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a use of a different class or type unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
(4)  Permits required. No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the City of South Lyon Building Code, Housing Law, or this chapter, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.640) 
Sec. 102-35. - Certificates. 
    No land, building, or part thereof shall be occupied by or for any use unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such use. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
(1)  Certificates not to be issued. No certificates of occupancy shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Certificates required. No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected, or altered shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
(3)  Certificates including zoning. Certificates of occupancy as required by the city building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this chapter. 
(4)  Certificates for existing buildings. Certificates of occupancy shall be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Record of certificates. A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the building inspector and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
(6)  Certificates for dwelling accessory buildings. Buildings or structures accessory to dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
(7)  Application for certificates. Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building inspector on forms furnished by that department, and such certificates shall be issued within five days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof, or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid five-day period. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.645) 
Sec. 102-36. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair or moving of any building, structure or part thereof shall notify the building inspector immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.650) 
Sec. 102-37. - Fees. 
(a)  Fees for zoning change review, site plan review for a project requiring review under section 102-131, uses permitted subject to special conditions, inspection and the issuance of permits or certificates or copies thereof required or issued under the provisions of this chapter may be collected by the building inspector in advance of issuance. The amount of such fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall cover the cost of inspection and supervision resulting from enforcement of this chapter. 
(b)  Additionally, the city may require the payment of reasonable fees for zoning permits as a condition to the granting of authority to use, erect, alter, or locate dwellings, buildings, and structures, including tents and recreational vehicles, within a zoning district established under this act. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.655; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-38. - Security for completion of improvements. 
    All improvements shown on the site plan shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, where it would be impractical to delay occupancy prior to the completion of certain improvements, a temporary certificate of occupancy can be issued upon the approval of the building inspector if an adequate guarantee as required in section 102-39 is presented to the city to secure the improvements. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.660) 
Sec. 102-39. - Guarantee. 
(a)  Guarantee in the form of a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond shall be provided in a form acceptable to the city. The amount of such guarantee shall cover the estimated cost of all improvements not normally covered in the building permit, i.e., berms, walls landscaping, lighting, surfacing of drives, parking, service drives, acceleration/deceleration lanes, bypass lanes and other traffic control devices, etc. This money shall be deposited with the clerk of the city at the time of issuance of the permit authorizing the activity. The guarantee shall include a schedule of costs assigned to the different elements after inspection of work and approval of the building inspector. Any partial release of funds shall be less than ten percent which shall be retained by the city until all work has been completed and subsequently inspected and approved by the building inspector. 
(b)  If more than one bond or guarantee is involved in construction of the improvements required in this section, each such assurance shall be treated as a separate agreement and the ten percent holdback may be released upon satisfactory completion of such phase of construction and approval of the building inspector. 
(c)  In instances where all improvements, as required in this section, are not completed, and a temporary certificate of occupancy is requested, the estimated cost of such improvement shall be verified by the building inspector, particularly with respect to any delay to another construction season. In those instances where the estimated cost has changed, then a revised guarantee, acceptable to the city, shall be filed with the clerk covering such improvements. 
(d)  This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit, or surety bond has been deposited under the land division act, 1967 PA 288. MCL 560.101 to 560.293. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.665; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Secs. 102-40-102-60. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AUTHORITY OF PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 102-61. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The city planning commission is hereby designated the commission as specified in Act 110 Public Acts of Michigan 2006, as amended, together with such other powers and duties as are given to such commission by the provisions of this chapter, including authority to act on all matters requiring approval or recommendation of such commission. 
(b)  One member of the planning commission shall serve as a member of the board of appeals. 
(c)  The planning commission shall hold two annual open meetings giving 15 days notice via publication. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.670; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-62. - Zoning commission. 
    The planning commission is hereby designated as the commission specified in Act 110 of the Public Acts of 2006, as amended, and shall perform the zoning duties of said commission as provided in the statute in connection with the amendment of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.750; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-63. - Authority to approve uses. 
    Whenever in this chapter the lawful exercise or existence of a use requires the approval of the city planning commission, such commission is hereby authorized and directed to investigate the matter requiring such approval, to conduct a hearing thereon, to make a determination, to either grant or refuse the approval and to do all things reasonably necessary to the making of such investigation and determination, subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.675) 
Sec. 102-64. - Hearing; notice. 
    Upon receipt of an application for a special land use approval, a conditional use approval, a planned development approval, a single-family cluster approval or any other land use approval which requires a decision on discretionary grounds, one notice that a request has been received shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall indicate that a public hearing on the special land use request may be requested by any property owner or the occupant of any structure located within 300 feet of the property being considered for a special land use regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. It shall be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered, to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet, except that the notice shall be given not less than 15 days before the application will be considered. The notice must also describe the nature of the request, state when and where the request will be considered, and indicate when and where written comments will be received. Additionally, the notice shall indicate the property that is the subject of the request and shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property unless no such addresses exist. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.680; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-65. - Surveys and plans. 
    Where the planning commission is empowered to approve certain uses of premises under the provisions of this chapter or in cases where the commission is required to make an investigation, the applicant shall furnish such surveys, plans or other information as may be reasonably required by said commission for the proper evaluation and consideration of the matter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.690) 
Sec. 102-66. - Special land uses. 
(a)  Whenever a special land use, namely, a use permitted subject to special conditions, is requested pursuant to sections 102-203, 102-233, 102-248, 102-263, 102-278, 102-293, 102-308, 102-323, 102-338, 102-353, 102-367(4), 102-368, 102-384 and 102-432, then the provisions and conditions of this section shall apply in addition to the provisions and conditions of the other aforesaid sections and the following sections. 
(b)  The planning commission shall have the authority to grant special land use permits and to attach conditions to a permit. Only those uses listed in sections 102-203, 102-233, 102-248, 102-263, 102-278, 102-293, 102-308, 102-323, 102-338, 102-353, 102-367(4), 102-368, 102-384 and 102-432 shall be considered for special land use permit review and approval. 
(c)  Application for a special land use permit shall be made by filing the application form, required information, and required fee with the building inspector. The fee shall be set by resolution by the city council, except that no fee shall be required for a special land use permit application for the construction of a single-family residence or of any governmental body or agency. No part of the fee shall be returnable to the applicant. The building inspector shall transmit a copy of the application and submitted information to the planning commission. 
(d)  An application for a special land use permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, and telephone number. 
(2)  The names and addresses of all record owners and proof of ownership. 
(3)  The applicant's interest in the property, and, if the applicant is not the fee-simple owner, the owner's signed authorization for the application. 
(4)  Legal description, address, and tax parcel number of the property. 
(5)  A scaled and accurate survey drawing correlated with a legal description and showing all existing buildings, drives, and other improvements. 
(6)  A detailed description of the proposed use. 
(7)  A site plan, if requested by the planning commission, which plan shall meet all the requirements of section 102-131. 
(e)  The planning commission shall review the particular circumstances and facts of each proposed use in terms of the following standards and required findings, and with respect to any additional standards set forth in this chapter. The planning commission shall find and report adequate data, information, and evidence showing that the proposed use meets all required standards; 
(1)  Will be harmonious, and in accordance with the objectives, intent, and purpose of this chapter; 
(2)  Will be compatible with a natural environment and existing and future land uses in the vicinity; 
(3)  Will be compatible with the city master plans; 
(4)  Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage ways and structures, refuse disposal, or that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately for such services; and 
(5)  Will not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to existing or future neighboring uses, persons, property, or the public welfare; and 
(6)  Will not create additional requirements at public costs for public facilities and services that will be detrimental to the economic welfare of the community. 
(f)  The planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny special land use permit application. The planning commission's decision, the basis for their decisions, and all conditions imposed, shall be described in a written statement which shall be made a part of the record of the meeting. 
(g)  In granting a special land use permit, the planning commission shall impose any conditions it deems necessary to achieve the objective and standards of this chapter, the standards of the City or Village Zoning Act, and the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. Failure to comply with such conditions shall be considered a violation of this chapter. An approved special land use permit, including all tax conditions, shall run with the parcel in the approval and shall remain unchanged except upon the consent of the planning commission. Any such changes shall be entered into city records and recorded in the minutes of the planning commission meeting at which the action occurred. The procedures required for an original application shall be followed with respect to any proposed changes. 
(h)  An application for a special land use permit which has been denied wholly or in part by the planning commission shall not be resubmitted for a period of 365 days from the date of denial, except on grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions found by the planning commission to be valid. 
(i)  A special conditional use approval runs with the land until such time as the use designated in the "approval" is changed by the occupant. The land then reverts back to only the uses permitted in that specific zoning district. 
(j)  The decision of the planning commission with respect to a special land use permit shall not be appealable to the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.695) 
Sec. 102-67. - Hearings; matter to be considered. 
    In making any recommendations or approvals on special land uses, conditional uses, planned development districts, single-family cluster developments or other matters authorized by law, the planning commission and the city council, where its approval is also required, shall consider and apply the following standards: 
(1)  Whether or not the use involved is consistent with and promotes the intent and purpose of this chapter. 
(2)  Whether or not the use involved is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use. 
(3)  Whether or not the use involved is consistent with the public health, safety and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.700) 
Sec. 102-68. - Conditions for approval. 
    Reasonable conditions may be required in conjunction with the approval of a special land use, conditional use, planned development district, single-family cluster development or other land uses or activities permitted by discretionary decision. The conditions may include conditions necessary to insure that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall do the following: 
(1)  Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity, and the community as a whole. 
(2)  Be reasonably compatible with the city's master plan for future land use. 
(3)  Be related to the valid exercise of the policy power and purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity. 
(4)  Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning regulations; be related to the standards established in the ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration, and be necessary to insure compliance with those standards. 
(5)  The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority and the landowner. The approving authority shall maintain a record of changes granted in conditions. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.705) 
Secs. 102-69-102-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS 

Sec. 102-81. - Creation and membership. 
(a)  There is established a board of zoning appeals which shall perform its duties and exercise its powers as provided in Article VI of Public Acts 110 of 2006 as amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this title be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. 
(b)  The board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council. Appointments shall be as follows: appointments for the first year shall be for a period of one, two and three years, respectively, so as nearly as may be to provide for the appointment of an equal number each year, thereafter each member to hold office for the full three-year term. One member may also be a member of the planning commission. The remaining members shall be selected from the electors residing in the zoning jurisdiction. Membership shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the local unit of government. 
(c)  One regular member may be a member of the city council but shall not serve as chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. 
(d)  An employee or contractor of the city may not serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals. 
(e)  The city may also if it so desires appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members of the board of appeals using the same criteria to select a regular board member. The alternate members may be called to sit as regular members of the board of appeals in the absence of any regular member if the regular member is unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. The alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the board of appeals. 
(f)  A member of the zoning board of appeals may be paid a reasonable per diem and reimbursed for expenses actually incurred in the discharge of his or her duties. 
(g)  A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed by the city council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. 
(h)  A successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. Vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.710; Ord. of 4-14-08; Ord. No. 01-18, Pt. I, 3-12-18) 
Sec. 102-82. - Meetings. 
    All meetings of the board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board may determine. All hearings conducted by the board shall be open to the public. The city clerk, or his representatives, shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact; and shall also keep records of its hearing and other official action. The minutes shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Five members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of its business. The board shall have the power to subpoena and require the attendance of witnesses, administer oaths, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.715; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-83. - Appeal. 
(a)  An appeal may be taken to the board of appeals by any person, firm, or corporation, or by any officer, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector. Such appeal shall be taken within such time as shall be prescribed by the board of appeals by general rule, by filing with the building inspector and with the board of appeals a notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. The building inspector shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building inspector certifies to the board of appeals after notice of appeal has been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, otherwise than by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record. 
(b)  The board shall select a reasonable time and place for the hearing of the appeal and give notice thereof in the same manner as a variance hearing to the parties and shall render a decision on the appeal without unreasonable delay. Any person may appear and testify at the hearing, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. 
(c)  The appeals board shall have the authority to hear appeals concerning: 
(1)  All questions that arise in the administration of zoning ordinance, including interpretation of the zoning map. 
(2)  All administrative orders, requirements, decision or determination made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  All decisions of the zoning administrator. 
(4)  All decisions concerning site plan review. 
(5)  All decisions of the planning commission concerning planned unit developments. 
(d)  Upon receipt of a demand for appeal, the administrator will review the demand for appeal to insure it is complete and the fee is paid. If the application is not complete the administrator will return the application to the applicant with a letter that specifies the additional material required, otherwise the administrator and chairman of the appeals board shall establish a date to hold a hearing on the appeal. 
(e)  The appeals board shall hold a hearing on the demand for appeal. Those wishing representation at said hearing are entitled to appear by agent or attorney. The appeals board will base its decisions on variances from the strict requirements of this article so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done based on the following standards: 
(1)  For dimensional variances: A dimensional variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following: 
a.  That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not due to the applicants personal or economic difficulty. 
b.  That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions of the property owner or previous property owners. 
c.  That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other dimensional requirements will unreasonably prevent the property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with those regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 
d.  That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to the other property owners in the district. 
e.  That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of property in the neighborhood or zoning district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.720; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-84. - Fees. 
    The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals, which the secretary shall forthwith pay over to the city treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the City of South Lyon. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.725) 
Sec. 102-85. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property, nor to make any change in the terms of this chapter, nor to permit any use in a district in which it is not permitted, but does have power to act on these matters where this chapter provides for an administrative review, interpretation, exception or special approval permit and to authorize a variance as defined in this section and laws of the State of Michigan. Said powers include: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the appellant that there is an error in any order, requirements, permit, decision or refusal made by the building inspector or any other administrative official in carrying out or enforcing any provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Variance. To authorize, upon an appeal, a variance from the strict application of the provisions of this chapter where it is found: 
a.  That there are circumstances or conditions applying to the property that do not apply generally to other properties in the same zoning classification. 
b.  That such variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right similar to that possessed by other properties in the same zoning district and in the vicinity, provided that possible increased financial return shall not of itself be deemed sufficient to warrant a variance. 
c.  That authorization of such variance will not be of substantial detriment to adjacent property, and will not materially impair the intent and purpose of this chapter or the public health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
d.  That the condition or situation of the specific piece of property or the intended use of said property for which the variance is sought, is not of so general or recurrent a nature as to make reasonably practical the formulation of a general regulation for such conditions or situation, a part of this chapter. 
e.  If a condemning agency seeks a variance pursuant to MCL 213.54(2), the potential benefits of the public use shall be considered. 
(3)  Exceptions and special approvals. To hear and decide, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, requests for exceptions, for interpretations of the zoning map, and for decisions on special approval situations on which this chapter specifically authorizes the board to pass. Any exception or special approval shall be subject to such conditions as the board may require to preserve and promote the character of the zone district in question and otherwise promote the purpose of this chapter, including the following: 
a.  Interpret the provisions of this chapter in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown upon the zoning map fixing the use districts, accompanying and made part of this chapter, where street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
b.  Permit the erection and use of a building or use of premises for public utility purposes, upon recommendation of the planning commission. 
c.  Permit the modification of the automobile parking space or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such modification will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such requirements. 
d.  Permit such modification of the height and area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of a lot which is of such shape, or so located with relation to surrounding development or physical characteristics, that it cannot otherwise be appropriately improved without such modification. 
e.  Permit temporary buildings and uses for periods not to exceed two years in undeveloped sections of the city and for periods not to exceed six months in developed sections. 
f.  Permit, upon proper application, the following character of temporary use, not otherwise permitted in any district, not to exceed 12 months with the granting of 12-month extensions being permissible: uses which do not require the erection of any capital improvement of a structural nature. 
The board of appeals, in granting permits for the above temporary uses, shall do so under the following conditions: 
1.  The granting of the temporary use shall in no way constitute a change in the basic uses permitted in the district nor on the property wherein the temporary use is permitted. 
2.  The granting of the temporary use shall be granted in writing, stipulating all conditions as to time, nature of development permitted and arrangements for removing the use at the termination of said temporary permit. 
3.  All setbacks, land coverage, off-street parking, lighting and other requirements to be considered in protecting the public health, safety, peace, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city shall be made at the discretion of the board of appeals. 
4.  In classifying uses as not requiring capital improvement, the board of appeals shall determine that they are either demountable structures related to the permitted use of land; recreation developments, such as, but not limited to: golf driving ranges and outdoor archery court; or structures which do not require foundations, heating systems or sanitary connections. 
5.  The use shall be in harmony with the general character of the district. 
6.  No temporary use permit shall be granted without first giving notice to owners of adjacent property of the time and place of a public hearing to be held as further provided for in this chapter. Further, the board of appeals shall seek the review and recommendation of the planning commission prior to the taking of any action. 
(b)  In consideration of all appeals and all proposed variations to this chapter, the board shall, before making any variations from the chapter in a specific case, first determine that the proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the inhabitants of the City of South Lyon. The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirements, decision, or determination of the building inspector, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter upon which it is authorized by this chapter to render a decision. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to give or grant to the board the power or authority to alter or change this chapter or the zoning map, such power and authority being reserved to the City Council of the City of South Lyon, in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.730; Ord. of 10-11-04(3); Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-86. - Orders. 
    In exercising the above powers, the board may, upon the concurring vote of the majority of the members, reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the building inspector from whom the appeal is taken. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.735; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-87. - Notice. 
    The board shall make no recommendation except in a specific case and after a public hearing conducted by the board. It shall by general rule or in specific cases determine the interested parties who, in the opinion of the board, may be affected by any matter brought before it. Notice will be given as follows: 
(1)  The notices shall be given not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing on a proposed zoning amendment and notices shall be sent to: 
a.  The applicant. 
b.  The owner(s) of the property, if different. 
c.  If the zoning amendment is for less than 11 adjacent properties: the owner(s) and occupant(s) of all real property within 300 feet of the boundary for the property for which the approval has been requested, as shown by the latest assessment roll, regardless of whether the owner and property is located in the zoning jurisdiction or not. 
d.  The general public by publication in a newspaper which circulates in the City of South Lyon. 
e.  Members of the planning commission, or city council and planning commission if the hearing is being held by the city council. 
(2)  The notice shall include: 
a.  The nature of the zoning amendment being requested. 
b.  The property(ies) for which the zoning amendment has been made. 
c.  If the zoning amendment is for less than 11 adjacent properties, also a listing of all existing street addresses within the property(ies) which is (are) subject to the zoning amendment. 
d.  The location where the application documents can be viewed and copied prior to the date of the zoning amendment hearing. 
e.  The date, time and location of when the hearing on the zoning amendment will take place. 
f.  The address at which written comments should be directed prior to the hearing on the zoning amendment. 
g.  For members of the planning commission only, a copy of the request for the zoning amendment, the draft of the zoning amendment, and supporting documents in the record. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.740; Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-88. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  No order of the board permitting the erection of a building shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(b)  No order of the board permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that where such use permitted is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in force and effect if a building permit for said erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is started and proceeds to completion is accordance with the terms of such permit. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.745) 
Secs. 102-89-102-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCEPTIONS 

Sec. 102-101. - Area, height and use exceptions. 
    The regulations in this chapter shall be subject to the following interpretations and exceptions. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.570) 
Sec. 102-102. - Essential services. 
    Essential services serving the City of South Lyon and essential transportation services authorized by state and federal law shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law and other ordinances of the municipality. Overhead or underground lines and necessary poles and towers to be erected to service primarily those areas beyond the municipality shall receive the review and approval, after a public hearing, of the board of appeals. Such review of the board of appeals shall consider abutting property and uses as they relate to easements, rights-of-way, overhead lines, poles and towers and further, shall consider injurious effects on property abutting or adjacent thereto and on the orderly appearance of the city. Any essential service shall not be considered as being classified in a zoning district and shall not thereby be granted the rights of any zoning districts other than those directly associated with the essential service. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.575) 
Sec. 102-103. - Voting place. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not be so construed as to interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in connection with a municipal or other public election. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.580) 
Sec. 102-104. - Height limit. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to farm buildings, chimneys, church spires or steeples, flag poles, public monuments and privately owned noncommercial towers or structures provided that the height of such building or structure shall not be greater than the minimum horizontal distance measured from the base of said building or structure to the nearest property line. The board of appeals may specify a greater height when the owners of adjacent land which lies within the free fall radius of the building or structure, who would therefore be most affected, are notified prior to a hearing on the requested variance. In determining whether a variance ought to be granted and particularly when a variance for a privately owned noncommercial tower is the subject of the variance request, the board of appeals shall consider the private and public value to be derived from the erection of said tower and balance that need against the legitimate concerns of surrounding property owners in making their decision. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.585) 
Sec. 102-105. - Lot area. 
    Any lot existing and of record on the effective date of this Code may be used for any principal use permitted in the district in which such lot is located, other than conditional uses for which special lot area requirements are specified in this chapter, whether or not such lot complies with the lot area and width requirements of this chapter. Such use may be provided that all requirements other than lot area and width prescribed in this chapter are complied with, and provided that not more than one dwelling unit shall occupy any lot except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter for required lot area for each dwelling unit. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.590) 
Sec. 102-106. - Lots adjoining alleys. 
    In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins any alley for the purpose of applying lot area requirements of this chapter, one-half the width of such alleys abutting the lot shall be considered as part of such lot. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.595) 
Sec. 102-107. - Yard regulations. 
    When yard regulations cannot reasonably be complied with, or where their application cannot be determined on lots of peculiar shape, topography or due to architectural or arrangement, such regulations may be modified or determined by the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.600) 
Sec. 102-108. - Porches and decks. 
    An unopened, unenclosed and uncovered porch or paved terrace may project into a required front yard for a distance ten feet, but this shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed canopies. Decks at or below the ground floor level may project into a required side or rear yard, not to exceed a depth of 25 percent of the depth of the required side or rear yard. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.605; Ord. of 12-8-97(2)) 
Sec. 102-109. - Projections into yards. 
    Architectural features such as but not limited to chimneys and bay windows may extend or project into a required side yard not more than two inches for each one foot of width of such side yard; but may not extend or project into any required yard more than three feet, except that no projection shall comprise more than 25 percent of the wall surface from which it projects. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.610) 
Sec. 102-110. - Access through yards. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, access drives may be placed in the required front or side yards so as to provide access to rear yards or accessory or attached structures. These drives shall not be considered as structural violations in front and side yards. Further, any walk, terrace or other pavement servicing a like function, and not in excess of nine inches above the grade upon which placed, shall for the purpose of this chapter not be considered to be a structure, and shall be permitted in any required yard. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.615) 
Sec. 102-111. - Lots having water frontage. 
    Those residential lots or parcels having water frontage and abutting a public thoroughfare shall maintain the yard on the water side as an open unobscured yard, excepting that a covered and/or uncovered boat well shall be permitted after review and approval of plans by the zoning board of appeals. Accessory structures shall be permitted in the setback between the abutting road right-of-way and the main building providing the front setback required in section 102-408 is met. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.620) 
Sec. 102-112. - Open storage on residential lots or parcels. 
    In residential areas materials used in the landscape improvements of the specific property on which used, fire wood or lawn furniture shall not be considered as being stored in the open. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.625) 
Secs. 102-113-102-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Sec. 102-131. - Site plan review (all districts). 
(a)  Submission. A site plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval of the following: 
(1)  Any use or development for which the submission of a site plan is required by a provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Any development, except single-family and two-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided as required in sections 102-476 and 102-477. 
(3)  Any use in an RT, RM, MH, OS, B, I, PD, or P-1 district. 
(4)  Any use except single- or two-family residential which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street. 
BERM ILLUSTRATIONS 

(5)  All residentially related uses permitted in single-family districts such as but not limited to churches, schools and public facilities. 
(6)  Building additions or accessory buildings shall not require planning commission review unless off-street parking in addition to that already provided on the site is required. However, the building inspector may refer such site plans to the planning commission for review. 
(7)  Site plans for site condominiums and planned developments shall follow the procedures as provided in section 102-132 and article VI, division 15 of this chapter, respectively. Site plans for subdivisions shall follow procedures of chapter 86, subdivisions. 
(b)  Compliance with requirements; fees. Each site plan submitted to the planning commission in accordance with the requirements of this chapter shall contain such information and be in such form as the planning commission may prescribe in its adopted rules for site plan submission. No site plan shall be approved by the planning commission until the same has been reviewed, where applicable, by the building inspector in coordination with other city departments, planning and engineering consultants and for compliance with the standards of the respective departments. Fees for review of site plans shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Required information. The following information shall be included on the site plan: 
(1)  A scale of not less than 1? = 50' if the subject property is less than three acres and 1? = 100' if three acres or more. 
(2)  Date, north point and scale, topography at two-foot contour elevations or spot elevations on a 50-foot grid of both existing and proposed grades, location of floodplains, wetlands and woodlands. 
(3)  A vicinity sketch showing location of the property and zoning abutting the property. 
(4)  The dimensions of all lot and property lines, showing the relationship of the subject property to abutting properties. 
(5)  The location of all existing and proposed structures on the subject property and all existing structures within 100 feet of the subject property. 
(6)  Typical floor plans and building elevation drawings shall be submitted. 
(7)  The location of all existing and proposed drives and parking areas. 
(8)  The location and right-of-way widths of all abutting streets and alleys. 
(9)  Plans for greenbelts, berms and landscape planting shall be submitted as required by the city. In those instances where open space development is proposed the layout and improvements proposed shall be submitted with cost estimates for such improvements. 
(10)  The names and addresses of the architect, landscape architect, planner, designer, engineer, or person responsible for the preparation of the site plan. 
(11)  For commercial developments, a sample of all exterior building materials shall be provided to all planning commission meetings. 
(d)  Preliminary site plans. Action on a preliminary site plan shall be taken by the planning commission when one of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  All requirements for site plan approval, as set forth herein, are met and a recommendation for approval has been forwarded to the planning commission by all reviewing agencies of the city. 
(2)  A site plan, by request of the applicant, needs an official denial by the planning commission in order to gain access to the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  In those instances where approval authority is vested with the city council, a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission to the city council. 
Preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission, or when required by the city council establishes site development feasibility. 
(e)  Final site plans (detailed engineering plans). Except where otherwise set forth in this chapter, final site plan approval shall be given by the planning commission when all conditions set forth herein for final site plans are complied with. The planning commission may waive final site plan approval and delegate such final site plan approval to city administrative personnel. In the process of reviewing a final site plan, the various reviewing agencies and departments shall consider. 
(1)  That all local, county and state requirements as may apply to the proposed use are met. 
(2)  All applicable engineering requirements are met. 
(3)  The final site plan shall remain unchanged from the approved preliminary site plan except as may be recommended by the planning commission. 
(4)  Final site plan approval, except as specifically permitted in subsection (e)(4)c. of this section, shall not be given until all the above requirements are met. No work shall commence on any site, except as specifically permitted herein, or any buildings requiring site plan approval and no permits shall be issued until after final site plan approval is granted. Final site plan approval shall be granted as set forth below: 
a.  All requirements for final site plan approval are met. 
b.  In those instances where approval authority is vested with the city council, a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission to the city council. 
c.  Upon request, the city may permit, when justifiable conditions are found to exist, and after preliminary site plan approval has been given, the movement of soil on the site, prior to final site plan approval, provided: 
1.  A grading plan, drawn to city specifications and when necessary to county specifications, has been reviewed and approved. 
2.  A soil erosion permit, when required, has been secured from the county. 
3.  A site water run off permit from the department of natural resources. 
(f)  Review considerations. In the process of reviewing the site plan, the planning commission shall consider: 
(1)  The location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to streets giving access to the site, and in relation to pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  The traffic circulation features within the site and location of automobile parking areas; and may make such requirements with respect to any matters as will assure: 
a.  Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
b.  Satisfactory and harmonious relationships between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
c.  In those instances where nonresidential land uses abut areas zoned for residential purposes, access to streets by means of curb cuts or driveways to and from such nonresidential land uses shall be limited to those streets that are zoned for nonresidential land use. In those instances where corner lots abut both a residential street and a nonresidential street, access may be allowed to the residential street only if properties immediately opposite across such street are zoned for nonresidential purposes and turning movements to such residential street shall be restricted to only allow a turn toward the nonresidential street. 
(3)  The planning commission may further require landscaping, fences, and walls in pursuance of these objectives and same shall be provided and maintained as a condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to which they are appurtenant. 
(4)  Uses permitted in this chapter shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  In those instances where the planning commission finds that an excessive number of ingress or egress points may occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, or where the city master plan designates thoroughfares for the provisions of marginal service roads, the commission may require marginal service roads and to assure adequate traffic circulation on the site, may require the development of parking so that contiguous lots on abutting properties will allow traffic circulation from one property to another without re-entering the public thoroughfare. 
b.  The pavement of the marginal service road shall be located 30 feet from the future right-of-way line of the thoroughfare and shall be at least 24 feet wide. Such service road shall be an easement which will permit the use of the service road for traffic circulation from one property to another. Such easement shall be in a written form acceptable to the city and approved by the city council prior to the issuance of a building permit. No permanent structures such as curbs shall be permitted within the easement. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the easement so that it remains usable as a means of getting from one property to another. 
The easement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
c.  In reviewing the site plan, the planning commission may permit parking in the easement area, provided that the layout is such that parking can be removed at a later date when the marginal service road is needed for access to adjacent properties without disrupting the layout of the parking area. Temporary parking spaces permitted within the marginal service road easement shall not be included in computing the minimum off-street parking requirements under section 102-476. 
d.  Where marginal service roads are required, the planning commission shall recommend that the entire 24-foot area be paved up to the abutting properties. 

Backing from parking spaces onto the marginal service road shall not be permitted except on a temporary basis. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the marginal service road at the property line and the building inspector shall maintain a record of all marginal service road elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. Marginal service road elevations shall conform to elevations established by the city or, if not so established, be not more than one foot above or below the elevation of the adjoining property. Paving of the marginal service road shall meet construction specifications set by the city. 
e.  The 30-foot setback area between the future road right-of-way and the marginal service road shall be kept in grass and landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the planning commission. The maintenance of the grass and landscaped area shall be the obligation of the abutting property owner. 
f.  Temporary entrances and exits may be approved for individual sites provided money is placed in escrow to assure elimination of temporary entrances and exits. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until monies have been deposited with the city. As a guideline, the following National Highway Institute standards may be utilized by the planning commission in determining spacing for temporary entrances and exits. 
Highway 
Speed 
(mph) Minimum 
Spacing 
(Feet) 20  85 25 105 30 125 35 150 40 185 45 230 50 275  
g.  In determining which entrances and exits will be permanent and which shall be temporary, the planning commission shall generally be guided by a minimum distance of 600 feet between entrances and exits and by the location of existing or approved drives on the opposite side of the street. 
h.  Before obtaining a building permit for a permitted use, the owners of all property shall submit to the city a properly executed and witnessed license agreement which gives the city council the authority to open and close marginal service roads and driveways whenever necessary in order to guarantee, to the satisfaction of the city council, a safe and efficient movement of traffic. The license may be recorded in the office of register of deeds of Oakland County, Michigan. Acceptance of this license shall in no way obligate the city to build, repair, maintain or clear the marginal service roads and no public funds may be spent by the city to build, repair, maintain or close the marginal service roads. The intent of this subsection is to require owners to construct a marginal service drive across the front of their property and to allow the city to enforce its traffic ordinances movement of traffic. All necessary pavement markings, signs and signals will be provided in accord with acceptable traffic engineering standards by the adjacent property owners. 
(g)  Expiration The approval of any site plan under the provisions of this article, other than subdivision plats, which shall follow the procedures set forth in the platting sections of the Michigan Land Division Act, as amended, and the applicable standards of the South Lyon Subdivision Regulations, shall expire one year after the date that site plan approval is given, whether it is preliminary or final site plan approval, unless actual construction and development have been commenced within the time limitations of the original one year approval period, and construction is in conformity with the approved final site plan. If construction and development have commenced within the original one year approval period then site plan approval shall continue for a period of five years from the date final site plan approval was given, provided no lapse in the continuous construction and development of the property takes place until all development and construction is completed and approved by the city. In the event that a lapse in development and construction on the property should take place and development and construction is not commenced again on the property, site plan approval shall continue for a period of one year from the last inspection date registered on the building permit. One year after that date, site plan approval shall expire and no further construction or development shall thereafter take place on the property until site plan approval has been requested by the applicant and granted by the planning commission. When site plan approval of a proposed development shall expire for any reason, a previously approved site plan shall not again receive approval until or unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Any subsequent amendments to the standards of this zoning code, site engineering standards, or city council policies that may be applicable to the proposed development shall be met before site plan approval may be granted, and 
(2)  Any change in use not part of any previously approved site plan proposed for the development or any part thereof, shall meet all of the requirements of this zoning code, site engineering standards or city council policies that may be applicable to the new use before site plan approval may be granted. 
The building department shall not issue a building permit for any type of development or construction on the basis of any previously approved site plan when that approval has expired, unless the site plan has received an extension from the planning commission or is re-approved. 
The fee for review of an expired site plan shall be the current fee that would be charged for the review of an initial site plan submittal. 
(h)  A development agreement with suitable guarantee may be required by the city to assure compliance with an approved final site plan. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.540; Ord. of 5-8-06(1); Ord. of 2-11-08(2)) 
Sec. 102-132. - Site condominium review. 
    Pursuant to authority conferred by section 141 of the Condominium Act, Act 59 of 1978, as amended, all condominium subdivision plans shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission and city council. In determining whether to approve a condominium subdivision plan, the planning commission and city council shall consult with the city attorney, city engineer, and city planner regarding the adequacy of the master deed, deed restrictions, utility systems and streets, subdivision layout and design and compliance with all requirements of the Condominium Act. Site condominium general requirements shall be as follows: 
(1)  Definitions. In addition to the definitions found in section 102-3, the following shall apply to this section: 
a.  In applying the provisions of chapter 86 to a condominium development as provided herein, the word "lot" shall be deemed to mean "condominium unit;" the word "subdivision" shall be deemed to mean "site condominium;" and the word "plat" shall be deemed to mean "condominium subdivision plan." 
b.  The definitions of the following terms as found in Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended, the "Condominium Act," shall also apply to this section: 
 Condominium project 
 Condominium subdivision plan 
 Condominium unit 
 Developer 
 Master deed 
c.  The following additional definition shall also apply to this section: Site condominium shall mean a condominium project wherein individual parcels of land constituting individual development sites are proposed for separate ownership and use, in fashion similar to a subdivision as defined in chapter 86. 
(2)  Preliminary site plan approval requirements. Prior to recording of the master deed required by section 72 of Act 59, Public Acts of 1978, as amended, a condominium project must receive preliminary site plan approval pursuant to section 102-131. 
(3)  Information requirements for preliminary approval. In addition to any other information required to be submitted by this chapter in connection with site plan approval, for a condominium project, a developer shall furnish the following information to the commission: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone numbers of the developer or proprietor of the condominium project, and any person, partnership, or corporation with any ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project is proposed to be developed together with a description of the nature of such interest. 
b.  The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will be developed together with tag identification number. 
c.  The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will be developed. 
d.  The purpose of the project (for example, residential, commercial, industrial, etc.). 
e.  Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
f.  A plan indicating the proposed method of sewage disposal, water supply, and stormwater drainage. 
g.  A copy of the proposed master deed, including all exhibits thereto. 
h.  A copy of any proposed restrictive covenants. 
In the event any of the above information or materials are changed or revised prior to certificates of occupancy units, such revisions or changes shall be forwarded to the building inspector. 
(4)  Standards for preliminary approval. 
a.  The standards and procedures found in this chapter relative to site plan approval shall apply to any condominium project in the city. 
b.  In addition to the above, a site condominium project shall also comply with following restrictions, regulations, and standards of chapter 82, article III, and sections 86-2, 86-62, 86-63, 86-64, 86-65, 86-66, 86-67, 86-68 and 86-69. 
c.  Private roads may be permitted, notwithstanding the provisions of subsection 86-62(b), provided such roads meet the balance of the requirements of this section. 
(5)  Final approval requirements. Following construction of the condominium development, and prior to issuance of any certificates of occupancy, the developer shall secure final approval from the planning commission. 
(6)  Information requirements for final approval. In connection with an application for final approval for a condominium project, a condominium developer shall submit: 
a.  A copy of the recorded master deed (including exhibits). 
b.  A copy of any recorded restrictive covenants. 
c.  Two copies of an "as-built survey." 
d.  A copy of the site plan on photographic hard copy, laminated photostatic copy or mylar sheet of at least 13 by 16 inches with an image not to exceed 101/2 by 14 inches. 
e.  Appropriate approvals from the State of Michigan and/or County of Oakland for any improvements for which such approvals are required. 
f.  A fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
(7)  Standards for final approval/temporary occupancy permits. 
a.  The commission shall review the information submitted to insure that the condominium development has been constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and any other applicable provisions of this Code. 
b.  In the event required monuments, stormwater drainage facilities, sewage disposal facilities, water supply facilities, or any other required improvements are not completed at the time the request for final approval is made, the commission may grant final approval, and allow temporary occupancy permits for a specific period of time and for any part of the condominium development, provided that a deposit in the form of cash, certified check, or irrevocable letter or credit be made with the city, in form and amount as determined by the commission, to insure the installation and/or completion of such improvements without cost to the city. 
c.  All condominium projects shall comply fully with all applicable state and federal statutes. 
(8)  Conditions. In granting preliminary site plan approval or final approval, the commission may impose reasonable conditions in accordance with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(9)  Variances. In connection with the application of the standards set forth in subsection (4)b of this section, the commission may grant variances in accordance with section 86-5. 
(10)  Expandable or convertible condominiums. Prior to expansion or conversion of a condominium project to additional land, the new phase of the project shall undergo the preliminary site plan review and final approval review as provided herein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.545) 
Secs. 102-133-102-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - NONCONFORMITIES 

Sec. 102-151. - Intent. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to permit legal nonconforming lots, structures, or uses to continue until they are removed but not to encourage their survival. 
(b)  It is recognized that there exist within the district established by this chapter and subsequent amendments, lots, structures, and uses of land and structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future amendments. 
(c)  Such uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts involved. It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconforming uses shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding other structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
(d)  A nonconforming use of a structure, a nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use of a structure and land shall not be extended or enlarged after passage of Ordinance 153 by attachment on a building or premises of additional signs intended to be seen from off the premises, or by addition of other uses of a nature which would not be permitted generally in the district involved. 
(e)  To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of Ordinance 153 or this chapter and upon which actual building construction has been diligently carried on. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner; except that where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be diligently carried on until completion of the building involved. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(1)) 
Sec. 102-152. - Class A nonconforming uses or structures. 
    Those nonconforming uses or structures which have been designated by the planning commission, after hearing, shall be designated class A providing findings that the following conditions exist with respect to the use or structure: 
(1)  The use or structure was lawful at its inception. 
(2)  Continuance of the use or structure does not significantly depress property values of nearby properties. 
(3)  Continuance of the use or structure would not be contrary to the public health, safety or welfare or the spirit of the chapter. 
(4)  No useful purpose would be served by strict application of the provisions of this chapter with which the use or structure does not conform. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(2)) 
Sec. 102-153. - Class A conditions. 
(a)  The decision to grant a class A designation shall be made in writing setting forth the findings and reasons on which it is based. Conditions may be attached, including time limits where deemed necessary to assure the use or structure does not become contrary to the public health, safety, or welfare or the spirit and purpose of this chapter and further to assure that at least the following standards are met. 
(1)  Screening and landscaping should be provided in keeping with community standards to provide compatibility with adjacent uses. 
(2)  Effects which may have a negative impact such as lighting, noise or visual impact should be minimized. 
(3)  Where such use is in close proximity to homes, parking should not be permitted to utilize curbside parking to an extent greater than the immediate property frontage of the nonconforming use. 
(4)  New signage should meet zoning district requirements. Existing nonconforming signs may be required to be eliminated or reduced in size and number as the commission may, in its judgment, determine. 
(5)  The exterior building materials utilized in any alteration to the building shall be harmonious with materials on abutting properties whenever practical. 
(6)  Enlargement of a building may be allowed provided such enlargement does not create a more nonconforming yard setback condition which would impact on conforming properties in the immediate vicinity. 
(7)  The commission may require such other safeguards and improvements as it may deem necessary to protect conforming uses in the surrounding area. 
(b)  Once the planning commission has conducted a hearing and designated a nonconforming use or structure to the person, firm or partnership requesting the designation, said class A designation shall be deemed temporary until the planning commission has received written verification from the building inspector that the party requesting the class A designation has complied with all of the conditions set forth by the planning commission. 
(c)  Once the planning commission has received written verification from the building inspector, that the party requesting the class A designation has complied with said conditions, the class A designation shall become final, subject to other provisions of this chapter as hereinafter prescribed. 
(d)  No class A nonconforming use or structure shall be resumed if it has been discontinued for six consecutive months or 18 months in any three-year period. No class A nonconforming use or structure shall be used, altered or enlarged in violation of any condition imposed in its designation. 
(e)  No temporary class A nonconforming use or structure which has not met with all the conditions set forth by the planning commission within six months from the date of the nonconforming use or structure received a temporary class A designation shall receive final approval unless a request for extension of time in which to fulfill all of the conditions set forth by the planning commission is submitted in writing to the planning commission along with sufficient reasons as to why the temporary class A designation should be extended. 
(f)  Upon a showing of good cause, the planning commission may extend the temporary class A designation for the nonconforming use or structure for another six months. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(3)) 
Sec. 102-154. - Class B nonconforming uses or structures. 
    All nonconforming uses or structures, not designated class A, shall be class B, nonconforming uses or structures. Class B nonconforming uses and structure shall comply with all the provisions of this chapter relative to nonconforming uses and structures. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(4)) 
Sec. 102-155. - Nonconforming lots. 
    In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. This provision shall apply even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements not involving area or width or both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Yard requirement variances may be obtained through approval of the board of appeals. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(5)) 
Sec. 102-156. - Nonconforming uses of land. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, lawful use of land exists that is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased, nor extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(2)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter. 
(3)  If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than 12 months, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations specified by this chapter for the district in which such land is located. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(6)) 
Sec. 102-157. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases its nonconformity. However, a structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which does not increase its nonconformity. 
(2)  Should such structure be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 60 percent of its replacement costs, exclusive of the foundation, it shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is removed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(7)) 
Sec. 102-158. - Nonconforming uses of structures and land. 
    If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter that would not be permitted in the district under the terms of this chapter, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this chapter in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered except in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this chapter, but no such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building. 
(3)  If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, may be changed to another nonconforming use of the same or a more restricted classification provided that the board of appeals, either by general rule or by making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing nonconforming use. In permitting such change, the board of appeals may require conditions and safe guards in accord with the purpose and intent of this chapter. Where a nonconforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 
(4)  Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be resumed. 
(5)  When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for 12 consecutive months, the structure or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
(6)  Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land. 
(7)  The city may acquire, by purchase, condemnation, or otherwise, private property or an interest in private property for the removal of nonconforming uses and structures. The city may provide that the cost and expense of acquiring private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in local units of government. Property acquired under this subsection by a city or village shall not be used for public housing. 
(8)  The elimination of the nonconforming uses and structures in a zoning district is declared to be for a public purpose and for public use. The city may institute proceedings for condemnation of nonconforming uses and structures under 1911 PA 149, MCL 213.21 to 213.25. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(8); Ord. of 4-14-08) 
Sec. 102-159. - Repairs and maintenance. 
(a)  On any building devoted in whole or in part to any nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50 percent of the assessed (state equalized) value of the building, provided that the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of passage or amendment of this chapter shall not be increased. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(9)) 
Sec. 102-160. - Uses permitted under special conditions not nonconforming uses. 
    Any use permitted as a special condition use as provided in this chapter shall not be deemed a nonconforming use, but shall, without further action, be deemed a conforming use in such district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(10)) 
Sec. 102-161. - Change of tenancy or ownership. 
    A change of tenancy, ownership, or management of any existing nonconforming uses of land, of structures, or of structures and land in combination, shall be permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(11)) 
Sec. 102-162. - Residential dwellings in nonresidential districts. 
    Residential dwelling units, which are so used and existing at the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted in all nonresidential districts and shall not be considered a nonconforming structure for purposes of replacement as provided for in section 102-157 and section 102-158. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.470(12)) 
Secs. 102-163-102-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-181. - Districts established. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the City of South Lyon is hereby divided into the following districts: 
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
R-1A One-family residential district R-1 One-family residential district R-2 One-family residential district R-3 One-family residential district RT Two-family residential district RM-1 Multiple-family residential district RM-2 Multiple-family residential district RM-3 Multiple-family residential district MH Mobile home residential district  
NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 
OS-1 Office service district B-1 Community business district B-2 Central business district B-3 General business district I-1 Light industrial district I-2 General industrial district IRO Industrial research office district P-1 Vehicular parking district  
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.55) 
Sec. 102-182. - District boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the zoning map, City of South Lyon Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies that ordinance, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this chapter as if fully described herein. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.60) 
Sec. 102-183. - District boundaries interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys, shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(2)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines. 
(3)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following city limits. 
(4)  Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be construed to be midway between the main tracks. 
(5)  Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be construed to follow such shorelines, and in the event of change in the shoreline, shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline; boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerline of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such centerlines. 
(6)  Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections (1) through (5) of this section shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map. 
(7)  Where physical or natural features existing on the ground are at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered by subsections (1) through (6) of this section, the board of appeals shall interpret the district boundaries. 
(8)  Insofar as some or all of the various districts may be indicated on the zoning map by patterns which, for the sake of map clarity, do not cover public rights-of-way, it is intended that such district boundaries do extend to the center of any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.65) 
Sec. 102-184. - Zoning text interpreted. 
    Where uncertainty exists with respect to uses permitted in any district, or any condition set forth in this chapter, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  No use of land shall be permitted in any use district except those uses specifically set forth in the district. 
(2)  Uses or structures not specifically permitted in a zoning district shall be prohibited in such district. 
(3)  Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter where uses of yard areas are indicated as being permitted, the use of any other yard area for such use shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.70) 
Sec. 102-185. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Whenever any area is annexed to the City of South Lyon, one of the following conditions will apply. Land zoned or unzoned prior to annexation shall be automatically classified as an R-1A district until a zoning map for said area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend the appropriate zoning districts for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the city council. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.75) 
Sec. 102-186. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of South Lyon shall be vacated, such street, alley, or other public way or portion thereof shall automatically be classified in the same zone district as the property to which it attaches. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.80) 
Sec. 102-187. - District requirements. 
    All buildings and uses in any district, in addition to the requirements of the district, shall also be subject to the provisions of sections 102-4, 102-5, article III, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.85) 
Secs. 102-188-102-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - R-1A THROUGH R-3 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 102-201. - Intent. 
    The R-1A through R-3 one-family residential districts are designed to be the most restrictive of the residential districts. The intent is to provide for an environment of predominantly low-density, one-family detached dwellings along with other residentially related facilities which serve the residents in the district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.90) 
Sec. 102-202. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a one-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  One-family detached dwellings. 
(2)  Publicly owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways and recreational facilities. 
(3)  Cemeteries which lawfully occupied land at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(4)  Public, parochial and other private elementary schools offering courses in general education, and not operated for profit. 
(5)  Home occupation in compliance with the following provisions: 
a.  Home occupation shall not be permitted if said home occupation: 
1.  Changes the outside appearance of the residential character of the dwelling. 
2.  Occupies more than 25 percent of the ground floor area or basement of the dwelling. 
3.  Requires the employment of anyone in the home other than the dwelling occupants. 
4.  Generates excessive traffic, parking, sewage, or water use. 
5.  Requires parking for customers that cannot be accommodated on the site and/or not exceeding one parking space at curbside in the street. 
6.  Creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or results in electrical interference, or becomes a nuisance. 
7.  Results in outside storage or display of anything; including signs. 
8.  Requires the delivery of goods or the visit of customers before 6:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. 
b.  The following are permitted home occupations provided they do not violate the provisions of subsection (5)a of this section. 
1.  Dressmaking, sewing, and tailoring. 
2.  Laundering and ironing. 
3.  Home crafts, such as model making, rug weaving, and lapidary work. 
4.  Painting, sculpturing, or writing. 
5.  Telephone answering. 
6.  Computer application; not including sale of computers. 
7.  Salesperson office or home office of a professional person. 
8.  Tutoring, music, or dance teaching, limited to four students at a time. 
9.  Repair of clocks, instruments, or other small appliances which do not create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or results in electrical interference. 
10.  Day-care home (family). 
c.  The following are not permitted as home occupations: 
1.  Private clubs. 
2.  Repair shops which create a nuisance due to noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference. 
3.  Restaurants. 
4.  Stables or kennels. 
5.  Vehicle repair or paint shops. 
d.  Any proposed home occupation not referenced in subsections (5)b and (5)c of this section may be permitted subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (5)a of this section and subject to further review and approval by the planning commission pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 102-203. 
e.  Home occupation permits shall be limited to applicants who legally reside in the residence. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses, customarily incident to any of the above uses, provided such building and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.95) 
Sec. 102-203. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Farms, provided they do not create a public nuisance as defined by local and county health codes and provided further that they shall meet the minimum of standards of those codes. Livestock when corralled or tethered shall be so restrained no less than 80 feet from any property line. 
(2)  Apiaries, when located well into the interior of a property. 
(3)  Private stable as an accessory use for not more than one horse on a lot and when said zoning is not less than two acres in area, except that one additional horse may be stabled thereon provided there is an additional one-half acre of land for each additional horse. In no instance shall a horse be tethered nearer than 80 feet to any property line and shall in all instances be located in the rear yard. 
(4)  Public stables and riding academies subject to the following conditions: 
a.  There shall be maintained a minimum lot area of not less than ten acres, with a minimum lot width of not less than 500 feet. 
b.  There shall be provided an area of not less than one acre for each horse stabled. 
c.  Any structure for housing horses shall be not less than 100 feet from any exterior property line, except that any such structure shall not be less than 200 feet from any adjacent residential district. 
d.  Manure and stable refuse shall be treated and disposed of as required by local health codes. 
e.  Grandstands and other spectator facilities may be permitted provided that all such facilities are located in the interior of the site, and provided further that adequate off-street parking as required in sections 102-476 and 102-477 shall be provided with all access to off-street parking conforming to requirements of section 102-439. 
(5)  Churches and other facilities normally incidental thereto subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in article VII, division 2, of this chapter may be allowed provided front, side and rear yards are increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
(6)  Public, parochial and private intermediate or secondary schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. Access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
(7)  Utility and public service buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate the locating of said building within the district in order to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(8)  State licensed day care home (group) all in accord with Act 116 of 1973, as amended, for not more than 12 children for care during the day subject to the following: 
a.  Is located not closer than 1,500 feet to any of the following: 
1.  Another licensed group day care home. 
2.  Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the adult foster care facility licensing act. 
3.  A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under article 6 of the Public Health Code. 
4.  A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
b.  Has appropriate fencing for the safety of the children in the group day care home as determined by the city. 
c.  Maintains the property consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
d.  Does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. The city may limit the operation of a group day care home between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
e.  Off-street parking for not less than two cars in addition to requirements for the dwelling unit shall be provided. 
(9)  Private noncommercial recreational areas, institutional or community recreation centers; nonprofit swimming pool clubs, all subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed site for any of the uses permitted herein which would attract persons from, or are intended to serve, areas beyond the immediate neighborhood shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare as designated on the major thoroughfare plan and the site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 102-439. 
b.  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The planning commission may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is specifically determined that the users will originate from the immediately adjacent areas, and will therefore be pedestrian. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirement shall be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is constructed under this chapter, said pool area shall be provided with a protective fence, six feet in height, and entry shall be provided by means of a controlled gate. 
(10)  Golf courses, which may or may not be operated for profit, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The site shall be so planned as to provide all access in accordance with section 102-439. 
b.  The site plan shall be laid out to achieve a relationship between the major thoroughfare and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways, and parking areas which will encourage pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
c.  Development features including the principal and accessory buildings and structures shall be so located and related as to minimize the possibilities of any adverse effects upon adjacent property. This shall mean that all principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 200 feet from any property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided that where topographic conditions are such that buildings would be screened from view, the planning commission may modify this requirements. 
d.  Whenever a swimming pool is to be provided, said pool shall be provided with a protective fence six feet in height, and entry shall be by means of a controlled gate. 
(11)  Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical, or religious education and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites of at least 40 acres in area, and shall not be permitted on any portion of a recorded subdivision plat. 
b.  All access to said site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
c.  No building shall be closer than 80 feet to any properly line. 
(12)  Cemeteries provided that: 
a.  Not more than 51 percent of the land in the residential unit in which the cemetery is to be located is in recorded plats. 
b.  All access to said site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
(13)  Bed and breakfast operations as a subordinate use to single-family dwelling units subject to city licensing provisions and a determination by the city planning commission that the applicant has shown proof of historic significance of the dwelling unit. In making the determination, the planning commission shall reference the historic criteria developed and adopted by the commission. Bed and breakfast operations shall further be subject to the following: 
a.  Such dwelling shall abut a major thoroughfare as designated on the City of South Lyon Master Plan for thoroughfares. 
b.  Such dwellings shall meet all applicable codes and ordinances of the city, county and state. 
c.  Floor plans drawn to scale of all floors to be utilized for bed and breakfast activities shall be submitted to the city. 
d.  Buildings shall be suitable in character for the use proposed and shall not be cause for a change in character of the neighborhood. 
e.  The dwelling shall be a building exhibiting historical qualities with not more than six sleeping rooms available for guests of the bed and breakfast dwelling. 
f.  There shall be no separate cooking facilities provided for the bed and breakfast occupants. Meals, other than those served as a part of the normal operation of the household, shall be served only to occupants of the bed and breakfast facility. 
g.  Approved smoke detectors shall be provided in individual sleeping units and in common hallways. 
h.  Emergency egress lighting to assure continued illumination for a duration of not less than one hour in case of emergency or primary power loss. 
i.  An approved fire extinguisher in the common hallway accessible to all occupants. 
j.  Every sleeping unit shall have at least one operable window approved for emergency egress or rescue, except where the sleeping unit is provided with a door to a corridor having access to two remote exits in opposite directions. 
k.  Occupancy shall be of a transient nature for periods not to exceed one week in duration in any one month by any transient occupant. A guest registry indicating name, address, phone number, vehicle license number shall be kept indicating dates of arrival and departure of guests and shall be available to the city for inspection upon request. 
l.  An unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area may be provided. Such sign may be provided as a ground sign or a wall sign. 
m.  Off-street parking shall be provided based upon one space for each rental room and one space for the operator of the facility. It is the city's intent to not encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed or the integrity of the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In those instances where parking requirements cannot be met, the applicant may request special consideration from the planning commission. In such a case, the applicant shall submit an analysis of radius of the subject parcel. After analyzing this data, the planning commission may lower the number of the required parking spaces based on the fact that sufficient off-street parking exists in the neighborhood. 
n.  Such bed and breakfast dwelling shall not be located within 200 feet as measured from the nearest property lines of another such facility. 
(14)  Private pools shall be permitted as an accessory use within the rear yard only provided they meet the following requirements: 
a.  Private pools shall not require planning commission review and approval. 
b.  The outside of a pool wall shall not be located less than six feet from any rear or side lot line. 
c.  There shall be a distance of not less than four feet between the outside pool wall and any building located on the same lot. 
d.  No swimming pool shall be located less than 35 feet from any front lot line or any existing dwelling unit on abutting property. 
e.  No swimming pool shall be located in an easement. 
f.  For the protection of the general public, all areas containing swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height. The gates shall be of a self-closing and latching type, with the latch on the inside of the gate not readily available for children to open. Gates shall be capable of being securely locked when the pool is not in use for extended periods. 
(15)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(16)  Landscaping and snow removal vehicle storage subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Sites for vehicle storage of landscaping and snow removal equipment shall be limited to those sites whose side yard or rear yard abuts an industrial district(s). 
b.  There shall be maintained a minimum lot area of not less than four acres. 
c.  The maximum number of vehicles stored on site shall not be more than five. 
d.  The maximum number of trailers stored on site shall not be more than five. 
e.  All service vehicles and equipment must be screened from view and stored in the rear yard. 
f.  Trailers shall not exceed 20 feet in length. 
g.  Service vehicles shall be limited to those with one axle. 
h.  No product, material, or waste from another site shall be stored, dumped, or placed on site. 
i.  Hours of operation shall be between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. 
j.  This use shall be subject to yearly review to ensure compliance with the above conditions. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.100; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1; Ord. of 1-25-10(3)) 
Sec. 102-204. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building inspector subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  The building inspector may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (b)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. The building inspector or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building inspector may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.105) 
Secs. 102-205-102-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RT TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-216. - Intent. 
    The RT two-family residential districts are designed to afford a transition of use in existing housing areas by permitting new construction or conversion of existing structures between adjacent residential and commercial, office, thoroughfares or other uses which would affect residential character. This district also recognizes the existence of older residential areas of the city where larger houses have been or can be converted from single-family to two-family residences in order to extend the economic life of these structures and allow the owners to justify the expenditures for repairs and modernization. This district also allows the construction of new two-family residences where slightly greater densities are permitted. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.115) 
Sec. 102-217. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a two-family residential district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the one-family residential districts except farms, and private stables. The standards of the schedule of regulations applicable to the R-3 one-family residential district shall apply as minimum standards when one-family detached dwellings are erected. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.120) 
Sec. 102-218. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, the maximum density permitted, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building inspector subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  The building inspector may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (b)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. The building inspector or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building inspector may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.125) 
Secs. 102-219-102-230. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 102-231. - Intent. 
(a)  The RM-1 and RM-2, multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures and related uses, with height restrictions compatible with single-family residential districts, to serve the needs for the apartment type of unit in an otherwise low-to-medium density residential community. 
(b)  The RM-1 district is generally intended for the development of a planned complex of low-rise, low-density buildings on acreage parcels. The RM-2 district is intended for limited usage in areas where a land use transition is desired, but where the existing pattern of platting is on small lots or parcels. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.135) 
Sec. 102-232. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the multiple-family residential districts, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the RT two-family residential district. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.140) 
Sec. 102-233. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  General hospitals when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least five acres in areas. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
c.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 75 feet for front, rear and side yards for all buildings. 
(2)  Convalescent homes and child care centers when the following conditions are met: 
a.  There shall be provided on the site, the following minimum land area ratio: 
1.  Convalescent homes: One thousand square feet of total land area per bed. The 1,000 square feet of land area shall provide for a landscaping setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading and unloading space, and yard requirements. 
2.  Child care centers (not including dormitories) provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be fenced and screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
(3)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.145) 
Sec. 102-234. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building inspector subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  The building inspector may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (b)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. The building inspector or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building inspector may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
_____
(c)  Areas and facilities for recreation purposes, trees and landscaping shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Land area shall be provided and developed for recreation purposes in all multiple dwelling projects. Not less than 200 square feet of land area per dwelling unit shall be provided. All land area provided for recreation space may be used in computing dwelling unit density and shall be provided and developed in accordance with the following table: 
Development 
 Size (in 
dwelling 
  units) Maximum 
Number of 
Recreation 
 Sites Minimum Improvements Up to 100 units One Playground equipment, picnic facilities, and landscaping 101 to 200 units Two Playground equipment, picnic facilities, tennis courts or active recreation facility and landscaping 201 to 400 units Two Playground equipment, picnic facilities, pathways, tennis court, field sports area or active recreation areas and landscaping 401 to 600 units Three Two playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least two tennis courts, clubhouse and/or swimming pool, field sports area and landscaping Over 600 Four plus one additional area for each 300 units in excess of 600 units Three playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least three tennis courts, swimming pool and clubhouse, field sports area and landscaping  
_____ 
(2)  Not less than one 21/2-inch deciduous shade tree shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such trees shall be located in accord with an overall landscape plan for the development which shall be submitted for review and approval of the township building official. In those instances where existing trees meeting the size requirements above specified and in appropriate location are maintained on the site, such existing trees may be utilized in meeting these requirements. 
(d)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street, and site plan review as related to uses permitted in the district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.150) 
Secs. 102-235-102-245. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - RM-3 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS 

Sec. 102-246. - Intent. 
    The RM-3 multiple-family residential districts are designed to provide for planned multiple-family development in limited locations where such land use is not incompatible with single-family residential uses. This district is further provided to accommodate independent and dependent housing facilities as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.155) 
Sec. 102-247. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Principal uses permitted in RM-3 multiple-family residential districts shall be as follows: 
(1)  All uses permitted and as regulated in the RT two-family residential district. 
(2)  Multiple-family dwellings. 
(3)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.160) 
Sec. 102-248. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  General hospitals when the following conditions are met: 
a.  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least three acres in area. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
c.  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 75 feet or front, rear and side yards for all buildings. For every story above two the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
(2)  Care center independent and dependent housing, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  A minimum site of not less than five acres shall be provided. 
b.  All access to the site shall be in accordance with section 102-439. 
c.  Independent and dependent types of housing units shall meet the following standards: 
1.  Independent housing provided for in a detached single-family, two-family, multiple-family or cluster housing form with full facilities for self-sufficiency in each individual unit. A community center for this overall development may be provided. 
2.  Dependent housing provided for in a cluster housing or multiple-family housing form with central dining facilities provided as a basic service to each unit. A community center for the overall development shall be provided to support recreational and social activities. 
_____ 
3.  The following minimum requirements shall be provided for the elderly unit types permitted in subsections (2)c.1 and 2 above. 
Independent 
Housing Dependent 
Housing Maximum density 15 dwellings per acre 25 dwellings per acre Minimum usable floor area One bedroom 500 sq. ft. 350 sq. ft. Two bedroom 600 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft. Building and height setbacks and percent coverage of site-Same as article VII, division 2, of this chapter. Off-street parking Residents 1 space/unit 0.25 space/unit Guests 0.25 space/unit 0.25 space/unit  
_____ 
d.  Developments will be evaluated in terms of their convenience and/or accessibility by residents to various commercial, office and service facilities. Consideration will be given to the type of facilities proposed, resident needs, effective proximity to service facilities and transportation services to these facilities. 
e.  Developments will be evaluated as to suitability of site locations as it relates to abutting land uses and its surrounding neighborhood. Building plans and elevations shall be submitted with a site plan showing the site development and abutting land uses and buildings bordering the site to provide sufficient detail to allow for review of the suitability of the site location and its impact on the neighborhood. 
f.  All spacing shall meet requirements of section 102-457, footnote (d). No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
(3)  Convalescent homes or nursing home not to exceed a height of two stories, when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The site shall be so developed as to create a land-to-building ratio on the lot or parcel whereby for each one bed in the convalescent home there shall be provided not less than 1,500 square feet of open space. The 1,500 square feet of land area per bed shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirements, employee facilities, and any space required for accessory uses. The 1,500 square foot requirement is over and above the building coverage area. 
b.  No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
(4)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.165) 
Sec. 102-249. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, maximum density permitted and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  All dwelling units shall be reviewed by the building inspector subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  Dwelling units shall conform to all applicable city codes and ordinances. Any such local requirements are not intended to abridge applicable state or federal requirements with respect to the construction of the dwelling. 
(2)  Dwelling units shall be permanently attached to a perimeter foundation. In instances where the applicant elects to set the dwelling on piers or other acceptable foundations which are not at the perimeter of the dwelling, then a perimeter wall shall also be constructed. Any such perimeter wall shall be constructed of durable materials and shall also meet all local requirements with respect to materials, construction and necessary foundations below the frost line. Any such wall shall also provide an appearance which is compatible with the dwelling and other homes in the area. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be provided with exterior finish materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(4)  Dwelling units shall be provided with roof designs and roofing materials similar to the dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(5)  Dwelling units shall be provided with an exterior building wall configuration which represents an average width-to-depth or depth-to-width ratio which does not exceed three to one, or is in reasonable conformity with the configuration of dwelling units on adjacent properties or in the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
(6)  The dwelling shall contain storage capability in a basement located under the dwelling, in an attic area, in closet areas, or in a separate structure of standard construction similar to or of better quality than the principal dwelling, which storage area shall be equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. 
(7)  The building inspector may request a review by the planning commission of any dwelling unit with respect to subsections (b)(3), (4) and (5) of this section. The building inspector or planning commission shall not seek to discourage architectural variation, but shall seek to promote the reasonable compatibility of the character of dwelling units, thereby protecting the economic welfare and property value of surrounding residential uses and the city at large. In reviewing any such proposed dwelling unit, the building inspector may require the applicant to furnish such plans, elevations and similar documentation as it deems necessary to permit a complete review and evaluation of the proposal. When comparing the proposed dwelling unit to similar types of dwelling areas, consideration shall be given to comparable types of homes within 300 feet. If the area within 300 feet does not contain any such homes, then the nearest 25 similar type dwellings shall be considered. 
_____
(c)  Areas and facilities for recreation purposes, trees and landscaping shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  Land area shall be provided and developed for recreation purposes in all multiple dwelling projects. Not less than 200 square feet of land area per dwelling unit shall be provided. All land area provided for recreation space may be used in computing dwelling unit density and shall be provided and developed in accordance with the following table: 
Development 
 Size (in 
dwelling 
  units) Maximum 
Number of 
Recreation 
  Sites Minimum Improvements Up to 100 units One Playground equipment, picnic facilities, and landscaping 101 to 200 units Two Playground equipment, picnic facilities, tennis courts or active recreation facility and landscaping 201 to 400 units Two Playground equipment, picnic facilities, pathways, tennis court, field sports area or active recreation areas and landscaping 401 to 600 units Three Two playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least two tennis courts, clubhouse and/or swimming pool, field sports area and landscaping Over 600 Four plus one additional area for each 300 units in excess of 600 units Three playground equipment areas, picnic facilities, pathways, at least three tennis courts, swimming pool and clubhouse, field sports area and landscaping  
_____ 
(2)  Not less than one 21/2-inch deciduous shade tree shall be provided for each dwelling unit. Such trees shall be located in accord with an overall landscape plan for the development which shall be submitted for review and approval of the township building official. In those instances where existing trees meeting the size requirements above specified and in appropriate location are maintained on the site, such existing trees may be utilized in meeting these requirements. 
(d)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street, and site plan review as relates to uses permitted in the district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.170) 
Secs. 102-250-102-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - MH MOBILE HOME RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-261. - Intent. 
    The purpose of the MH mobile home residential district is to encourage a suitable environment for persons and families that by preference choose to live in a mobile home rather than a conventional single-family structure. In keeping with the occupancy characteristics of contemporary mobile homes, this division establishes moderately low density standards and permitted uses that reflect the needs of residents in the district. Development is limited to mobile homes when located in a subdivision designed for that purpose or a mobile home park and recreation facilities, churches, schools and necessary public utility buildings. All mobile home park development shall comply with Act 419 of the Public Acts of 1976, as adopted. Act 419 of the Public Acts of 1976 as amended shall supersede any requirements of this chapter where this chapter may provide more restrictive standards. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.180) 
Sec. 102-262. - Principal permitted uses. 
    Principal permitted uses in the MH mobile home residential district shall be as follows: 
(1)  Mobile homes. 
(2)  Mobile home parks. 
(3)  Mobile home subdivisions. 
(4)  State registered family day care homes for children. 
(5)  Publicly owned and operated parks, playfields, playgrounds and other recreational facilities. 
(6)  Public, parochial or other private elementary, intermediate, and/or high schools offering courses in general education, not operated for profit. 
(7)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above permitted principal uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.185) 
Sec. 102-263. - Uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use and subject further to such other conditions which in the opinion of the planning commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Churches and other facilities incidental thereto subject to the following: 
a.  The site shall be adjacent to major thoroughfare and all ingress and egress shall be limited to and directly upon said thoroughfare. 
b.  Buildings exceeding 25 feet in height shall be permitted, providing the front, side and rear yard setbacks are increased one foot for each foot the building exceeds 25 feet. 
c.  A continuous uninterrupted obscuring screening of suitable material of at least four feet in height but not more than six feet in height shall be provided along sides of the off-street parking area when adjacent properties are zoned residential. 
d.  A minimum of three acres shall be provided. 
e.  The front setback area shall remain as open space unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for landscaping, plant materials, or vehicle access drives. 
(2)  Public utility buildings and uses, but not including service and storage yards, when operating requirements necessitate locating within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
(3)  Nursery schools, state licensed group day care homes and day care centers (not including dormitories); provided that for each child so cared for, there shall be provided and maintained a minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area. Such play space shall have a total minimum area of not less than 5,000 square feet and shall be screened from any adjoining lot in any residential district. 
(4)  Temporary buildings for use incidental to construction work for a period not to exceed one year. 
(5)  Golf courses, public or private. If a golf course is a course open to persons other than those who reside in the mobile home park, it cannot be used as part of the overall permitted density. 
(6)  Accessory buildings customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(7)  State licensed adult foster care facility that provides residential services for six or fewer persons under 24-hour supervision or care, or similar private facility providing 24-hour supervision of non-violent patients in rehabilitation treatment or care for the aged with the following conditions for both public and private facilities. 
a.  All sleeping arrangements must conform to state requirements for state licensed foster care facilities. 
b.  Per person space requirements must meet state requirements for similar facilities. 
c.  Food preparation and kitchen facilities must meet state standards for similar public facilities. 
d.  Non public uses must present with the application a drawing lay out confirming that space requirements above can or will be met prior to occupation of the facility. 
e.  Inspection by building official/fire marshal for compliance with fire and building codes. 
(Ord. Of 2-13-95(2), § 5.190; Ord. of 6-11-07(2)) 
Sec. 102-264. - Area, height, bulk and placement requirements. 
(a)  Generally. The requirements for mobile home parks in the MH mobile home residential district are: 
(1)  The park shall be a minimum of ten acres in area. 
(2)  All buildings within the park shall be less than two stories or 25 feet in height. 
(3)  Mobile home parks shall be landscaped as follows: 
a.  If the mobile home park abuts an existing residential development, the park shall be required to provide screening along the park boundary abutting the residential development. 
b.  If the park abuts a nonresidential development, the park need not provide screening. 
c.  In all cases, however, a park shall provide screening along the park boundary abutting a public right-of-way. 
The landscaping shall consist of evergreen trees or shrubs of minimum three feet in height which are spaced so they provide a continuous screen at maturity. Alternative screening devices may be utilized if they conceal the mobile home park as effectively as the required landscaping described above. 
(4)  Open space requirements. 
a.  A mobile home park that contains 50 or more mobile home sites shall have at least one easily accessible open space area containing not less than 25,000 square feet. 
b.  The total of the land dedicated for open space shall not be less than two percent of the park's gross acreage that is approved for construction pursuant to a permit to construct, but not less than 25,000 square feet. 
(b)  Site sizes. 
(1)  The mobile park shall be developed with sites averaging 5,500 square feet per mobile home unit. This 5,500 square feet for any one site may be reduced by 20 percent provided that the individual site shall be equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained through the reduction of a site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal amount of land shall be dedicated as open space, but in no case shall the open space and distance requirements be less than that required under R 125.1946, rule 946, and R 125.1941 and R 125.1944, rules 941 and 944, of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(2)  Mobile homes shall be placed at least ten feet from the pavement of the internal road serving the mobile home unit. 
(3)  Mobile homes shall be at least 20 feet from the front, side, or rear of the nearest mobile home. In those instances when the mobile home is adjacent to a structure which is not used for living purposes such distance shall be not less than ten feet. 
(c)  Accessory buildings and uses. 
(1)  Generally. The provisions of section 102-431 relating to accessory building location and spacing shall not apply to mobile home parks. Accessory buildings in mobile home parks shall be subject to Mobile Home Rule 941. 
(2)  Storage areas. No personal property shall be stored outside or under any mobile home. Storage sheds may be used to store property but need not be supplied by the owner of the mobile home development. 
(3)  Storage/parking. If boats, boat trailers and utility trailers are permitted to be parked within the mobile home park, adequate parking spaces for such vehicles in a central or collective parking area shall be provided. This area shall be in addition to the automobile parking requirements of this chapter and shall be adequately locked, fenced and permanently buffered. 
(d)  Mobile home subdivisions. The requirements for mobile home subdivisions, in addition to the requirements contained in the Michigan Subdivision Control Act of 1967 and the City of South Lyon Subdivision Control Ordinance are: 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 
Single area: 5,000 square feet. 
Width: 45 feet. 
Double wide area: 7,200 square feet. 
Width: 60 feet. 
(2)  Maximum building height: 25 feet. 
(3)  Minimum yard setback: 
Front: 25 feet. 
Side: 10 feet. 
Rear: 25 feet. 
(4)  Maximum lot coverage by all buildings: 30 percent. 
(5)  In a mobile home subdivision, a corner lot which abuts upon a street on the same side of which other residential lots front in the same block, any building shall have a minimum side setback equal to the front setback of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.200) 
Secs. 102-265-102-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - OS-1 OFFICE SERVICE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 102-276. - Intent. 
    The OS-1 office service districts are designed to accommodate uses such as offices, banks and personal services which can serve as transitional areas between residential and commercial districts and to provide a transition between major thoroughfares and residential districts. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.210) 
Sec. 102-277. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an office service district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting and sales subject to the limitations contained in section 102-279. 
(2)  Medical office, including clinics. 
(3)  Facilities for human care such as hospitals, sanitariums, rest and convalescent homes, subject to the density of section 102-248. 
(4)  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations, and similar uses; drive-in facilities as an accessory use only. 
(5)  Personal service establishments including barber shops, beauty shops, and health salons. 
(6)  Off-street parking lots. 
(7)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(8)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.215; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-278. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  An accessory use customarily related to a principal use authorized by this section, such as but not limited to: a pharmacy or apothecary shop, stores limited to corrective garments or bandages, or optical service, may be permitted. 
(2)  Mortuary establishments, when adequate assembly area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in funeral processions, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments. 
(3)  Publicly owned buildings, telephone exchange buildings, and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, transformer stations, or gas regulator stations. 
(4)  In the case of an existing or former residential structure, located within the district and containing an office use or proposed for such use, may, after planning commission review and approval, permit one, two or multiple dwelling units within the structure provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  Dwelling units shall not be located below the second floor. 
b.  A minimum floor area of 500 square feet for one bedroom and efficiency apartments shall be provided. For each additional bedroom, an additional 100 square feet of floor area shall be provided. 
c.  The minimum requirements governing area and number of parking spaces in the RM-2 multiple-family residential districts shall be met. 
(5)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses, provided such buildings and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.220) 
Sec. 102-279. - Required conditions. 
(a)  No interior display shall be visible from the exterior of the building. 
(b)  The outdoor storage of goods or material shall be prohibited. 
(c)  Warehousing or indoor storage of goods or material, beyond that normally incident to the above permitted uses, shall be prohibited. 
(d)  Any use permitted in the district which would be established in an existing structure previously used as a residential dwelling and whose appearance is that of a residential dwelling, shall maintain, under its new use, the character and appearance of a residential dwelling if it is found that: 
(1)  More than 50 percent of the structures in the block and on the same side of the street are residential dwellings; or 
(2)  The principal structures adjacent to the subject parcel on two sides are residential buildings. 
(3)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required in sections 102-476 and 102-477 for all uses within the structure and shall be provided in the rear yard only. 
(4)  Signs pertaining to the ground floor use only shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of section 102-493. 
(e)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(f)  See provisions in sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street, and site plan review as related to uses permitted in the district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.225) 
Secs. 102-280-102-290. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - B-1 COMMUNITY BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-291. - Intent. 
    The B-1 community business district, as herein established, is designed to meet the day-to-day convenience and comparison shopping and service needs of persons in the community. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.230) 
Sec. 102-292. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a community business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter: 
(1)  Generally recognized retail businesses which supply commodities on the premises, such as but not limited to: groceries, meats, dairy products, baked goods or other foods, drugs, dry goods, clothing and notions or hardware. 
(2)  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to: repair shops, (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors or barber shops, photographic studios, and self-service laundries and dry cleaners or pick-up stations. 
(3)  Any service establishment of an office, showroom, or workshop nature of an electrician, decorator, dressmaker, tailor, baker, painter, upholsterer or an establishment doing radio or home appliance repair, photographic reproduction, and similar service establishments that require a retail adjunct. 
(4)  Business establishments which perform services on the premises, such as but not limited to: banks, loan companies, insurance offices and real estate offices. 
(5)  Professional services including the following: offices of doctors, dentists, osteopaths, attorneys, accountants and similar or allied professions. 
(6)  Business schools and colleges or private schools operated for profit. 
(7)  Private clubs, fraternal organizations and lodge halls. 
(8)  Restaurants or other places serving food or beverages, except those having the character of a drive-in or drive-through. 
(9)  Theaters, assembly halls, concert halls or similar places of public assembly when conducted within enclosed buildings. 
(10)  Mortuaries or funeral homes, subject to the conditions of section 102-278. 
(11)  Off-street parking lots. 
(12)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(13)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.235; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-293. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Dry cleaning establishments dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
(2)  Publicly owned buildings, public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings; electric transformer stations and substations; gas regulator stations with service yards, but without storage yards; water and sewage pumping buildings. 
(3)  Planned commercial center, as defined in section 102-3 and subject to the yard requirements of section 102-457, footnote (h), and the following conditions: Access shall be provided from a major street. 
(4)  Reserved. 
(5)  Business in the character of a drive-in or drive-through, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.  Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts, as regulated in section 102-433. 
d.  A six foot high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, OS-1, B-1, B-2, or B-3 districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall further meet additional requirements of section 102-436. 
(6)  Sidewalk or outdoor cafes, subject to all conditions and requirements of subsection 102-308(2). 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.240; Ord. of 9-11-95; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1; Ord. of 12-10-07(3)) 
Sec. 102-294. - Required conditions. 
(a)  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
(b)  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(c)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(d)  Site plans as required in section 102-131 shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(e)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading and unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street, and site plan review as relates to uses permitted in the district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.245) 
Secs. 102-295-102-305. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - B-2 CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-306. - Intent. 
    The B-2 central business district is intended to permit those uses which provide for a variety of retail stores and related activities, and for office buildings and service establishments which occupy the prime frontages in the central business district, and which serve the consumer population beyond the corporate boundaries of the city. The district regulations are designed to promote convenient pedestrian shopping and the stability of retail development by encouraging a continuous retail frontage and by prohibiting automotive related services and nonretail uses which tend to break up such continuity. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.250) 
Sec. 102-307. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a B-2 central business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Any generally recognized retail business which supplies commodities on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: foods, drugs, liquor, furniture, clothing, dry goods, notions or hardware. 
(2)  Any personal service establishment which performs services on the premises within a completely enclosed building, such as, but not limited to: repair shops (watches, radio, television, shoe, etc.), tailor shops, beauty parlors, barber shops, interior decorators, photographers and dry cleaners. 
(3)  Restaurants and taverns where the patrons are served while seated with a building occupied by such establishment and wherein said establishment does not provide as an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in or drive-through. 
(4)  Offices and office buildings of an executive, administrative or professional nature. 
(5)  Banks, when said establishment does not provide an integral part of, or accessory thereto, any service of a drive-in or drive-through. 
(6)  Public and quasi-public buildings such as, but not restricted to: 
a.  Municipal offices. 
b.  Municipal off-street parking lots. 
c.  Libraries. 
d.  Museums. 
e.  Fraternal organizations. 
(7)  Commercial recreation facilities such as theaters. 
(8)  Offices and showrooms of plumbers, electricians, decorator or similar trades, of which not more than 25 percent of the floor area of the building or part of the building occupied by said establishment is used for making, assembling, remodeling, repairing, altering, finishing or refinishing its products or merchandise, and provided that: the ground floor premises facing upon and visible from any abutting street shall be used only for entrances, offices or display. 
(9)  Business schools or private schools operated for profit; examples include the following: dance schools, music schools, art studios and child care centers provided no outdoor activities are located on the site. 
(10)  Newspaper offices and their printing facilities. 
(11)  Printing shops. 
(12)  Storage facilities when incident to and physically connected with any principal use permitted, provided that such facility be within the confines of the building or part thereof occupied by said establishment. 
(13)  Hotels. 
(14)  Bus passenger stations. 
(15)  Other uses which are similar to the above and subject to the following restrictions: 
a.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with consumers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail from premises where produced. 
b.  All business, servicing or processing, except for off-street or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise provided herein. 
c.  Outdoor storage of commodities shall be expressly prohibited. 
(16)  Accessory uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.255; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-308. - Principal uses permitted, subject to special conditions. 
    The following use may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for the use by the building inspector. In conducting its review, the building inspector shall be satisfied that the conditions imposed in this section are met. Furthermore, the building inspector at his or her discretion may impose other reasonable conditions that he or she may deem necessary in order to assure that adequate protection to the proposed use, to the neighborhood near it, and to abutting properties, is provided. 
(1)  To encourage and provide for the economic vitality of the central business district, residential occupancy shall be permitted in buildings of two stories in height or greater subject to the following conditions. 
a.  In buildings used for both business and residential occupancy, no dwelling unit shall: 
1.  Occupy any portion of the ground floor of the building at grade level. 
2.  Occupy the same upper floor area that is occupied by any nonresidential use, unless the dwelling unit or units are completely separated from the nonresidential elements on the same floor by a separate means of access. 
3.  Occupy any floor below a floor occupied by a nonresidential use. 
4.  Contain more than two bedrooms. 
5.  Have less than the floor area set forth in the schedule below: 
1.  Efficiency dwelling unit ..... 400 sq. ft. 
2.  One-bedroom dwelling unit ..... 500 sq. ft. 
3.  Two-bedroom dwelling unit ..... 600 sq. ft. 
b.  Off-street parking shall be provided as required in sections 102-476 and 102-477, except in those areas of the district where contiguous off-street parking is provided. 
(2)  Sidewalk or outdoor cafes. Outdoor cafes or restaurants subject to the following conditions. In the interest of promoting business by increasing activity and improving the general business climate, the city manager or his/her designee may issue revocable permits to businesses that apply for a permit to operate a sidewalk cafe or an outdoor cafe as an extension of or compatible with, the existing business on a portion of a city sidewalk adjacent to the business or on private property adjacent to the business. The permit may be issued under the following terms and conditions: 
a.  Sidewalk or outdoor cafe permits shall be issued if the city manager or his/her designee determines the occupancy will not: 
1.  Interfere with the use of the street for pedestrian or vehicular travel. 
2.  Unreasonably interfere with the view of, access to or use of property adjacent to said street. 
3.  Reduce any sidewalk width to less than five feet. 
4.  Interfere with street cleaning or snow removal activities. 
5.  Cause damage to the street or to sidewalks, trees, benches, landscaping or other objects lawfully located therein. 
6.  Cause a violation of any state or local laws. 
7.  Be principally used for off-premises advertising. 
8.  Be attached to or reduce the effectiveness of or access to any utility pole, sign or other traffic control device. 
9.  Cause increased risk of theft or vandalism. 
10.  Be in or adjacent to property zoned exclusively for residential purposes. 
b.  All businesses selling food or beverages to be consumed in a public sidewalk area or outdoor area adjacent to the business shall enclose the area with a temporary structure approved by the building inspector. Prior to approval, written plans shall be submitted to the building inspector. All construction shall conform with existing building codes and regulations of the city and shall not be permanent. Such plans shall also include the location of adequate trash receptacles. 
c.  Prior to the issuance of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe permit the applying business must provide the city with a certificate of liability insurance in an amount to be determined solely by the city. The certificate of insurance must be in effect for at least the period of the permit to be issued. In addition, the applying business shall, by written agreement with the city, indemnify and hold harmless the city from all claims or damages incident to the establishment and operation of a sidewalk cafe. 
d.  Prior to the issuance of a permit, a fee as specified from time to time by resolution of the city council shall be paid by the requesting business for the period of the permit. The period of a sidewalk or outdoor cafe permit shall not exceed 180 days. The dates and duration shall be specified on the permit. The permit shall be subject to immediate revocation for failure to properly maintain the area being used as a sidewalk or outdoor cafe, or for any other violation of this chapter. 
(3)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.260; Ord. of 5-8-06(2)) 

Sec. 102-309. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  Site plans as required in section 102-131 shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street and site plan review. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.265) 
Secs. 102-310-102-320. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - B-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICTS 

Sec. 102-321. - Intent. 
    The B-3 general business districts are designed to provide sites for more diversified business types which would often be incompatible with the pedestrian movement in the community business district or the central business district. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.270; Ord. of 3-12-12) 
Sec. 102-322. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a general business district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Any uses permitted in B-1 and B-2 districts as principal uses permitted and uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
(2)  Automobile salesroom, showroom, or office. 
(3)  Laundry and dry cleaning establishments performing their operation on the site. 
(4)  Other uses similar to the above uses. 
(5)  Bowling alleys, pool or billiard parlor or club, indoor archery, indoor tennis clubs, health clubs and other similar indoor commercial recreation establishments. 
(6)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.275; Ord. of 3-12-12) 
Sec. 102-323. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Outdoor sales space for exclusive sale of new or used automobiles, house trailers, or rental of trailers and/or automobiles, all subject to the following: 
a.  The lot or area shall be provided with a permanent, durable and dustless surface, and shall be graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water accumulated within the area. 
b.  Access to the outdoor sales area shall be at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  No major repair or major refinishing shall be done on the lot. 
d.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts as regulated in section 102-433. 
(2)  Motel, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b.  Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
c.  No guest shall establish permanent residence at a motel. 
d.  No kitchen or cooking facilities are to be provided, with the exception of units for the use of the manager or caretaker. 
(3)  Business in the character of a drive-in or drive-through restaurant, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A setback of at least 60 feet from the right-of-way line of any existing or proposed street must be maintained. 
b.  Access points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts, as regulated in section 102-433. 
d.  A six feet high completely obscuring wall shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned for R, OS-1, B-1, B-2 or B-3 districts. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. Said wall shall further meet additional requirements of section 102-436. 
(4)  Plant materials nursery for the retail sale of plant materials not grown on the site, and sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supplies subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The storage or display of any materials or products shall meet all setback requirements of a structure. 
b.  All loading and parking shall be provided off-street. 
c.  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, or other loose, unpackaged materials shall be contained so as to prevent any effects on adjacent uses. 
(5)  Gasoline service station for the sale of gasoline, oil, and minor accessories only, and where no repair work is done, other than incidental service, but not including steam cleaning or undercoating, vehicle body repair, painting, tire recapping, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, auto glass work, and such other activities whose external effects could adversely extend beyond the property line. 
a.  The curb cuts for access to a service station shall not be permitted at such locations that will tend to create hazards in the streets immediately adjacent thereto. Entrances shall be no less than 25 feet from a street intersection (measured from the road right-of-way) or from adjacent residential districts. 
b.  The minimum lot area shall be 15,000 square feet and so arranged that ample space is available for motor vehicles which are required to wait. Gasoline service stations which are intended solely for the sale of gasoline, oil and minor accessories and having no facilities for repair or servicing of automobiles (including lubricating facilities) may be permitted on lots of 10,000 square feet, subject to all other provisions herein required. 
(6)  Automobile repair shops (major) existing in the district at the time of adoption of this amendment shall be permitted as a special use of land provided the following conditions are met: 
a.  All operations shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
b.  Outdoor storage of motor vehicles awaiting repair shall be permitted in the interior side or rear yards only, and provided further, that: 
1.  Not more than five such vehicles shall be stored outside at one time and no such vehicle shall be stored on-site for more than 30 consecutive days. 
2.  All such vehicles shall be nonoperative. 
3.  All outdoor storage shall be screened from view as herein set forth. 
c.  No other outdoor storage of any parts, operational equipment or materials relating to the operation of the shop shall be stored outside, except up to two wrecker trucks, when used by the shop in its operations, may be parked outside within the designated and fully screened outdoor storage area. 
d.  No operations, principal or accessory, involving the use of any motor vehicle salvaging equipment such as but not limited to the crushing or bailing of vehicles shall be permitted and no operations that would take on the appearance or function of the motor vehicle salvage yard shall be permitted. 
e.  All access to the site shall be directly from a public street. 
f.  Outdoor storage existing on the premises at the time of adoption of this amendment, and which is clearly accessory to an existing motor vehicle repair shop on the premises, shall be permitted and may be expanded provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Outdoor storage shall consist of only those uses expressly permitted in this section. 
2.  Any expansion of an existing outdoor storage area shall be within a rear or interior side yard only. 
3.  All outdoor storage areas existing and proposed shall be fully screened from view in accordance with the screening requirements of section 102-436, except the planning commission may permit one of the following alternatives to the screening requirements of section 102-436: 
i.  Permit use of a six-foot high chainlink fence with heavy evergreen plantings located outside of and within four feet of the fence. All evergreen plantings shall be of the narrow type and shall be at least five feet in height at the time of planting. 
ii.  Permit the continued use and extension of existing screening devices in place at the time of adoption of this amendment, if in its opinion, the existing screening materials are of such substance and quality that they are and will continue to effectively screen outdoor storage from view. 
(7)  Minor automotive repair businesses such as muffler shops, shock absorber replacement shops, tire stores, undercoating shops and minor engine repair shops, subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Access to such use shall be directly to a major or collector street or shall be to a minor street which has direct access to an abutting major or collector street. 
b.  Access to and from such use shall not be cause for traffic to utilize residential streets. 
c.  Outdoor storage of parts or materials shall be prohibited unless such storage is within a fenced and obscured area which meets all setback requirements. 
d.  Vehicles shall not be allowed to be stored outside the building for more than 48 hours unless awaiting repair for which a "work order," signed by the owner of the vehicle, is posted in the vehicle so as to be visible from outside the vehicle. 
e.  Areas for off-street parking required for customer use shall not be utilized for the storage or vehicles awaiting repair. 
f.  All vehicle servicing or repair, except minor repairs such as, but not limited to, tire changing and headlight changing shall be conducted within a building. 
g.  Suitable containers shall be provided and utilized for the disposal of used parts and such containers shall be screened from public view. 
h.  A six-foot obscuring wall shall be provided and maintained on those property lines adjacent to or abutting a residential district. 
(8)  Automobile car wash subject to the following: 
a.  All buildings shall have a front yard setback of not less than 50 feet. 
b.  All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
c.  Vacuuming and drying areas may be located outside the building but shall not be in the required front yard and shall not be closer than 25 feet from any residential district. 
d.  All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided space off the street right-of-way and parking shall be provided in accordance with sections 102-476 and 102-477. 
e.  Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60 feet from the intersection of any two streets. 
f.  All off-street parking and waiting areas shall be hard surfaced and dust free. 
g.  All lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent residential districts. 
h.  A four-foot six-inch completely obscuring wall shall be provided where abutting to a residential district. 
(9)  Commercially used outdoor recreational space for children's amusement parks, miniature golf courses, subject to the following: 
a.  Children's amusement park must be fenced on all sides with a four foot six-inch wall or fence. 
b.  Adequate parking shall be provided off the road right-of-way and shall be fenced with a four-foot six-inch wall or fence where adjacent to the use. 
c.  All lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential districts. 
d.  A four-foot six-inch completely obscuring wall or fence must be provided where abutting or adjacent to a residential district. The height of the wall shall be measured from the surface of the ground. 
(10)  Commercial outdoor recreation facilities such as batting cages, archery ranges and similar activities all subject to the following: 
a.  No such activity shall be permitted within 200 feet of any residential dwelling. 
b.  The lot or area utilized for recreation activity shall be provided with a durable and dustless surface. 
c.  Off-street parking shall be provided in accord with article VII, division 3, of this chapter. In those instances where a joint use of parking facilities by more than one activity on a lot or parcel is proposed, such joint use may be permitted where it can be shown that parking demand for such joint uses will not create an overload of the parking area. 
d.  Lighting shall be shielded to be directed only on the activity on the site. 
e.  Noise levels shall not exceed 75 decibels at the property line of the site. 
f.  Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday; and from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday. 
(11)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(12)  Veterinary clinics and hospitals subject to the following: 
a.  Small animal walk areas shall be provided in an area other than public street right-of-way or sidewalk areas. 
b.  Outdoor areas, including animal walk areas, shall be cleaned and maintained at all times. 
(Ord. Of 2-13-95(2), § 5.280; Ord. of 12-10-07(3)) 
Sec. 102-324. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitting land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  Site plans as required in section 102-131 shall be submitted to the planning commission for its review and approval prior to issuance of a building permit. 
(c)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street and site plan review. 
(d)  All access to a site shall be from a major thoroughfare. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.285) 
Secs. 102-325-102-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - IRO INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH OFFICE DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-336. - Intent. 
    The IRO industrial research office districts are designed to provide for uses which are office or research type or industrial uses which have limited impact outside of the industrial building. The district is intended to encourage uses which have a high value per acre of land that will supplement the city's tax base. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.290; Ord. of 10-11-99(2)) 
Sec. 102-337. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In an IRO industrial research office district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this title: 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design and pilot or experimental product development. 
(2)  Office buildings. 
(3)  Data processing and computer centers, including service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment. 
(4)  Other uses similar to, but no more objectionable than, the above uses. 
(5)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above permitted uses. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.295; Ord. of 10-11-99(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-338. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted by the planning commission subject to the conditions imposed in this article for each use, including the review and approval of the site plan by the planning commission, and the imposition of special conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to ensure that the land use or activity authorized is compatible with adjacent uses of land, the natural environment and the capacities of public services and facilities affected by the land use, and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this article. 
(1)  Any of the following industrial uses when conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building: 
a.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceutical, toiletries, food products, hardware, and cutlery; tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
b.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling or treatment of articles or merchandise from the following previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, feathers, felt, fiber, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal (excluding large stamping such as automobile fenders or bodies), shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood (excluding saw and planing mills), and yarns. 
c.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
d.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other small molded rubber products. 
e.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios, and phonographs. 
f.  Laboratories-Experimental, film, or testing, 
(2)  Any of the preceding uses shall be subject to section 102-66, special land uses, section 102-67, hearings; matter to be considered; and section 102-68, conditions for approval. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.300; Ord of 10-11-99(2), § 1) 
Sec. 102-339. - Required conditions. 
    The following are required conditions for IRO districts: 
(1)  The outdoor storage of equipment, goods, or materials is prohibited. The outdoor loading and unloading of trucks or vehicles at truck bays is allowed; however, outdoor parking of any truck or vehicle for periods of longer than 24 hours shall not be permitted and shall be considered storage. 
(2)  Any use established in the IRO district shall be operated so as to comply with the performance standards set forth in section 102-440 and shall further comply with wall requirements as prescribed for I-1 districts set forth in section 102-436. 
(3)  All uses shall receive site plan review and approval by the planning commission prior to the issuance of any building permit. 
(4)  Off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule: 
a.  For office buildings of less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area, at least one loading space, separate from off-street parking, shall be provided in the rear or side yard only. 
b.  For office buildings of 100,000 square feet or more in gross floor area, at least one loading space with a dimension of at least 10 × 50 feet or 500 square feet in area, with clearance of at least 14 feet in height, in the rear or side yard only. 
c.  For industrial buildings, off-street loading shall be provided in accordance with section 102-478. 
d.  All loading and unloading shall be provided off-street in the rear yard or in interior side yard, and in no instance shall be permitted in a front yard. All loading and unloading areas shall be screened from public view. 
(5)  All activity shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.305; Ord. of 10-11-99(2), § 1) 
Secs. 102-340-102-350. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - I-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-351. - Intent. 
(a)  The I-1 light industrial districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehouses, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 district is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly or treatment of finished or semifinished products from previously prepared material. It is further intended that the processing of raw material for shipment of bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, not be permitted. 
(b)  The general goals of this use district include, among others, the following specific purposes: 
(1)  To provide sufficient space, in appropriate locations, to meet the needs of the municipality's expected future economy for all types of manufacturing and related uses. 
(2)  To protect abutting residential districts by separating them from manufacturing activities, and by prohibiting the use of such industrial areas for new residential development. 
(3)  To promote manufacturing development which is free from danger of fire, explosions, toxic and noxious matter, radiation, and other hazards and from offensive noise, vibration, smoke, odor and other objectionable influences. 
(4)  To protect the most desirable use of land in accordance with a well considered plan. To protect the character and established pattern of adjacent development, and in each area to conserve the value of land and buildings and other structures, and to protect the municipality's tax revenue. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.315) 
Sec. 102-352. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a light industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(2)  Any of the following uses when the manufacturing, compounding or processing is conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. That portion of the land used for open storage facilities for materials or equipment used in the manufacturing, compounding or processing shall be totally obscured by a wall on those sides abutting R-1A through R-3, RT, RM-1, RM-2, OS-1, B-1, B-2 and B-3 districts, and on any front yard abutting a public thoroughfare except as otherwise provided in section 102-436. In I-1 districts, the extent of such a wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such a wall shall not be less than four feet six inches in height and may, depending upon land usage, be required to be eight feet in height, and shall be subject further to the requirements of sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter. A chainlink fence, with intense evergreen shrub planting, may be considered an obscuring wall. The height shall be determined in the same manner as the wall height as above set forth. 
a.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities. 
b.  The manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging or treatment of products such as, but not limited to: bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, gauge and machine shops. 
c.  The manufacture, compounding, assembling, or treatment of articles or merchandise from previously prepared materials: bone, canvas, cellophane, cloth, cork, elastomers, feathers, felt, fibre, fur, glass, hair, horn, leather, paper, plastics, rubber, precious or semi-precious metals or stones, sheet metal, shell, textiles, tobacco, wax, wire, wood and yarns. 
d.  The manufacture of pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay, and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
e.  Manufacture of musical instruments, toys, novelties, and metal or rubber stamps, or other molded rubber products. 
f.  Manufacture or assembly of electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, radios and phonographs. 
g.  Laboratories-experimental, film or testing. 
h.  Manufacturing and repair of electric or neon signs, light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, cornices, eaves and the like. 
i.  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries provided that such plants shall not deal directly with consumers at retail. 
j.  All public utilities, including buildings, necessary structures, storage yards and other related uses. 
(3)  Warehouse, storage and transfer and electric or gas service buildings and yards. Public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations. Water supply and sewage disposal plants. Water and gas tank holders. Railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way. Freight terminals. 
(4)  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings and uses, including outdoor storage. 
(5)  Commercial kennels. 
(6)  Greenhouses. 
(7)  Trade or industrial schools. 
(8)  Lumber yards with associated retail space. 
(9)  Freestanding nonaccessory signs. 
(10)  Other uses of a similar and no more objectionable character to the above uses. 
(11)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.320) 
Sec. 102-353. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Auto engine and body repair, and undercoating shops when completely enclosed. 
(2)  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 district. 
(3)  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measure to control the type of process to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
(4)  Uses which serve the convenience needs of the industrial district (such as, but not limited to: bank, savings and loan association, credit union, automobile service station, trade or industrial school or industrial clinic), provided that such use shall be located on an internal industrial street and shall not abut a major thoroughfare. 
(5)  Indoor tennis courts, rollerskating rinks, ice skating rinks and bowling alleys, when, together with accessory uses such as retail sales of products used on the premises, are located at least 100 feet from any residential district. 
(6)  Other uses of a similar character to the above uses. 
(7)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.325) 
Sec. 102-354. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading, unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street and site plan review. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.330) 
Secs. 102-355-102-365. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - I-2 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-366. - Intent. 
    The I-2 general industrial districts are designed primarily for manufacturing, assembling, and fabrication activities including large-scale or specialized industrial operations, whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 district is so structured as to permit the manufacturing, processing, and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials as well as from previously prepared material. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.335) 
Sec. 102-367. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a general industrial district, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(1)  Any principal use or use permitted subject to special conditions in an I-1 district. 
(2)  Heating and electric power generating plants. 
(3)  Any of the following production or manufacturing uses (not including storage of finished products) provided that they are located not less than 800 feet distant from any residential district and not less than 300 feet distant from any other district. 
a.  Junk yards, provided such are entirely enclosed within a building or within an eight-foot obscuring wall and provided further that one property line abuts a railroad right-of-way. 
b.  Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant, including recycling centers. 
c.  Blast furnace, steel furnace, blooming or rolling mill. 
d.  Manufacture of corrosive acid or alkali, cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris. 
e.  Petroleum or other inflammable liquids, production, refining or storage. 
f.  Smelting of copper, iron or zinc ore. 
(4)  Any other use which shall be determined by the city council of South Lyon after recommendation from the planning commission, to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses in this section. The city may impose any required setback and/or performance standards so as to insure public health, safety and general welfare. 
(5)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.340) 
Sec. 102-368. - Principal uses permitted subject to special conditions. 
    The following uses may be permitted upon the granting of a permit for such use by the planning commission subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use, and subject further to such other reasonable conditions which, in the opinion of the commission, are necessary to provide adequate protection to the neighborhood and to abutting properties and subject further to a public hearing and review in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. 
(1)  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all residential or business districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. In any I-2 district, the extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the planning commission on the basis of usage. Such fence or wall shall not be less than four feet six inches in height, and may, depending on land usage, be required to be eight feet in height. A chainlink type fence, with intense evergreen shrubbery inside of said fence, may be considered to be an obscuring fence. 
(2)  Accessory structures and uses customarily incident to the above uses provided such structures and uses are located on the same zoning lot as a permitted use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.345) 
Sec. 102-369. - Required conditions. 
(a)  See article VII, division 2, of this chapter limiting the height and bulk of buildings, the minimum size of lot by permitted land use, and providing minimum yard setback requirements. 
(b)  See sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter regarding off-street parking requirements, off-street parking layout, standards, construction and maintenance, off-street loading-unloading, signs, exterior lighting, walls and frontage on a public street and site plan review. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.350) 
Secs. 102-370-102-380. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-381. - Intent. 
    The PD planned development district is intended to permit the private or public development or redevelopment of areas throughout the city which shall be substantially in accord with the goals and objectives of the master plan of future land use for the City of South Lyon. The use patterns of the areas involved shall provide a desirable environment and shall be harmonious to the general surrounding uses permitting flexibility in overall development while ensuring the highest of safeguards and standards for public health, safety, convenience and general welfare. Such planned development district may embrace a mixture of one or more distinct uses or zoning categories, in the vertical or horizontal plane. A planned development district shall encourage the use of land in accordance with its character and adaptability; conserve natural resources and energy; encourage innovation in land use planning; and bring about a greater compatibility of design and use. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.355) 
Sec. 102-382. - Standards for planned development districts. 
(a)  The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare or convenience or any combination thereof, on present and potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will encourage a more efficient use of public utilities and services and lessen the burden on circulation systems, surrounding properties, and the environment. This beneficial effect for the city (not the developer) shall be one which could not be achieved under any other single zoning classification. 
(b)  The uses proposed shall be consistent with the master plan of future land use for the city. 
(c)  The zoning is warranted by the design and amenities incorporated in the development proposal. 
(d)  Usable open space shall be provided, at least equal to the total of the minimum usable open space which would be required for each of the component uses of the development. The city may, if deemed appropriate, require for planned developments more or less open space than that required by this chapter. 
(e)  Off-street parking sufficient to meet the minimum required by section 102-476 shall be provided and the city may, if deemed appropriate by the city require for planned developments more or less parking than that required by this chapter. 
(f)  Landscaping shall be provided so as to ensure that proposed uses will be adequately buffered from one another and from surrounding public and private property. The city may, if deemed appropriate, require for planned unit developments more or less landscaping than that required by this chapter. 
(g)  Vehicular and pedestrian circulation, allowing safe, convenient, uncongested and well-defined circulation within and to the district shall be provided. 
(h)  Natural and historical features of the district shall reasonably be protected and preserved. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.360) 
Sec. 102-383. - Procedure for application. 
    Application shall be made to the city council for consideration under this district. The person applying shall be required to make a submittal of the following material for review and recommendation by the planning commission: 
(1)  A property area survey of the exact area being requested (scale: 1? = 100'). 
(2)  A proof of ownership of land being requested for rezoning. 
(3)  A topography map of the entire area at a contour interval showing two-foot changes in elevation. This map shall indicate all natural and manmade features (scale 1? = 100'). In those instances where more detailed topography is deemed necessary the city may request a contour interval of one foot. Where extreme slopes exist the city may allow a contour interval of five feet. 
(4)  A preliminary plan of the entire area carried out in such detail as to show the land use being requested, the densities being proposed where applicable, the system of collector streets, and off-street parking system. 
(5)  A preliminary plan layout or an overlay of such plan on a currently available aerial photo of the site and its immediate surroundings. 
(6)  A written statement explaining in detail the full intent of the sponsor indicating the specifics of the development plan as it relates to the type of dwelling units contemplated and resultant population; the extent of nonresidential development and the resultant traffic generated and parking demands created; and providing supporting documentation such as but not limited to: market studies, supporting land use request, and the intended scheduling of development and such other studies as the city council or planning commission may require. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.365) 
Sec. 102-384. - Acceptance and approval of preliminary (stage I) site plan and rezoning. 
    Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall be effective for a period of two years and such accepted plan may be renewed upon expiration of said two-year period provided conditions have not changed that would be cause for denial of such extension. In reviewing and approving the plan, the following procedures and conditions shall be followed: 
(1)  The preliminary plan shall be reviewed and a recommendation shall be made by the planning commission after public hearing to the city council relative to the plan's meeting the intent and the requirements of the master plan of future land use and for the rezoning of the property to PD district. Such rezoning shall be contingent on approved stage II plans becoming part of such rezoning. The hearing for the preliminary plan may also, with proper notification and advertising, be the hearing for rezoning of the property to a planned development district. 
(2)  Approval of the preliminary plan shall be given only after public hearing by the planning commission and shall not constitute final site plan approval. Rezoning procedures under this division will rely on the plan submitted for both stage I and stage II and the supporting documentation and the plan, therefore, is basic to the rezoning. 
(3)  Once an area has been rezoned to a PD district, no development shall take place therein nor use made of any part thereof except in accordance with the preliminary plan as originally approved, or in accordance with an approved amendment thereto. 
(4)  Approval of the preliminary plan by the city council shall not constitute approval of the final site plan. It shall be deemed as approval of the land use plan submitted and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of the final plan. 
(5)  The proposed PD district shall be of such area as to represent a sound carrying out of the master plan of land use, it not being the intention of this district that an unrelated parcel by parcel rezoning be effectuated. 
(6)  The zoning ordinance amendment which effectuates the rezoning to the PD district shall refer to and incorporate by reference the stage I site plan and the stage II site plan and such zoning amendment shall be carried out in accordance with rezoning procedures of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.370) 
Sec. 102-385. - Final plan submittal (stage II site plan) (prior to building permit). 
    A presentation of the final site plan shall be made to the planning commission for review and recommendation to the city council of the following: 
(1)  A final overall site plan for the entire area being requested under this PD district shall be submitted. This plan shall be worked out in detail showing specific uses, building location, off-street parking, street alignments, open spaces and other physical plan details being proposed. Supporting documentation in the form of building plans, and schedule of construction shall be submitted. The final site plan shall conform to all site plan requirements and all site plan review requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The final plan shall reflect and adhere to those use patterns as approved in the preliminary plan. Standards for building bulk and off-street parking shall be equal to at least the minimum standards set forth for like uses in article VII, division 2, of this chapter and off-street parking requirements of sections 102-476 and 102-477. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.375) 
Sec. 102-386. - Stage II site plan; approval of site plan. 
    Approval of the final site plan shall be effective for a period of three years. If development is not completed in this period, the planning commission shall review progress to date and make a recommendation to the city council as to action relative to permitting continuation under an extension of the original approval. In reviewing and approving the final plan, the following conditions shall be set forth: 
(1)  A stage II certificate of compliance may be granted by the city after review and recommendations are made, that the stage II site plan is accepted and approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public open spaces shall be made prior to any construction taking place on the site and shall be recorded by the developer. 
(3)  In residential use areas, any prorated open space shall be committed by dedication to an association of residents, either as rights-in-fee, easement, or in a master deed and retained as open space for park, recreation and related uses. All lands dedicated in fee or easement shall meet the requirements set forth by the city council. Provisions satisfactory to the city council shall be made to provide for the financing of any improvements shown on the plan for open spaces and common use areas which are to be provided by the applicant, and including maintenance of such improvements by a means satisfactory to the city council. This may include a development agreement. Such documents shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(4)  In those instances where a subdivision plat is being utilized as a planned development or a part of such development, the procedures and expiration dates of the Plat Act shall govern. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.380) 
Sec. 102-387. - General design standards. 
(a)  All regulations applicable to setbacks, parking and loading, general provisions, and other requirements shall be met in relation to each respective land use in the development based upon zoning districts in which the use is listed as a permitted use or use permitted subject to special conditions. 
(b)  Residential density shall be regulated as follows: 
(1)  The maximum permitted residential density for single-family dwelling shall not exceed the density allowed for the area currently zoned single-family as shown on the zoning district map. Yard setbacks for the R-2 district shall apply. 
(2)  The maximum permitted residential density for multiple-family areas shall not exceed the requirements of the RM-2 district and shall meet setback requirements of the RM-2 district. 
(c)  Requirements for height, bulk and density for all nonresidential uses shall be in accord with zoning district standards most nearly reflecting policies in the city's master plan. 
(d)  Density calculations shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Land areas to be used in calculating gross densities as provided in this section shall each be delineated on the stage I plan and the stage II plan so that the acreage and density computations can be confirmed. 
(2)  The land area used for calculating gross residential density shall include the total residential land area designated on the plan, where applicable, less any area within existing public street rights-of-way. 
(3)  The planning commission may require, as part of a final site plan review of a phase of a PD, that land shown as open space on the approved plan to be held in reserve as part of the phase to be developed, in order to guarantee that density limits for the entire approved PD will not be exceeded when the subject phase is completed. Such reserved land may be included in the development of subsequent phases if the density limits will not be exceeded upon completion of that phase or if other land is similarly held in reserve. 
(4)  The surface area of lakes, streams, ponds (natural, manmade, or stormwater retention), marshlands, and similar areas may be included in the acreage used for calculating density if at least 50 percent of the frontage of such areas are part of lands devoted to parks and open space used for and accessible to all residents to the PD district. 
(5)  Common open space, other common properties and facilities, individual properties, and all other elements of a PD district are so planned that they will achieve a unified open space and recreation area system, with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each other, the site and surrounding lands. 
(e)  To the maximum extent feasible, the development shall be designed so as to preserve natural resources and natural features. 
(f)  There shall be a perimeter setback and berming, for the purpose of buffering the development in relation to surrounding properties. Such perimeter setback shall be established in the discretion of the planning commission taking into consideration the use or uses in and adjacent to the development. The setback distance need not be uniform at all points on the perimeter of the development. 
(g)  Thoroughfare, drainage, and utility design shall meet or exceed the standards otherwise applicable in connection with each of the respective types of uses served. 
(h)  There shall be underground installation of utilities, including cable, electricity and telephone, as found necessary by the city council, upon the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(i)  Signage, lighting, landscaping, building architecture and materials, and other features of the project, shall be designed to achieve an integrated and controlled development, consistent with the character of the community, surrounding development or developments, and natural features of the area. 
(j)  Where nonresidential uses adjoin residentially zoned property, noise reduction and visual screening mechanisms such as landscape berms and/or decorative walls shall be employed. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.385) 
Sec. 102-388. - Required conditions. 
    Before approving the plan in either the preliminary stage I site plan or final stage II plan submittal, the planning commission and the city council shall determine that: 
(1)  The cost of installing all streets, sidewalks, bike paths, street lights, park areas and necessary utilities and maintenance thereof has been assured by a means satisfactory to the city council. The city council shall have the option of requiring suitable guarantee in a form suitable to the city for the provision of any or all site improvements. 
(2)  The final plan of each project area of the approved plan is in conformity with the overall approved plan. Any changes or amendments requested shall terminate approval of the preliminary plan until such changes or amendments have been reviewed and approved as in the instance of the first submittal, it being the intent of this section that no other administrative or board of appeals action shall constitute official approval of such changes or amendments to the preliminary plan. Denial by the city council of any requested changes or amendments shall not void the originally approved plan. 
(3)  Proceeding with a planned development district shall only be permitted if it is mutually agreeable to the city council and the developer. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.390) 
Sec. 102-389. - Deviations from approved planned development final site plan. 
    Minor changes to a previously approved planned development site plan may be approved without necessity of planning commission or city council action thereon if the building inspector certifies in writing that the proposed revision constitutes a minor alteration and does not alter the basic design nor any specific conditions of the plan as agreed upon by planning commission and city council. The building inspector shall record all such changes on the original PD site plan and shall advise planning commission and city council of all said minor revisions within 15 days of said administrative approval. Minor alterations or revisions under this section shall be limited to: 
(1)  Addition or relocation of fire escapes. 
(2)  Shifting of building heights and elevations, providing such shifting does not exceed ten percent of the previously approved dimension and providing such shifting does not significantly alter the conceptual integrity of the plan. 
(3)  Construction of additional, or alteration of, approved sidewalks, provided that the full intent of pedestrian movement through and around the site is not inhibited thereby. 
(4)  Shifting of, additions to, changes in species of landscape materials, provided that such change does not reduce minimum landscape requirements. 
(5)  Relocation of refuse collection stations. 
(6)  Internal rearrangement of parking lots and curb cut locations, not including the relocation of parking lots, provided such functional rearrangement does not reduce the total number of parking spaces required, and further provided that the minimum landscape requirements are maintained, and further provided that such rearrangement does not inhibit good traffic flow or circulation. 
(7)  Any decrease in building size or changes in bedroom counts per dwelling unit in no more than ten percent of the total number of units. 
(8)  Installation of recreational or maintenance facilities that do not require erection of a structure intended for human use or occupancy. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.395) 
Sec. 102-390. - Filing of zoning amendment. 
    Upon adoption by the city council of the zoning amendment, the site plan, building elevations and other development proposals including the proposed uses shall become an integral part of the zoning amendment to the PD district and for purposes of recordation, shall be referred to as "Planned Development No. _______." All approved plans shall be filed with the city clerk and the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.400) 
Sec. 102-391. - Time limitations. 
    The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the city council shall be subject to the expiration time as set forth in section 102-131(g) for preliminary site plan approvals. The granting of final site plan approval by the city council shall be subject to the same expiration time limitations as set forth in section 102-131(g). Additionally, in the case of final site plan approval for development in a PD district where, upon expiration of a previously approved final site plan by the city council, and for which no extension has been requested by the applicant as set forth and regulated in section 102-131(g), the PD zoning district designation on the property shall automatically revert to the zoning district that existed on the property before it was zoned PD. 
Editor's note- An ordinance adopted May 22, 2006, repealed the former § 102-391, and enacted a new § 102-391 as set out herein. The former § 102-391 pertained to fees and derived from Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.405. 
Sec. 102-392. - Fees. 
    Fees for legal, engineering and planning review of the site plans shall be established by the city council. In the event the time limit on an approved site plan has expired, any submittal of the site plan thereafter for re-approval by the applicant shall be assessed the full current site plan review fee as though the site plan was being submitted for the first time. 
(Ord. of 5-22-06) 
Secs. 102-393-102-405. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 15. - P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT 

Sec. 102-406. - Intent. 
    The P-1 vehicular parking districts are intended to permit the establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will generally be provided by petition or request to serve a use district which has developed without adequate off-street parking facilities. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.410) 
Sec. 102-407. - Principal uses permitted. 
    Premises in such districts shall be used only for an off-street vehicular parking area and shall be developed and maintained subject to such regulations as are hereinafter provided. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.415) 
Sec. 102-408. - Required conditions. 
(a)  The parking area shall be accessory to, and for use in connection with one or more businesses, or industrial establishments, located in adjoining business or industrial districts, or in connection with one or more existing professional or institutional office buildings or institutions. 
(b)  Such parking lots shall be contiguous to an RM-1 or nonresidential district. Parking areas may be approved when adjacent to said districts, or on the end of a block where such areas front on a street which is perpendicular to that street servicing the district. There may be a private driveway or public street or public alley between such P-1 district and above listed districts. 
(c)  Parking area shall be used solely for parking of private passenger vehicles for periods of less than one day and shall not be used as an off-street loading area. 
(d)  No commercial repair work of service of any kind, other than emergency service, or sale or display thereof, shall be conducted in such parking area. 
(e)  No signs of any kind, other than signs designating entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking area. 
(f)  No building other than those for shelter or attendants shall be erected upon the premises and they shall not exceed ten feet in height. 
(g)  Applications for P-1 district rezoning shall be made by submitting a dimensional layout of the area requested showing the intended parking plans in accordance with sections 102-476 and 102-477. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.420) 
Sec. 102-409. - Minimum distances and setbacks. 
(a)  Side and rear yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to the side or rear lot lines of premises within a residentially zoned district, the required wall shall be located along said lot line. 
(b)  Front yards. Where the P-1 district is contiguous to a residentially zoned district which has a common frontage in the same block with residential structures, or wherein no residential structures have been yet erected, there shall be a setback equal to the required residential setback for said residential district, or a minimum of 25 feet, or whichever is the greater. The required wall shall be located on this minimum setback line unless, under unusual circumstances, the planning commission finds that no good purpose would be served. The land between said setback and street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be planted with shrubs, trees, or lawn and shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.425) 
Sec. 102-410. - Parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    P-1 vehicular parking districts shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of sections 102-4, 102-5, article V and article VII, divisions 1, 3 and 4, of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.430) 
Secs. 102-411-102-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 102-431. - Accessory buildings, structures and uses. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all regulations of this chapter applicable to the main building. 
(2)  Accessory buildings shall not be erected in any minimum side yard setback nor in any required front yard. 
(3)  An accessory building in a one- or two-family district shall not occupy more than 25 percent of a rear yard setback area nor more than 40 percent of any rear yard area in excess of the rear yard setback and provided further no detached accessory building, including the floor area of an attached garage, shall exceed one-half the ground floor area of the dwelling portion of a residential dwelling. In no instance shall the total area of detached accessory buildings exceed 576 square feet and shall not exceed two detached accessory buildings. Children's play houses or other play structures shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(4)  No detached accessory building shall be located closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than three feet to any side or rear lot line. 
In those instances where the rear lot line abuts an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall not be closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory building be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
(5)  No detached accessory building in R-1A districts shall exceed a height of 15 feet. No detached accessory building in R-1, R-2, R-3, RT, RM-1, RM-2, RM-3, OS-1, B-1 and P-1 districts shall exceed 12 feet in height. 
Accessory buildings in all other districts may be constructed to equal the permitted maximum height of structures in said districts, subject to board of appeals review and approval if the building exceeds 40 feet in height. 
(6)  When an accessory building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard setback required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. In no instance shall an accessory building be located nearer than 20 feet to a street right-of-way line. 
(7)  When an accessory building in any residence, business or office district is intended for other than doghouses, playhouses for children, storage of private motor vehicles or small storage sheds not exceeding 100 square feet in floor area for the storage of lawn care tools or implements, the accessory use shall be subject to the approval of the board of appeals. 
(8)  An accessory building in a residential district shall be constructed of exterior building materials similar to those in the principal structure. 
(9)  Recreational vehicles, except those licensed as commercial vehicles, may be parked or kept on any lot or parcel in any R residential district, subject to the following requirements: 
a.  Recreational equipment parked or stored shall not have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or a sanitary sewer, and at no time shall such equipment be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. 
b.  Any recreational vehicle not parked or stored in a garage shall be parked or stored in the rear or side yard, provided that a minimum of three feet of side or rear yard shall be maintained between the vehicle and the side or rear lot line; and except that such vehicles may occupy a side or front yard for loading and unloading purposes, so long as such location does not obstruct the view of driveways or vehicular and pedestrian traffic of adjoining properties. 
c.  The storage of recreational vehicles on a residential lot or parcel shall be limited to only those vehicles owned by, and licensed or registered to, the occupant of the residential lot or parcel on which the vehicle is stored. 
d.  In the case of multiple-family dwelling complexes, and mobile home parks, the planning commission, after site plan review, may require a screened area in addition to required off-street parking spaces be provided on the site for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles. 
(10)  Satellite dish antennas subject to the following: 
a.  Satellite dish antennas are permitted in rear yards only and may not be located nearer than six feet from a lot line, and may not be located on or placed on an easement. 
b.  In districts other than residential districts, when a satellite dish antenna cannot be installed in conformance to the requirements of the chapter, a satellite dish antenna is permitted in a side yard or upon the roof of a main building upon the expressed written approval of the building inspector. 
c.  In districts that permit the sale of a satellite dish antenna, the owner of a business may display satellite dish antennas for sale purposes in the front yard or side yard of the business premises, provided such satellite dish antennas do not obstruct or hinder public access and are not located on a sidewalk or within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.  A three-day nonrenewable temporary use permit for a satellite dish antenna mounted to a mobile unit may be granted by the building inspector after application has been made therefore. 
(11)  Wireless transmission antenna and towers subject to the following: 
a.  A maximum height limit of 60 feet for towers and antenna is permitted in residential districts. 
b.  No maximum height limit is required in nonresidential districts. 
c.  In all districts, a tower or antenna shall be located on the parcel or lot in such manner that the base of the tower or antenna is set back from all property lines not less than the height of the tower or antenna. 
(12)  A resident of a dwelling unit may have not more than one motorized vehicle for sale on the site of such dwelling unit at any time and in no instance shall vacant residential lots or parcels be utilized for the sale of vehicles. A resident may repair vehicles of the resident on the property of the resident's dwelling unit; however, in no instance shall a resident repair the vehicle of other than a resident of the dwelling unit on said property. In no instance shall vehicles for sale be displayed in a front yard other than on the driveway portion of such yard. The sale of vehicles from a residential property shall not exceed two vehicles in any one year. 
(13)  Freestanding solar panels shall be considered an accessory building and shall be subject to the requirements for such, together with all other applicable building codes and ordinances. 
(14)  Wind generators may be permitted in rear yards when the following conditions are met: 
a.  The highest point of any portion of the generator shall not exceed 35 feet above the average grade of the lot. 
b.  The generator device shall be placed no closer to any side or rear lot line than the total distance between the grade of the lot at the base of the tower and the highest point of any portion of the generator. 
c.  The maximum diameter formed by a circle encompassing the outermost portions of the blades or other wind activated surfaces shall not exceed 30 percent of the distance between the ground and the highest point of any portion of the wind generator. The generator shall be so located that no portion of the structure would penetrate the vertical plane of any adjacent property line if it were to topple over in its normally assembled configuration. 
d.  The construction of the tower, blades, base structure, accessory building and wiring shall meet all applicable local building codes and ordinances. 
(15)  In all office, service and business districts, rooftop equipment and apparatus shall be screened from ground level by being housed in a penthouse or structure constructed of the same type of building materials used in the principal structure, or by building design. 
(16)  Towers and antennae for cellular telephone transmission may be permitted in any nonresidential district subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Cellular towers and antennae shall not exceed 120 feet in height, measured from the grade at the base of the tower. 
b.  The base of the tower shall have a minimum setback of 300 feet from any residential district. 
c.  The base of the tower and any other structures connected therewith shall provide the minimum setback required by the district, provided that the setbacks shall not be fewer than 20 feet from any freeway right-of-way, 50 feet from any other street right-of-way and 20 feet from any other lot line. 
d.  If located on the same zoning lot with another permitted use, such tower and any other structures connected therewith shall not be located in a front yard or side yard abutting a street. 
e.  Cellular telephone antennae and supporting structures shall be permitted to be placed on the roofs of buildings in any nonresidential district, whether or not they are accessory, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The principal use is a conforming use and the building is a conforming structure. 
2.  The antenna shall not exceed the height of its supporting structure by more than 12 feet. 
3.  The top of the supporting structure may exceed the maximum height of the district in which it is located by not more than ten feet. 
4.  The supporting structure shall be set back from the outermost vertical wall or parapet of the building a distance equal to at least two times the height of such structure. 
f.  Cellular towers and antennae may be permitted in any use district after review and approval by the planning commission. This includes locations not otherwise permitted in residential districts on large parcels of land, occupied by uses such as, but not limited to, golf courses or institutions. The placement of cellular telephone antennae on towers shared with other antennae is encouraged. 
The planning commission may permit such use after finding that the criteria for approving special land uses are met as well as the following: 
1.  The petitioner demonstrates that operating requirements necessitate locating within the city and within the district, and that location on sites or buildings in districts where such facilities are permitted is not available within the same general area. 
2.  That, in the opinion of the planning commission, residential areas will not be negatively influenced by the location of the tower. 
3.  That the height of the tower and antennae not exceed 120 feet. 
4.  That the extent of setbacks required shall be related to the screening capabilities of the site and the surrounding area, based on characteristics such as, but not limited to, vegetation, topography, land use, zoning and the location of existing buildings. However, the setbacks required shall not be less than the setbacks required for the district in which the tower is located. 
(17)  Commercial, utility and recreational vehicle storage. 
a.  In residential areas, the keeping of no more than one commercial vehicle of a rated capacity not exceeding one ton is permitted. 
b.  Recreational and utility vehicles, except those licensed as commercial vehicles, may be parked or kept on any lot or parcel in any R residential district, subject to the following requirements: 
1.  Recreation equipment parked or stored shall not have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or a sanitary sewer, and at no time shall such equipment be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. 
2.  Any recreational vehicle not parked or stored in a garage shall be parked or stored in the rear or side yard, provided that a minimum of three feet of side or rear yard shall be maintained between the vehicle and the side or rear lot line; and except that such vehicles may occupy a side or front yard for loading and unloading purposes, so long as such location does not obstruct the view of driveways or vehicular and pedestrian traffic of adjoining properties. 
3.  The storage of recreational vehicles on a residential lot or parcel shall be limited to only those vehicles owned by, and licensed or registered to, the occupant of the residential lot or parcel on which the vehicle is stored. 
4.  In the case of multiple-family dwelling complexes, and mobile home parks, the planning commission, after site plan review, may require a screened area in addition to required off-street parking spaces be provided on the site for the parking and storage of recreational vehicles. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.475) 
Sec. 102-432. - Uses not otherwise included within a specific use district. 
(a)  Because the uses hereinafter referred to possess unique characteristics making it impractical to include them in a specific use district classification, they may be permitted by the city council under the conditions specified, and after public hearing and review, by the planning commission held in accord with article II, division 2, of this chapter. In every case, the uses hereinafter referred to shall be specifically prohibited from any residential districts unless otherwise specified. 
(b)  These uses require special consideration since they service an area larger than the city, creating problems of control with reference to abutting use districts. Reference to those uses falling specifically within the intent of this section is as follows: 
(1)  Outdoor theaters and music theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they shall be permitted in I-2 districts only. Outdoor theaters shall further be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  The proposed internal design shall receive approval from the building inspector and the city engineer as to adequacy of drainage, lighting and other technical aspects. 
b.  Outdoor theaters shall abut a major thoroughfare, and points of ingress and egress shall be available only from such major thoroughfare. 
c.  All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
d.  The area shall be so laid out as to prevent the movie screen or stage from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major thoroughfares. All lighting uses to luminate the area shall be so installed as to be confined within, and directed onto, the premises of the outdoor theater site. 
(2)  Commercial television and radio towers and public utility microwaves and public utility TV transmitting towers. Radio and television towers, public utility microwaves and public utility TV transmitting towers, and their attendant facilities shall be permitted provided said use shall be located centrally on a continuous parcel of not less than the height of the tower measured form the base of said tower to all points on each property line. 
(3)  Training farm for horses. Training farm for horses in one-family residential districts subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Said use shall not be established on a site of less than 60 acres. 
b.  Not less than two acres shall be provided for each horse not stabled. 
c.  Said use shall not be permitted in any quarter section containing a platted subdivision of record and not within 500 feet of any subdivision of record. 
d.  No building, structure or activity area such as a parking lot, shall be located closer than 300 feet to any exterior property line and no practice track shall be located closer than 200 feet to any exterior property line. Buildings of greater height than the maximum height allowed in article VII, division 2, of this chapter may be allowed. 
e.  The site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare and all ingress and egress shall be from said major thoroughfare. 
f.  The site shall not be open to the public and the construction of grandstands or other spectator facilities shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.495) 
Sec. 102-433. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts used to light the general area of a specific site shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged as to reflect lights away from all adjacent residential districts or adjacent residences. 
(b)  All outdoor lighting in all use districts shall be directed toward and confined to the ground areas of lawns or parking lots. 
(c)  All lights used for the illumination of business establishments or for the illumination of business buildings or areas surrounding them, or for the illumination or display of merchandise or products of business establishments shall be completely shielded from the view of vehicular traffic using streets abutting such business properties. Floodlights used for the illumination of said premises or of any sign thereon, whether or not such floodlights are attached to or separate from the building, shall not project above the highest elevation of the front wall of the building. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.515) 
Sec. 102-434. - Residential entranceway. 
    In all residential districts, so called entranceway structures and development identification including but not limited to walls, columns, and gates marking entrances to single-family subdivisions, site condominium developments, cluster housing developments and multiple housing projects may be permitted and may be located in a required yard, except as provided in section 102-435, provided that such entranceway structures shall comply to all codes of the municipality, and shall be approved by the building inspector and a permit issued. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.520) 
Sec. 102-435. - Corner clearance. 
(a)  No wall of any kind shall be permitted, and no shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of two feet from the established street grades shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance along each line of 25 feet from their point of intersection; except that in the interest of public safety, corner clearance requirements may be made more restrictive upon recommendation of the city police department. No obstruction which limits vision or otherwise creates a public hazard as determined by the city police department, shall be permitted in any right-of-way between the sidewalk and the street curb. 
(b)  Wherever a lot line intersects a public right-of-way or driveway, no obscuring wall of any kind shall be permitted, and no shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of two feet from the established street grade shall be permitted within the triangular area formed at the intersection of the lot line and right-of-way by a straight line drawn between said lot line and right-of-way line a distance along each line of 15 feet from their point of intersection. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.525) 
CORNER CLEARANCE 
Sec. 102-436. - Walls. 
(a)  For those use districts and uses listed below, there shall be provided and maintained on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district an obscuring wall or landscaped earth berm as required below, except as otherwise permitted in subsection (b) of this section. 
Use Requirements (1) P-1 Vehicular Parking District 4'6? high wall (2) Off-street parking area 
(other than P-1 districts) 4'6? high wall (3) B-1, B-2, B-3 and OS-1 districts 4'6? high wall (4) I-1 and I-2 districts open storage areas, loading or unloading areas, service areas 4'6? to 8' high wall or fence. (Height shall provide the most complete obscuring possible.) (See subsection 102-352(2) and subsection 102-368(1)) (5) Auto wash 
Drive-in restaurants 6'0? high wall (6) Hospital-ambulance and delivery areas 6'0? high wall (7) Utility buildings, stations and/or substations 6'0? high wall  
For uses permitted in the I-1 and I-2 industrial districts, a wrought iron or chainlink security fence may be permitted on the lot lines, except where front yard setbacks are required. Such fences when eight feet in height or more may be topped with barbed wire. 
_____
(b)  For those use districts and uses listed above, there may be provided, in lieu of an obscuring wall, an obscuring landscaped earth berm (earth mound). When such earth berm is provided in place of a wall, the berm shall be landscaped and maintained in a clean, orderly and growing condition, and shall meet the following minimum design standards: 
(1)  Continuous earth berms shall be provided with an undulating horizontal and vertical top and sides, the height of which shall be no less than required for a wall in the district. Earth berms may consist of opaque screen plantings within the horizontal berm depressions or masonry walls or a combination of both, so long as the minimum required height of the earth berm plantings, walks or combinations thereof are maintained. 
(2)  Berms shall be a landscaped earth mound possessing a maximum slope ratio of three to one. (Three feet of horizontal plane for each one foot of vertical height.) Side slopes shall be designed and planted to prevent erosion. The berms shall have nearly flat horizontal area at their crests of at least two feet in width. 
(c)  Required walls or earth berms shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this chapter requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Upon review of a site plan, the planning commission may approve an alternate location for the wall or earth berm with the unanimous consent of adjacent property owners, or waive the wall or earth berm requirements, if in specific cases, it would not serve the purposes of screening the parking area. In considering the waiver of wall or earth berm requirements between residential and nonresidential districts, the planning commission shall make a determination as to whether or not the residential district is considered to be an area in transition and will become nonresidential in the future. In such cases where the planning commission determines the residential district to be a future nonresidential area, it may temporarily waive the wall or earth berm requirements for an initial period not to exceed 12 months. Granting of subsequent waivers shall be permitted, provided that the planning commission shall make a determination as hereinbefore described, for each subsequent waiver prior to granting of such waiver. 
(d)  Required walls or earth berms may, upon approval of the board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from a nonresidential district that abuts a residential district when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall or earth berm on a given block will be a major consideration of the board of appeals in reviewing such requests. 
(e)  Such walls and/or screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except such openings as may be approved by the chief of police and the building inspector. All walls herein required shall be constructed of materials approved by the building inspector to be durable, weather resistant, rust proof and easily maintained. 
(f)  Masonry walls or earth berms may be constructed with openings which do not in any square section (height and width) exceed 20 percent of the surface. Where walls or earth berms are so pierced, the openings shall be so spaced as to maintain the obscuring character required, and shall not reduce the minimum height requirement. The arrangement of the openings shall be reviewed and approved by the building inspector. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.530) 
Sec. 102-437. - Fences (residential). 
    Fences as permitted shall be subject to the requirements of article III of chapter 18. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.535) 
Sec. 102-438. - Frontage on a public street. 
    No lot shall be used for any purpose permitted by this chapter unless said lot abuts a public street, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter or this Code. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.550) 
Sec. 102-439. - Access to major street or collector street. 
    For uses making reference to this section 102-439, vehicular access shall be provided only to an existing or planned major street, freeway service drive, or collector street. Provided, however, that access driveways may be permitted to other than a major street, freeway service drive, or collector street where such access is provided to a street where the property directly across the street between the driveway and the major street, freeway service drive, or collector street is zoned for multiple-family use or any nonresidential uses, is developed with permanent uses other than single-family residences or is an area which, in the opinion of the planning commission, will be used for other than single-family purposes in the future. This exception shall apply only if the planning commission finds that there are special circumstances which indicate that there will be substantial improvement in traffic safety by reducing the number of driveways to a thoroughfare. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.555) 
Sec. 102-440. - Performance standards. 
    No use otherwise allowed shall be permitted within any district which does not conform to the following standards of use, occupancy, and operation, which standards are hereby established as the minimum requirements to be maintained within said area: 
(1)  Smoke: 
a.  Emission; exceptions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever to a density greater than that density described as no. 2 on the Ringlemann Chart; provided that the following exceptions shall be permitted: 
1.  Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than no. 3 on the Ringlemann Chart for a period, or periods, aggregating four minutes in any 30 minutes. 
2.  Smoke, the shade or appearance of which is equal to but not darker than no. 3 of the Ringlemann chart for a period or periods, aggregating three minutes in any 15 minutes, when building a new fire or when breakdown of equipment occurs such as to make it evident that the emission was not reasonably preventable. 
b.  Method of measurement. For the purposes of grading the density of smoke, the Ringlemann chart, as now published and used by the United States Bureau of Mines, which is hereby made a part of this chapter, shall be the standard. However, the Umbrascope readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with Ringlemann's chart. 
(2)  Dust, dirt and fly ash. 
a.  No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and approved equipment, means, method, device or contrivance to reduce the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids of fumes emitted into the open air, which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace, or combustion device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 0.20 grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500 degrees Fahrenheit. 
b.  Method of measurement. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such devices these conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the stack does not exceed 50 percent at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be measured by the A.S.M.E. Test Code of dust-separating apparatus. All other forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The building inspector may require such additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have been made. 
(3)  Glare and radioactive materials. Glare from any process (such as or similar to arc welding, or acetylene torch cutting) which emits harmful ultraviolet rays shall be performed in such a manner as not be seen from any point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public point beyond the property line, and as not to create a public nuisance or hazard along lot lines. Radioactive materials and wastes, and including electromagnetic radiation such as x-ray machine operation, shall not be emitted to exceed quantities established as safe by the U.S. Bureau of Standards, when measured at the property line. 
(4)  Fire and explosive hazards. 
a.  In the I-1 industrial district, the storage, utilization or manufacture of materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning, as determined by the fire marshal, is permitted, subject to compliance with all other performance standards above mentioned. 
b.  The storage, utilization, or manufacture of materials, goods, or products ranging from free to active burning to intense burning, as determined by the fire marshal is permitted subject to compliance with all other yard requirements and performance standards previously mentioned, and provided that the following conditions are met: 
1.  Said materials or products, shall be stored, utilized or produced within completely enclosed buildings or structures having combustible exterior walls, which meet the requirements of the building code. 
2.  All such buildings or structures shall be set back at least 40 feet from lot lines, or in lieu thereof, all such buildings or structures shall be protected throughout by an automatic sprinkler system complying with installation standards prescribed by the National Fire Association. 
3.  The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by Public Act No. 207 of 1941, as amended. 
(5)  Noise. 
a.  Generally. The emission of measurable noises from the premises shall not exceed 60 decibels as measured at the boundary property lines, except where normal street traffic noises exceed 60 decibels during such periods, the measurable noise emanating from such premises may equal, but not exceed, such traffic noises. This provision shall apply in all districts except as hereinafter specified for the I-1 and I-2 districts. 
b.  I-1 and I-2 districts. In I-1 and I-2 districts the measurable noise emanating from the premises used for activities permitted shall not exceed 75 decibels during the normal work periods of between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and shall not exceed 70 decibels during the sleeping hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., as measured at the property lines. Noises shall be muffled so as not to become objectional due to intermittence, beat frequency or high frequency. 
(6)  Vibration. Machines or operations which cause vibration shall be permitted in industrial districts, but no operation shall cause a displacement exceeding 0.003 of one inch as measured at the property line. 
(7)  Odors. Creation of offensive odors shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.560) 
Sec. 102-441. - Access management. 
(a)  The standards of this section are intended to promote safe and efficient travel within the city; minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts; separate traffic conflict areas by reducing the number of driveways; provide efficient spacing standards between driveways, and between driveways and intersections; protect the substantial public investment in the street system; and to ensure reasonable access to properties, though not always by the most direct route. 
(b)  The following standards shall apply to all uses except residential developments involving less than five dwelling units. However, if it appears that there would be unusual difficulty encountered in meeting these requirements because of grade changes, existing or proposed intersections, driveways, bridges or other land restrictions, the planning commission, upon recommendation of the city engineer, may waive or modify the requirements of this section. 
(1)  Acceleration-deceleration passing lanes. 
a.  Driveways providing ingress and egress to all two-laned, paved major thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lands and passing lanes. 
b.  Driveways providing ingress and egress to all three-laned, paved major thoroughfares shall be provided with paved acceleration and deceleration lanes. 
c.  Driveways providing ingress and egress to roads of four or more lanes shall be provided with paved tapers or turning lanes. 
d.  Required lanes or tapers shall be indicated schematically on the site plan and shall be constructed in accordance with the standards for such facilities as established by the city engineer. 
(2)  Driveway spacing. 
a.  Except in instances where a shared driveway is proposed, there shall be a minimum spacing of 20 feet between the edge of a driveway and the adjacent property line not including the right turn lane and/or taper. 
b.  If a driveway curb radius extends beyond the frontage of the property, written consent from the affected adjacent property owner(s) allowing the design shall be provided. 
c.  Except where a center median or boulevard is provided, to reduce left-turn conflicts, new commercial driveways shall be aligned with those across the roadway where possible. If alignment is not possible, driveways should be offset a minimum of 150 feet from those on the opposite side of the roadway. 
d.  Minimum driveway spacing requirements shall be determined based on posted speed limits along the parcel frontage, as indicated in the following table: 
Posted 
Speed 
(mph)* Minimum 
Driveway 
Spacing 
(Feet) 30 125 35 150 40 185 45 230 50 275 55 350  
* or the corresponding metric equivalent. 
(3)  Distance from intersecting streets. Driveway spacing from an intersection shall be measured from the centerline of the driveway to the closest edge of the nearest travel lane on the intersecting street. The required minimum distance between a driveway and an intersecting street varies as follows: 
Intersecting 
 Streets Full 
Movement 
Driveway 
(Feet) One-Way 
Drives 
(Feet) Major thoroughfare 200 100 Signalized major thoroughfare 150  75 Local or secondary thoroughfare 100  50  
(4)  Number of driveways. Where driveway spacing standards can be met (outlined in subsection (b)(2) of this section), an individual parcel or contiguous parcels under the same ownership shall be permitted one two-way driveway or a paired one-way driveway system wherein one driveway is designed, and appropriately marked, to accommodate ingress traffic and the other egress traffic. In the following instances the planning commission may allow more than one driveway. 
a.  For parcels with frontage of at least 300 feet one additional driveway may be allowed, with another driveway allowed for each 300 feet of frontage thereafter, provided that these driveways meet the standards of subsection (b)(2) of this section. 
b.  Where parcels have frontage on more than one street the planning commission may allow the provisions of two drives, one to each street, provided that the standards of subsections (b)(2) and (3) of this section are met. 
(5)  Alternative means of access. To reduce the number of curb cuts, alternative means of access shall be encouraged in general. However, due to the driveway spacing standards specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section, a shared driveway may be the only design solution that will be permitted. In such cases the following alternative means of access shall apply. 
a.  Shared driveways. Sharing or joint use of a driveway by two or more property owners shall be encouraged. The shared driveway shall be constructed along the midpoint between the two properties. If a written easement is provided which allows traffic to travel across one parcel to access another, or access the public street, the driveway can be located entirely on one parcel. 
b.  Marginal service roads. In cases where a marginal service road exists, is recommended in a plan adopted by the City of South Lyon planning commission and/or is proposed in an approved site plan for an adjoining lot or parcel, access shall be provided via such service road, rather than by direct connection to the major thoroughfare. 
In areas where marginal service roads are planned, but adjacent properties have not yet developed, the site shall be designed to accommodate a future road. In such instances, the planning commission may temporarily grant individual parcels a direct connection to the adjacent major thoroughfare. A performance bond or other financial guarantee must be provided which assures elimination of the temporary access upon completion of the service road. Occupancy permits shall not be issued until such financial guarantee has been submitted to the city. 
c.  Parking lot connections. All parking lots shall be designed in such a way as to allow for a connection to the parking lot of an existing or future use. Such connection shall be a minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be set back a minimum of 30 feet from the planned future right-of-way of adjacent roads. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97, § 5.492) 
Sec. 102-442. - Building facade design. 
    The purpose of this section is to provide a minimum set of exterior building wall material standards, the intent of which is to enhance the visual environment of the city. Furthermore, the review of building facade design and the consistent administration of standards can help to maintain and improve the city's sense of place by encouraging consistent quality and character when structures are built or redeveloped. These standards are the minimum requirements that are expected. When a particular building design and the materials or combination of materials proposed to be used in exterior walls are found by the planning commission to be lacking in meeting the intent of this ordinance, the planning commission may impose alternative building material requirements. 
(1)  This section shall apply to all exterior building wall facades (except single-family residential structures) when any of the following criteria is met: 
 New construction; 
 Redevelopment that entails more than twenty-five percent of the facade; 
 Facade changes that are in excess of $10,000. 
The exterior building wall facades shall consist of those materials and combinations of materials as set forth in this section. 
(2)  The use of exterior wall facade materials shall be in compliance with the maximum percentages permitted in the schedule regulating use of exterior building wall facade materials. 
(3)  The application of these standards should promote integration and mixture of materials where more than one material is used in a building. If only one material is used, architectural detailing and articulation, massing, texture and form must be introduced into the building's facade design. Building roof materials should be in harmony with the style and material used on the building walls. 
(4)  When a particular building design and the materials or combination of materials proposed to be used in exterior walls are found by the planning commission to be in keeping with the intent and purpose of this section, but which may differ from the strict application of the schedule regulating material use of this section (e.g., use of new materials not covered in the facade materials schedule, use of recycled or reused materials), the planning commission may waive the requirements of this section pertaining to materials. When a waiver is requested under this subsection, the proposed building design and materials schedule shall be accompanied by a written design statement which shall describe how the selected facade materials and material combinations will be consistent with and enhance the building design. 
(5)  Where a new facade material is proposed for an existing building facade, only that portion of the building being altered shall be subject to the standards of this section. However, in considering the proposed alteration the planning commission shall view it in context of the architecture of the entire building. 
(6)  Where an addition is proposed to an existing building, the planning commission may allow the use of existing facade materials for the addition provided that the design of the alteration is consistent with the existing facade design. 
(7)  This section is not intended to regulate the quality, workmanship and requirements for materials relative to strength, durability and endurance, maintenance, performance, load capacity or fire resistance characteristics. In addition, all applicable building codes shall apply. 
Maximum Percent of Wall 1 to be Covered by Certain Building Materials by Zoning District Building 
Material RM OS-1 B-1, B-2, B-3 IRO 2 I-1 and I-2 100 75 50 25 100 75 25 100 75 50 25 100 75 50 25 100 75 25 Masonry/stone Face brick or ceramic * * * * * Split face or ribbed block * * * * * Stone * * * * * Precast concrete * * * * * Concrete formed in place * * * * * Metal 3 * * * * * * Glass Tinted or reflective * * * * * Glass block * * * * * Wood (fire-resistant only) * Wood siding (beveled, lap, TEG, batton) * * * * None Finishes 4 * * * * *  
1 Vision glass and door not included. 
2 All walls exposed to public view from adjacent residential, office or business districts or from a public street shall be constructed of not less than 75 percent masonry or stone not to include unfinished concrete block or unfinished concrete; metals utilized shall be ribbed panels or other decorative metal finished in suitable colors. 
3 Flat sheets and seamed or ribbed panels. Includes aluminum, porcelain, stainless steel, etc. 
4 Includes drivit, cement, plaster, stucco or similar materials. Such materials shall not be used where contact with vehicles may occur, such as parking areas, traffic ways, loading areas adjacent to building walls, unless such walls are adequately protected to prevent wall damage. In all instances, this material shall only be applied four feet or above finished grade. 
(Ord. of 8-11-97, § 5.536; Ord. of 5-24-10) 
Sec. 102-443. - Hazardous substances overlay zone. 
    Intent. The intent of the hazardous substances overlay zone is to provide supplemental development regulations in designated areas so as to permanently protect the city's drinking water source from long-term contamination originating from the improper use, storage or generation of hazardous substances or polluting materials. Due to vulnerability of groundwater aquifers to contamination, the need for public health protection, and the significant public investment in the municipal water supply system, the regulations set out in this section contain protective measures, which apply to certain areas of the community which sit above the aquifer which supplies the city drinking water source. 
    Scope. The provisions of the hazardous substances overlay zone, as set out in this section, shall apply to all nonresidential uses and facilities and zoning districts including private and public facilities, which use, store or generate hazardous substances in a quantity greater than 100 kilograms per month (25 gallons or 220 pounds), and which shall be subject to site plan review under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-444. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means a geologic formation, group of formations or part of a formation capable of storing and yielding a significant amount of groundwater to wells or springs. 
    Development means the carrying out of any construction, reconstruction, alteration of surface or structure or change of land use or intensity of use. 
    Environmental contamination means the release of a hazardous substance, or the potential release of a discarded hazardous substance, in a quantity which is or may become injurious to the environment, or to the public health, safety, or welfare. 
    Facility means any building, structure, or installation from which there may be a discharge of hazardous substances. 
    Hazardous substance means a chemical or other material, which is or may become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, hazardous substances as defined in the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of (Hazardous Waste Management of the National Resources and Environmental Protection Act) (NREPA) Act 451 of 1994, as amended; "petroleum" as defined in Part 213 (Leaking Underground Storage Tanks) of the NREPA, Act 451, of 1994 as amended. 
    Polluting material means any hazardous substance as defined in this subsection that can cause pollution to groundwater sources and/or become injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare of the general public or to the environment. 
    Primary containment facility means a tank, pit, container, pipe, or vessel of first containment of a hazardous substance. 
    Secondary containment facility means a second tank, catchment, pit, pipe, or vessel that limits and contains liquid or chemical leaking or leaching from a primary containment area. Containment systems shall be constructed of materials of sufficient thickness, density and composition to prevent the discharge to land, groundwater, or surface waters, of any pollutant, which may emanate from such storage containers. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-445. - Hazardous substance protection standards. 
(a)  The project and related improvements shall be designed to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains, and street slopes. 
(b)  Stormwater management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not significantly increase flooding or the potential for environmental contamination of surface waters or groundwater's, on-site or off-site. 
(c)  General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer system on-site holding tank in accordance with state, county, and city requirements, unless a groundwater discharge permit or permit exclusion has been obtained from the state department of natural resources. 
(d)  Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting materials are stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of hazardous substances to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers, or wetlands. 
(e)  State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No releases to groundwater, including direct and indirect releases shall be allowed without an applicable groundwater discharge permit or permit exclusion from the state department of natural resources. 
(f)  In determining conformance with the standards in this chapter, the city shall take into consideration the publication entitled Small Business Guide to Secondary Containment, Clinton River Watershed Council, 1991, and other applicable references. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-446. - Aboveground storage and use areas for hazardous substances and polluting materials. 
(a)  Primary containment of hazardous substances shall be product tight; meaning no leakage shall be permitted from the sealed container housing hazardous substances. 
(b)  Secondary containment of hazardous substances shall be provided for all facilities. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the recovery of any released substance. Products held in containers of five gallons or less packaged for retail use shall be exempt from this subsection. 
(c)  Outdoor storage of hazardous substances shall be prohibited except in product-tight containers, which are protected from, weather, leakage, accidental damage and vandalism. Secondary containment shall be sufficient to store the substance for the maximum anticipated period of time necessary for the operator to recover any released substance, including an allowance for the expected accumulation of precipitation. 
(d)  Outbuildings, storage rooms, sheds and pole barns which are utilized as secondary containment shall not have floor drains which outlet to soil, public sewer system, groundwater, nearby drains or natural water bodies unless a surface water or groundwater discharge permit has been obtained according to applicable requirements of Part 31 (Water Resource Protection of Act 451 (NREPA) of 1994, as amended. 
(e)  Areas and facilities for loading and unloading of hazardous substances, as well as areas where such materials are handled, used and stored, shall be designed and constructed to prevent unpermitted discharge or runoff to floor drains, rivers, lakes, wetlands, soils or groundwater. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-447. - Underground storage tanks for hazardous substances and polluting materials. 
(a)  Existing and new underground storage tank systems as defined under the Part 211 (Underground Storage Tank Regulation of Act 451 (NREPA) of 1994, as amended shall be registered with the authorized state agency in accordance with applicable requirements of the Environmental Protection Agency and the state department of environmental quality. 
(b)  Installation, operation, maintenance, closure and removal of underground storage tanks shall be in accordance with applicable requirements of the state department of environmental quality. Applicable leak detection, corrosion protection, spill prevention and overfill protection requirements shall be met. Records shall be required to be retained and available for review by state or city officials for a period of five years for tank tightness and for a two-year period for retention and all other monitoring or test results. 
(c)  Out-of-service and/or abandoned underground storage tanks shall be emptied and permanently closed in accordance with the requirements of the state department of environmental quality, response division, and the city. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-448. - Well abandonment. 
    Out-of-service water wells shall be sealed and abandoned in accordance with applicable requirements of the state department of public health well construction unit. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-449. - Sites with contaminated soils and/or groundwater. 
(a)  Site plans shall take into consideration the location and extent of any contaminated soils and/or groundwater on the site, and the need to protect public health and the environment. 
(b)  Development shall be prohibited on a site of environmental contamination unless information is available indicating that the development will not exacerbate the contamination or impede its remediation. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-450. - Construction standards. 
(a)  The general contractor, or if none, the property owner, shall be responsible for assuring that each contractor or subcontractor evaluates each site before construction is initiated to determine if any site conditions may pose particular problems for handling any hazardous substances. For instance, hauling hazardous substances in proximity to water bodies or wetlands may be improper. 
(b)  Manner designed to prevent spills and unpermitted discharges to air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. Any storage of quantities greater than 100 kilograms (25 gallons or 220 pounds) shall have secondary containment. 
(c)  If the contractor will be storing or handling hazardous substances or polluting materials that require a manufacture's material safety data sheet, the contractor shall familiarize himself with the sheet, and shall be familiar with procedures required to contain and clean up any releases of the hazardous substance. Any hazardous substances will require a secondary containment. 
(d)  Upon completion of construction, all hazardous substances or polluting materials, including containment systems no longer used or not needed in the operation of the facility, shall be removed from the construction site by the responsible contractor and shall be disposed of, recycled, or reused in a proper manner as prescribed by applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-451. - Maintenance. 
    In areas where hazardous substances or polluting materials are handled, the structural integrity of the building must be maintained to avoid inadvertent discharge of hazardous substances to soils and groundwater. Cracks and holes in floors, foundations and walls that could cause hazardous substances to be released shall be repaired in areas where hazardous substances are handled or stored. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-452. - Development review requirements. 
    The following development review requirements are in addition to the development requirements found under section 94-386, site plan review: 
(1)  Specify location and size of interior and exterior areas and structures to be for on-site storage, loading, unloading, recycling and use or disposal of hazardous substances or polluting materials. 
(2)  Specify location of all underground and aboveground storage tanks for such uses as fuel storage, waste oil holding tanks, hazardous substance storage, collection of contaminated stormwater or wash water, and all similar uses. 
(3)  Specify location of exterior drains, dry wells, catchbasins, retention/detention areas, pumps, and other facilities designed to collect, store or transport stormwater or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes shall be specified on the site plan. 
(4)  Specify areas on the site that the applicant has reason to believe are contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup, if applicable. 
(5)  Submit a list (hazardous substances reporting form for site plan reivew) of the types and quantities of hazardous substances and polluting materials, which will be used, stored, or generated on-site, including chemicals, hazardous substances/materials, petroleum products, hazardous wastes and other polluting materials. The list shall include common name (trade name) of materials, chemical name (components), form (liquid, pressurized liquid, solid, gas, pressurized gas, etc.), maximum quantity on hand at any one time, and type of storage containers (aboveground tank, underground tank, drums, cylinders, metal container, wooden or composition container, portable tank). Material safety data supplied to the fire department and to employees by an employer may also be submitted for site plan review purposes. 
(6)  Submit any state/county environmental permits necessary for the storage of and/or discharge of hazardous substances or polluting materials. 
(Ord. of 3-25-02) 
Sec. 102-453. - Exemptions and waivers. 
    The transportation of any hazardous substance or polluting material shall be exempt from the provisions of this section provided the transporting motor vehicle or railcar is in continuous transit, or that it is transporting substances to or from a properly licensed solid or hazardous waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility. 
Sec. 102-454. - Screening of rooftop equipment. 
    Penthouse or rooftop structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, heating and air conditioning equipment and other similar apparatus shall be screened from view by a penthouse or structure equal in height to the height of the equipment being screened, and constructed of a maintenance-free building material compatible with the material used in the principal building. Satellite reception antennas shall be exempt from this requirement. 
(Ord. of 8-25-08) 
Sec. 102-455. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HEIGHT, BULK, DENSITY AND AREA LIMITATION 

Sec. 102-456. - Schedule limiting height, bulk, density and area by zoning districts. 
Minimum Lot Area 
Per Unit Maximum Height 
of Structures Minimum Yard Setback(o) 
(Per Lot in Feet) 

Sides Zoning 
District Area in 

Square Feet Width in Feet In 

Stories In 

Feet Front Least 

One Total of 

Two Rear Minimum 
Floor Area 

Per Unit 

(square 
feet) Minimum 
Ground 
Floor Area 
Per Unit 
(square 
feet) Maximum 

Percent of 

Lot Area 

Covered 
By All 
Buildings R-1A(n) 15,000(a) 120(a) 2 25 35(b) 10(b) 20(b)m 50(b) 1,300 800 25 R-1(n) 12,000(a) 100(a) 2 25 35(b) 10(b) 20(b)m 50(b) 1,200 750 25 R-2(n) 10,000(a) 80(a) 2 25 30(b) 8(b) 16(b)m 40(b) 1,100 700 25 R-3(n) 8,750 70(a) 2 25 25(b) 6(b) 16(b)m 35(b) 1,000 650 25 RT(n) 4,000 40 2 25 25 6(b) 16(b)m 30(b) 600 25 1 BR-600 RM-1 (c) (c) 2 25 35(d) 30(d) 60(d)m 30(d) 2 BR-800 25 RM-2 (c) (c) 21/2 30 25(d) 25(d) 50(d)m 25(d) 3 BR-900 25 RM-3 (c) (c) 21/2 30 25(d) 25(d) 50(d)m 25(d) 4 BR-1,000 25 OS-1 - - - 25 20(e) 15(i) 30(i) 20(g) - - B-1 - - - 25 25(e, h) 10(f, h) 20(f, h) 20(g, h) - - B-2 - - - - - - - (g) - - B-3 - - - 35 30(e) 10(f) 20(f) 20(g) - - I-1 - - - 35(k) 40(j) 20(j, k, l) 40(j, k, l) 20(j, k, l) - - I-2 - - - 50(k) 60(j) 40(j, k, l) 80(j, k, l) 40(j, k, l) - - P-1 See article VI, division 15 of this chapter for regulations governing vehicular parking districts  
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.435) 
Sec. 102-457. - Notes to schedule of regulations. 
(a)  For other than one single dwelling on one lot, see section 102-458, averaged lot size; section 102-459, subdivision open space; and section 102-460, one-family cluster options, regarding residential flexibility allowances. 
(b)  For all uses permitted other than a residence, the setback shall equal the height of the main building or the setback required in section 102-203 or 102-456, whichever is the greater. 
In the case of single-family dwellings, when it can be found that the front yards of two or more permitted principal structures in any block in existence at the time of adoption of this chapter within the district zoned and on the same side of the street are less than the minimum front yard permitted in the district, then a principal structure erected thereafter shall provide the average depth of the front yards of said two or more structures. In the case of corner lots, the designated side yard abutting a street shall be equal in depth to the front yard setback requirements of the district, except that where applicable, the setback may be averaged as regulated above. 
(c)  In a RM-1 multiple-family district, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 1,500. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. 
In an RM-2 and RM-3 multiple-family district, the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not be more than the area of the parcel, in square feet, divided by 1,100. All units shall have at least one living room and one bedroom, except that not more than ten percent of the units may be of an efficiency apartment type. For the purpose of computing the permitted number of dwelling units per acre in all RM districts, the following room assignments shall control: 
Efficiency = 1 room One bedroom = 2 rooms Two bedroom = 3 rooms Three bedroom = 4 rooms Four bedroom = 5 rooms  
Plans presented showing one-, two- or three-bedroom units and including a "den," "library," or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
The area used for computing density shall be the total site area exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. Stormwater retention or detention ponds may be included in computing density, provided they maintain a slope ratio of one to five (one foot of vertical to five feet of horizontal) and are designed and landscaped as an integral part of the site's open space area. 
(d)  In all RM multiple-family residential districts, the minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. No multiple dwelling structure or combinations of attached structures shall contain more than 16 dwelling units. 
Parking may be provided within an exterior yard but shall not cover more than 30 percent of the area of the required yard, or any minimum distance between buildings. Where off-street parking is located near building or a public right-of-way, a minimum distance of unobstructed and landscaped yard area shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  From building walls with no openings, ten feet. 
(2)  From building wall with openings, 25 feet. 
(3)  From the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the major thoroughfare plan, eight feet. 
S = (L A + L B + 2(H A + H B )) ° 6 
Where: 
S  = The required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of building A and any wall of building B or the vertical prolongation of either. 
L A  = The total length of building A. The total length of building A is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building A from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building A will intersect any wall of building B. 
L B   = The total length of building B. The total length of building B is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of building B from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn perpendicular to building B will intersect any wall of building A. 
H A   = The height of building A. The height of building A at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building A. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
H B   = The height of building B. The height of building B at any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or portions of a wall or walls along the length of building B. Natural grade level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building. 
DISTANCE SPACING FOR MULTIPLE DWELLINGS 
(e)  Off-street parking shall be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front yard provided that there shall be maintained a minimum unobstructed and landscaped setback of ten feet between the nearest point of the off-street parking area, exclusive of access driveways, and the nearest right-of-way line as indicated on the major thoroughfare plan. In those instances where access drives serve as maneuvering lanes for parking spaces, such drive shall not be considered an access drive for setback purposes. 
(f)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines of the district, except as otherwise specified in the building code, provided that if walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards of not less than ten feet shall be provided. 
On a corner lot which has a rear yard abutting a residential district, there shall be provided a setback of 20 feet on the residential side street. Where a lot borders on a residential district or a street, there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side bordering the residential district or street. 
(g)  Loading spaces shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of buildings, the rear building setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. In OS districts, off-street loading may take place in undesignated places in parking lots provided such loading is of a short-term nature. 
(h)  In the case of a planned commercial center, as defined in section 102-3, the following minimum yard setback requirements shall apply: 
Front yard 75 feet Side yards 60 feet (total of two-120 feet) Rear yard 60 feet  
(i)  Off-street parking shall be permitted in a required side yard setback. 
(j)  No off-street parking shall be permitted in the front yard and no off-street parking shall be permitted closer than 40 feet to any side or rear lot line adjacent to a residential district. 
(k)  No building located on a parcel abutting a residential district shall exceed a maximum overall height of 25 feet measured from the building wall or walls facing the residential district. Building walls facing a residential district shall provide a yard setback at least equal to a ratio of five feet of horizontal setback for each foot of vertical height. 
(l)  All storage shall be in the rear yard and shall be completely screened with an obscuring wall or fence, not less than six feet high, or with a chainlink type fence and a greenbelt planting so as to obscure all view from any adjacent residential, office, or business district or from a public street. 
(m)  Any side or rear yard for a principal use or a conditional use permitted in this district other than one-family, two-family and multiple-family dwellings, shall not be less than the height of the structure at the side or rear lot line. 
(n)  Single-family detached condominiums in condominium subdivisions shall meet all requirements and standards of the district in which such dwellings are to be constructed, including minimum floor area requirements, and excepting minimum lot size, which shall be so developed that the number of dwelling units per gross acre shall not exceed the following: 
(1)  R1-A, 2.2 dwelling units per gross acre. 
(2)  R-1, 2.7 dwelling units per gross acre. 
(3)  R-2, 3.3 dwelling units per gross acre. 
(4)  R-3, 3.7 dwelling units per gross acre. 
(5)  R-4, 4.1 dwelling units per gross acre. 
(o)  Minimum yards for site condominiums shall be provided in accordance with this section and shall be computed as follows: 
(1)  Minimum front yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the front yard area line and the dwelling. 
(2)  Minimum rear yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the rear yard area line and the dwelling. 
(3)  Minimum side yard setbacks shall be equal to the distance between the side yard area line and the dwelling. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.440) 
Sec. 102-458. - Averaged lot size. 
    The intent of this section is to permit the subdivider or developer to vary his lot sizes and lot widths so as to average the minimum size of lot per unit as required in article VII, division 2, of this chapter, for each one-family residential district. If this option is selected, the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  In meeting the average minimum lot size, the subdivision shall be so designed as not to create lots having an area or width greater than ten percent below that area or width required in the schedule of regulations and shall not create an attendant increase in the number of lots. 
(2)  Each final plat submitted as part of a preliminary plat shall average the minimum required for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  All computations showing lot area and the average resulting through this technique shall be indicated on the print of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.445) 
Sec. 102-459. - Open space preservation option. 
    This development option is offered as an alternative means of single family residential development in all of the city's residential districts. The intent of this option is to provide for the creation and preservation of recreation open space areas within residential development as mandated in Michigan Public Act 179 of 2001. This is to be achieved in part by allowing for a reduction in the minimum lot area and lot width requirements by residential district. This modification shall be accomplished without any attendant increase in the number of lots or dwelling units that would be permitted if the property were developed in a conventional subdivision plat. 
(1)  Discretionary use of this option. Development of residential zoned property in the City of South Lyon under the development alternative offered in this section shall be at the option and discretion of the property owner or developer. 
(2)  Pre-application meeting. Prior to submitting an application to develop property under the guidelines of this option, the applicant shall request a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the meeting is to acquaint the applicant with how the option works and the potential advantages that may be gained from it. If the applicant is familiar with the option and has prepared: 
a.  A conceptual drawing showing the number of lots or home sites that could be provided on the site were it to develop in accordance with the applicable lot area, lot width and dwelling density limitations of the residential zoning district in which the property is located, as a conventional subdivision plat or single family site condominium development. This conceptual layout will serve as the basis for establishing dwelling density for the property under the open space preservation option. 
b.  A concept plan showing how the property could be developed under the open space preservation option with no more lots or home sites than were generated on the conceptual drawing outlined in subsection (2)a., above, 
c.  These two plans may be presented at the pre-application meeting. The applicant and his engineer or designer shall attend the meeting along with city personnel, its consulting planner and engineer. 
(3)  Application. An application to develop land under the open space preservation option may be obtained from the city. 
a.  Application form. The application form shall include all information and plans requested on the form. 
b.  Existing conditions drawing. An existing conditions drawing, prepared at an appropriate engineers scale of one inch equals 100 ft., 200 ft., 300 ft., 400 ft., or 500 ft, by a registered land surveyor or registered civil engineer, showing in detail all the natural features on the site, including any streams, ponds, wetlands, trees as outlined below, topography at two foot intervals, utility easements and other easements, along with all street and alley rights-of-way, driveways, buildings and structures. Trees that are six inches or greater in diameter breast high (DBH) shall be tagged in the field, and mapped on the existing conditions drawing. The drawing will also list all tagged trees by their tag number, diameter and specie. A breakdown of the general acres of the site that contain any public street rights-of-way, areas of environmental significance, including wetlands, ponds, stands of trees and steep topography shall be provided, along with the percent each makes up of the total acreage of the property. 
c.  Conventional concept layout. A conceptual drawing showing how the property could be developed in a conventional manner shall be submitted. This drawing is intended to establish dwelling density for the site. The drawing shall be prepared at an engineer scale which shall be the same scale as used to prepare the preliminary open space preservation layout set forth in subsection (3)d., below. The concept drawing shall include site topography, any regulated wetland areas, street rights-of-way, lots or home sites, and peripheral dimensions, lot area, and lot width at the minimum required front yard setback line for the smallest lot in the layout. That lot or home site shall be identified on the drawing. 
d.  Preliminary site plan or subdivision plat. If the two concept plans presented at the pre-application meeting were prepared as set forth in this subsection, they may be submitted as the preliminary site plan or plat. The preliminary site plan or subdivision plat shall: 
1.  Include one drawing that superimposes the proposed development over the existing conditions map so that the number of trees that will be removed by the development can be evaluated and a tree replacement number determined, as set forth in the city's woodlands preservation and landscaping requirements. A registered land surveyor, registered civil engineer or a registered landscape architect shall prepare the drawing. 
2.  Show the location of all proposed streets and alleys and their rights-of-way, utility easements, individual lots or home sites and their individual size in square feet, a legal description, a vicinity sketch, a north point, the name, address and phone number of the developer and the designer, utility easements, peripheral property line dimensions, lot line dimensions, the building footprint for each lot, a typical detail drawing showing minimum required setback dimensions, the area to be set aside as open space along with the area of the open space in square feet or acres and the percent the open space makes up of the net usable property acreage. 
3.  Provide all other applicable information set forth in the city's site plan review or subdivision plat application forms and check lists, along with all applicable requirements set forth in section 102-131, site plan review of this ordinance Code. 
4.  Sufficient site data as may be required by the city to establish engineering feasibility for the development proposed on the preliminary site plan or subdivision plat. 
(4)  Application submittal. The applicant shall pay to the city all applicable review fees as established by the city, at the time of submittal of the application for review. The city shall check the application for completeness including the correct number of site plans or subdivision plats. 
(5)  Public hearing notice. Upon receipt of a properly prepared application to develop land under the guidelines of this section, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing to be held by the planning commission. The hearing shall be advertised and held in accordance with the guidelines set forth in section 102-64., hearing notice, in the South Lyon Zoning Code, as amended. 
(6)  Preliminary site plan or subdivision plat review. If the application is in order, the city shall review the plans in accordance with its established site plan or subdivision plat review procedures. Acceptance of an application does not guarantee review of the application at the next planning commission meeting. 
a.  If the application is in order the city shall stamp each site plan or subdivision plat with the date received and forward the appropriate number of copies to applicable review personnel, and agencies. 
b.  The applicable review personnel shall review the site plan or subdivision plat and return their comments to the city in accordance with the city's review procedures. 
c.  Upon receipt of review comments from review personnel and agencies, the city shall schedule the application for review by the planning commission. 
d.  Review of the application by the planning commission shall be conducted at a duly authorized public hearing. 
e.  Following its review of the application, and depending on whether the development is a subdivision plat or a single family site condominium development, the planning commission may; 
1.  Grant preliminary site plan approval or tentative preliminary plat approval. Preliminary approval may be conditioned on resolution of any concerns expressed by the city, its review personnel or agencies, or by the planning commission, before final site plan or final preliminary plat approval will be considered. 
2.  Table approval pending further changes. If any of the review personnel, or review agencies do not recommend preliminary site plan or tentative preliminary plat approval, or if the planning commission determines after its review that to many critical or major concerns remain to be resolved, it may table its review pending the necessary changes being made to the application. If tabled, the applicant shall make the necessary changes and submit a proper number of revised site plans or subdivision plat drawings to the city for review. The procedure for reviewing a revised preliminary site plan or subdivision plat shall be the same as outlined herein for the initial review. 
3.  Deny preliminary site plan or tentative preliminary plat approval. The planning commission may deny the applicant preliminary site plan approval or tentative preliminary plat approval if compliance with any technical requirement of the zoning ordinance, or subdivision regulations is not met. 
f.  The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall give the applicant leave to prepare a final site plan for review by the planning commission. 
g.  The granting of tentative preliminary plat approval by the planning commission shall grant leave to the applicant to seek tentative preliminary plat approval by the South Lyon city council. 
(7)  Final site plan review. Except as otherwise set forth herein, final site plan approval or final preliminary plat approval shall not be granted by the planning commission until all of the following conditions are met. 
a.  Any conditions attached to preliminary site plan or tentative preliminary plat approval by the planning commission or by the city council in the case of a plat, shall be satisfactorily resolved prior to submittal of a final site plan or final preliminary plat for review by the planning commission. 
b.  A sufficient number of final site plans, or final preliminary plats, as required by the city, shall be submitted. 
c.  Upon receipt of the final site plans or final preliminary plats the city shall stamp the date of receipt on each site plan or subdivision plat and forward a copy of the stamped site plan or plat to the applicable review personnel and review agencies for their review and comment. 
d.  The applicable review personnel and review agencies shall review the final site plan or final preliminary plat and forward their comments in writing to the city. 
e.  When the city finds the final site plan or final preliminary plat to be in order it shall schedule the final site plan or final preliminary plat for review by the planning commission. 
f.  After reviewing the final site plan or final preliminary plat, the planning commission may grant final site plan approval, or final preliminary plat approval, provided all conditions that may have been attached to preliminary site plan or to any tentative preliminary plat approval have been satisfactorily resolved. Except, as otherwise set forth in this subsection, the granting of final site plan approval by the planning commission shall be without any conditions. The exceptions are, any final site engineering details that are normally worked out following final approval, and pending the city's review and approval of any required master deed, by-laws, protective covenants or deed restrictions associated with the development. The granting of final preliminary plat approval shall give the applicant leave to seek final preliminary plat approval by the city council. 
g.  The planning commission may table acting on the final site plan or final preliminary plat pending any changes or revisions that need to be made to the plan before final approval will be given, or it may deny final site plan or final preliminary plat approval if any technical concerns remain unresolved at the time of final review by the planning commission. 
(8)  Dwelling density limitations. Dwelling density under this option shall be no greater than set forth in this subsection by zoning district or dwelling density that could be achieved on the property were it developed as a conventional subdivision plat, which ever results in the lesser number of lots or home sites. 
a.  The number of single family dwellings by zoning district is set forth as follows. 
District Dwelling per acre R-1A 2.9 R-1 3.6 R-2 4.4 R-3 5.0  
(9)  Lot area, lot width and building setback requirements. The minimum lot area and lot width requirements of section 102-456, scheduled of regulations in this zoning code to the contrary not withstanding, the following minimum lot area and lot width requirements shall apply. 
a.  Individual lots or home sites. Shall be subject to the following standards. 
1.  Lot area and lot width - The minimum area and width of each lot or home site may be reduced to the following area and width by zoning district. 
Zoning 
District Lot Area 
In Square Feet Lot Width 
In Feet R1-A 12,000 100 R-1 10,000 80 R-2 8,750 70 R-3 7,500 60  
b.  Building setbacks. The minimum building setback requirements for each dwelling building shall be the same as set forth in section 102-456 of this zoning code, by zoning district, except rear yards may be reduced to 25 feet when a lot or home site borders on land dedicated to open space, provided that the width of the open space shall not be less than 100 feet measured from lot to lot or home site to home site across the open space area. 
(10)  Open space preservation. Land to be placed in perpetuity, as open space shall meet the following requirements. 
a.  Under the provisions of subsection (9)a. of this section, for every square foot of land gained through the reduction in the area of a lot or home site below the minimum land area requirements of section 102-456 of this zoning code by zoning district, at least an equal amount of land area shall be placed in perpetuity as open space for the common use and enjoyment of the home owners living in the development, except not less than 20 percent of the area of the site used to compute overall dwelling density shall be set aside as open space, as stipulated in PA 179, or not less than four acres, whichever is the greater amount. 
b.  Except as otherwise permitted in subsection (10)c. of this section, area reserved as open space shall not include sub aqueous land areas such as wetlands including seasonal wetland areas, or bodies of water that are inaccessible or unsuitable for recreation purposes, except bodies of water including lakes or ponds or streams that are accessible and may be used for recreation, including storm water detention or retention basins when they can be unfenced and made a integral landscape feature it may be included as usable open space. All land reserved for recreation shall maintain its natural drainage. The entire recreation open space may however, be located in a flood plain. 
c.  Land set aside for recreation open space shall to the extent practical, be distributed so as to serve the largest number of lots or home sites in the development. In those instances were it can be shown that 20 percent or more of the area of the site that was used to compute dwelling density, consists of sub aqueous lands that could not otherwise be counted as open space under subsection (10)b. of this section, up to ten percent of such area may be counted towards meeting the 20 percent recreation open space requirement of this section, except the planning commission at its discretion, may permit greater than ten percent of the required open space area to consist of wetlands, provided that in no event shall the commission permit all of the required open space to consist solely of wetlands. 
d.  All land set aside for recreation open space shall be set aside for that purpose and that purpose only. Once established and reserved as open space, no part of any open space so established shall thereafter be converted to land for development or for any other use without the express approval of the city and the residents living within the development. In no event shall any reduction in previously approved open space area result in less than 20 percent of the land area of the site or less than four acres of the property, as set forth in subsection (10)a. of this section be reserved as recreation open space. 
e.  Functional space shall be made accessible to as many residents as possible, In those instances where open space in an existing development extends to a common property line of a proposed new development, at least a portion of the open space in the new development shall join the open space in the abutting development. Such open space connections shall not be dead end open space areas, but shall be designed to allow pedestrian and bicycle riding access from one such development to another. When a residential open space preservation development abuts a commercial development, or undeveloped land that is zoned for commercial use, open space of sufficient width to permit connecting the two sites together via a trail or pathway, shall be provided. 
f.  All open space shall be clearly stipulated in any covenants placed on the development as area or areas to be set-aside in perpetuity as recreation open space. 
(11)  Assurance of open space preservation. The area of the property to be preserved as recreation open space as set forth in subsection (10), of this section shall be subject to the following preservation assurances. 
a.  Single family site condominiums. The location of all open space areas shall be described by legal description in the master deed. A general description of what the open space areas contain will be included. These areas shall be set forth as open space areas, which are to be preserved as open space areas. Open space areas may be identified as common areas, as defined in Michigan PA59 of 1978, as amended. All areas of any open space that will require maintenance shall be so identified in the master deed and the manner in which these areas will be maintained shall be clearly spelled out in the associations by-laws. 
b.  Single family subdivision plat. The location of all open space areas shall be described by legal description, along with a general description of what the open space areas will contain. These areas shall be set forth as open space areas to be preserved as open space in the form of protective covenants, or deed restrictions. The covenants shall also require the forming of an association of homeowners who shall be governed by association by-laws. The by-laws shall clearly spell out the responsibilities of the home owners association, including how all open space areas required in subsection (10), of this section, will be maintained by the association. 
c.  City approval. A master deed, protective covenants or deed restrictions, and the by-laws of the association of home owners, as required in this section, shall be subject to review and approval by the city. Of particular importance to the city shall be assurance that all open space areas are properly set aside for such purposes and those elements of the open space areas that will require maintenance, will be properly cared for. The city may refer such documents to the city attorney for review and comment. 
(12)  Life of site plan approvals. The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall be good for one year, commencing on the date of approval and terminating on the same date one year later. The granting of final site plan approval by the planning commission shall be good for one year, commencing on the date of approval and terminating on the same date one year later. 
If after the granting of preliminary site plan approval, but before the one year termination date a revised site plan is submitted and approved by the planning commission, the one year expiration date will be one year from the date of revised site plan approval. This same procedure shall apply to time limitations for final site plan approval as well. 
(13)  Life of subdivision plat approvals. Approval of a tentative and a final preliminary plat by the city council and approval of a final plat by the city council shall be subject to all time limitations that may be set forth in the city's subdivision regulations code. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.450; Ord. of 7-28-03; Ord. of 1-26-09(2)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 7-28-03, adopted July 28, 2003, repealed the former § 102-459, and enacted a new § 102-459 as set out herein. The former § 102-459 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.450. 
Sec. 102-460. - One family cluster housing option. 
(a)  Generally. The intent of this section is to permit the development of one-family residential patterns which, through design innovation, will introduce development flexibility so as to provide for the sound physical development of sites in those instances where the normal subdivision platting process, or single family site condominium procedure, or development under the open space preservation option, as set forth and regulated in this ordinance Code, would otherwise be unreasonably restrictive. To accomplish this, the following modifications to the conventional one family residential standards of this ordinance Code may be permitted, provided the qualifying conditions set forth in this section and the standards applicable to the clustering of dwelling units, are met. 
(b)  Qualifying conditions. In all one family residential districts, one family clustering may be permitted. In approving areas for one family cluster development under this section, the planning commission shall find that at least one of the following conditions or characteristics exists on the property. 
(1)  An area generally parallel to and generally not to exceed 360 feet in depth on those unsubdivided parcels of land having frontage on a major thoroughfare, as depicted on the city's master plan map, and having a right-of-way width of 120 feet and being so located as to provide transition between nonresidential or major thoroughfares and one-family development. 
(2)  An unsubdivided area which the planning commission finds to be of such unusual shape, or which is found to contain unsuitable or generally non-buildable soil conditions, or which has unusually severe topographic conditions, or which is characterized by some other unusual physical or development factor which would make sound physical development under the normal subdivision or single family site condominium approach impractical. 
(3)  An unsubdivided area which the planning commission finds to be characterized by major stands of trees, streams, or other water courses including wetlands, which as significant natural assets ought to be preserved, such conditions making sound development of the property under the normal subdivision or single family site condominium approach, undesirable. 
(4)  The natural landforms are so arranged that the change of elevation within the site includes slopes in excess of 15 percent between these elevations. These elevation changes and slopes shall appear as the typical feature of the site rather than exceptional or infrequent features of the site. 
(5)  The achieving of road grades of less than six percent is impossible unless the site were mass graded. Providing clusters of one family dwellings will, in the opinion of the planning commission, allow for greater preservation of the site's natural setting. 
(c)  Dwelling density. The maximum number of dwellings that may be permitted on the property shall be computed in the following manner. 
(1)  The dwelling density of sites containing five or fewer acres, excluding any existing public road rights-of-way, shall not exceed the number of dwellings per acre set forth herein by zoning district. 
(2)  Sites containing more than five acres, shall not exceed the total number of homes that could be built on the property were it to develop as a conventional subdivision plat, or not to exceed the total number of dwellings per acre set forth herein by zoning district, whichever results in the fewer number of dwellings. 
(3)  The overall dwelling density permitted on those parcels of land containing five or fewer acres and which qualify for development under the one family cluster housing option, and in which there will be no public street rights-of-way, the total number of dwellings per acre by zoning district shall not exceed the following dwelling density rations. If any interior streets will be in public rights-of-way, the dwelling density limitations set forth herein for sites over five acres, shall apply. 
Zoning district Dwellings per acre R-1A 2.2 R-1 2.7 R-2 3.3 R-3 3.7  
The overall dwelling density permitted on those parcels of land containing more than five acres and which qualify for development under the one family cluster housing option, and all streets will be in pubic rights-of-way, shall not exceed the following number of dwelling density rations by zoning district, unless development of the site as a conventional subdivision plat were to result in fewer dwellings per acre, were to result in fewer dwellings per acre, as stipulated in subsection (c)(2) above. 
Zoning district Dwellings per acre R-1A 2.9 R-1 3.6 R-2 4.4 R-3 5.0  
(d)  Dwelling building configurations. Under this section the attaching of one family homes in clusters and the detaching of one family homes in clusters shall be in accordance with the following applicable guidelines. 
(1)  The attaching of one family homes in clusters shall be permitted when said homes are attached one to another either through a common party wall or garage wall which does not have more than 50 percent of an individual wall or more than 25 percent of the total exterior walls of a home in common with the wall or walls of an adjoining home, or by means of an architectural detail which does not form interior room space, or through a common party wall in only the garage portion of the adjacent structures, there being no common party wall relationship permitted through any other portion of an residential dwelling unit. 
(2)  The detaching of one family homes in clusters shall be permitted so long as each home is separated from any other home in the cluster by a distance of six feet if the opposing walls of the home have no openings and a distance of ten feet if either or both opposing walls of two dwellings in a cluster have openings. No detached garage shall be located closer than ten feet from any dwelling unit. 
(3)  The maximum number of homes in a cluster shall be subject to review by the planning commission, except in no event shall a cluster contain more than four homes. 
(4)  Structures, including garages, shall be located no closer to a street right-of-way or service drive than 25 feet, except the exterior side wall of an end unit in a cluster may be located 15 feet from an interior street right-of-way or service drive when that wall does not have a garage or pedestrian door. 
(5)  Except as otherwise set forth herein, each cluster of one family attached or detached homes shall be separated from any other cluster of attached or detached one family homes by a distance determined by the number of homes in opposing clusters as set forth in the following scale. 
Total number of homes in a cluster 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 Minimum distance (in feet) 50 45 40 35 30 25 20  
The planning commission may vary the above minimum separation standards in only those instances where compliance with the strict application of the above standards would result in the loss of, or partial loss of a site amenity of particular value, such as a landmark tree, or a wetland area, or a steep topographic condition. 
In no event shall the reduction in any distance between clusters result in any increase in the number of dwelling units permitted on the property beyond the maximum number of dwellings permitted, as set forth in subsection (c) of this section. 
(6)  All clusters of one family dwellings that abut a designated major thoroughfare shall have a rear yard or side yard relationship to the thoroughfare. 
(7)  A landscaped earth berm at least five feet high shall be provided along the entire property line abutting any major thoroughfares. The area containing the base of the earth berm and any drainage swale directly associated with the earth berm shall be considered as part of the common area of the site. 
(8)  The base of any such earth berm and its attendant drainage swale shall be located no closer than 15 feet from any dwelling unit. The planning commission shall find that the slopes of any such earth berm shall be gentle enough so as not to erode when planted in grass. The planning commission shall also review the earth berm as it relates to street intersections, determining that the horizontal view of oncoming traffic is not obscured. 
The planning commission may permit an alternative landscape treatment along a thoroughfare in lieu of a landscaped earth berm when a landscaped earth berm is not practical due to site conditions. 
(9)  Street ingress and egress to the major thoroughfares shall be kept to a minimum. 
(e)  Review procedure. When reviewing the plans and acting on an application to develop land under this option the planning commission shall follow the procedures outlined below. 
(1)  An application to develop under the one family cluster housing option shall be submitted for review by the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing. The application shall contain the information outlined in section 102-459 of this ordinance Code, being subsection (3)a. and b., as well as a statement or statements detailing why, in the applicant's opinion, the property meets one or more of the qualifying conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section. The planning commission in making its review shall find at least one of the qualifying conditions set forth in subsection (b) of this section, is met. 
(2)  Approval to develop property under the guidelines of this option shall give leave to the applicant to proceed with the preparation of a preliminary site plan. A preliminary site plan shall include all of the applicable information set forth for a preliminary site plan in section 102-459, 1 of this ordinance Code, being subsection (3)a. and b., and c. if over five acres, except lot requirements shall not apply unless the development is to be a subdivision plat, and subsection d.1., 2., 3., and 4. apply. The preliminary site plan shall show the location of each dwelling envelope and any detached accessory buildings such as garages. If the development is to be a condominium development, the condominium unit, (building envelope) limited common areas and the common areas shall be identified on the drawing. 
(3)  The planning commission shall review the preliminary site plan in accordance with the guidelines set forth in section 102-459, of this ordinance Code, being subsection (6)a. through d. and e.1., 2. and 3. 
(4)  The granting of preliminary site plan approval by the planning commission shall give leave to the applicant to prepare a final site plan for review. The final site plan shall include a detailed landscape-planting plan along with exterior building wall elevation drawings and floor plans for a typical dwelling unit. The planning commission shall review the final site plan following the guidelines set forth in section 102-459 of this ordinance Code, being the applicable portions of subsection (7)a. through g. 
(f)  Open space requirements. Land to be placed in perpetuity as open space within the development shall include at least 20 percent of the same amount of land area used to compute dwelling density, as set forth in subsection (c)(1) of this section for sites five or fewer aces, or subsection (c)(2) of this section for sites over five acres. Open space shall include all of the designated common land of the site. Furthermore, land set aside as open space shall adhere to the applicable requirements of section 102-459, of this ordinance Code, being subsection (10)a. through f. 
(g)  Life of site plan and subdivision plat approvals. Site plan or subdivision plat approvals shall follow the applicable guidelines of section 102-459, of this ordinance Code, being subsections (12) and (13). 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.455; Ord. of 2-24-03; Ord. of 7-28-03; Ord. of 1-26-09(2)) 
Editor's note- Ord. of 7-28-03, adopted July 28, 2003, repealed the former § 102-460, and enacted a new § 102-460 as set out herein. The former § 102-460 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.455; Ord. of 2-24-03. 
Secs. 102-461-102-475. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 102-476. - Parking requirements. 
(a)  Generally. There shall be provided in all districts at the time of erection or enlargement of any main building or structure, automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces. The number of off-street parking spaces in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces may be located within a nonrequired side or rear yard and within the rear yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. Off-street parking shall not be permitted within a front yard or a side yard setback unless otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking for other than residential use shall be either on the same lot or within 300 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest point of the building to the nearest point of the off-street parking lot. Ownership shall be shown of all lots or parcels intended for use as parking by the applicant. 
(3)  Required residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve, and subject to the provisions section 102-431, accessory buildings, structures and uses, of this chapter. Front yard parking in residential districts on other than a driveway shall be prohibited. Parking on residential street between the curb or curb line and the lots line nearest the street shall be prohibited whether or not any sidewalk or curb is actually in place on such street. 
(4)  Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere. 
(5)  Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this chapter, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
(6)  Two or more buildings or uses may collectively provide the required off-street parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the several individual uses computed separately. 
(7)  In the instance of dual function of off-street parking spaces where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the board of appeals may grant an exception. 
(8)  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks, or the repair of vehicles is prohibited. 
(9)  For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which the planning commission considers is similar in type. 
(10)  When units or measurements determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction up to and including one-half shall be disregarded and fractions over one-half shall require one parking space. 
(11)  For the purpose of computing the number of parking spaces required, the definition of "useable floor area" in section 102-3 shall govern. 
_____ 
(12)  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Use Number of Minimum Parking 
Use Spaces Per Unit of Measure a. Residential 1. Residential, one-family and two-family Two for each dwelling unit 2. Residential, multiple-family Two for each dwelling unit plus one visitor parking space for each three dwelling units. 3. Housing for the elderly One for each two units and one for each employee. Should units revert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be provided. 4. Mobile home park Two for each mobile home site and one for each employee of the mobile home park. 5. Bed and breakfast dwelling Two for the owner and or operator and one for each leasable room. b. Institutional 1. Churches and temples One for each three seats or six feet of pews in the main unit of worship. 2. Hospitals/health care centers Two for each one bed. 3. Convalescent homes and nursing homes One for each two employees plus one for each four persons in residence. 4. Foster care facilities One for each two residents plus one for each employee. 5. Elementary and junior high schools One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator in addition to the requirements for auditorium or stadium. 6. Senior high schools One for each one teacher, employee, or administrator, and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements of the auditorium. 7. Private clubs, or lodge halls One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes. 8. Private golf clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or other similar uses One for each two member families or individuals plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. 9. Golf courses, open to the general public, except miniature or "par 3" courses Six for each one golf hole and one for each one employee, plus spaces required for each accessory use such as a restaurant or bar. 10. Fraternity or sorority One for each five permitted active members, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater. 11. Stadium, sports arena or similar place of outdoor assembly One for each four seats or eight feet of benches. 12. Theaters and auditoriums One for each three seats plus one for each two employees. 13. Library, museum or post office One for each 150 square feet of usable floor area. 14. Child and adult care facilities (a) Family day care homes for up to six adults Two for each dwelling unit plus one off-street parking space for each care giver. (b) Group day care home for up to 12 adults Two for each dwelling unit plus one off-street parking space for each care giver. (c) Group day care home for children Two for each dwelling unit plus one off-street parking space for each care giver. (d) Dependent day care center for children One off-street parking space for each care giver plus one space for each ten children in the facility. (e) Dependent day care center for adults One off-street parking space for each care giver plus one space for each 20 adults in the facility. c. Offices 1. Banks One for each 100 square feet of usable floor space. 2. Banks (drive-through) One for each employee. In addition, reservoir waiting spaces at each service window or station shall be provided at the rate of five for each service window or station. Each waiting space shall measure not less than 20 feet in length. 3. Business offices or professional offices except as indicated in the following item 4. One for each 200 square feet of usable floor space. 4. Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar professions One for each 50 square feet of usable floor area in waiting rooms, and one for each examination or treatment room, dental chair, or similar use area. d. Business and commercial 1. Planned commercial or shopping center One for each 100 square feet of usable floor area for the first 15,000 square feet. One for each 125 square feet for the next 15,001 to 450,000 square feet of usable floor area. One for each 150 square feet for that area in excess of 450,000 square feet of usable floor area. 2. Automobile repair Two for each service stall plus one for each employee. 3. Auto wash One for each one employee. In addition, reservoir parking spaces equal in number to five times the maximum capacity of the auto wash. Maximum capacity of the auto wash shall mean the greatest number of automobiles possible undergoing some phase of washing at the same time, which shall be determined by dividing the length in feet of each car wash line by 20. 4. Auto wash (self service or coin-operated) Three for each washing stall in addition to the stall itself. 5. Athletic clubs, exercise establishments, health studios, sauna baths, judo clubs and similar uses One parking space for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes plus one space per employee. In those instances where memberships are provided for, not less than one space per each five memberships shall be provided plus one space per employee or one space for each two clothing lockers plus one space per employee whichever is the larger. 6. Amusement arcade One for each one game table and one for each amusement device. 7. Beauty parlor or barbershop Two spaces for each of the first two beauty or barber chairs, 11/2 spaces for each additional chair. 8. Bowling alleys Five for each one bowling lane plus spaces required for accessory uses such as a bar or restaurant. 9. Dance halls, pool or billiard parlors, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats One for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes or one space for each 200 square feet of gross floor area, whichever is greater. 10. Commercial outdoor recreation facilities Four for each batting cage, archery ranges or similar activity. 11. Drive-in restaurant One for each employee and one for each 25 square feet of usable floor area. 12. Drive-through One for each employee and five stack-up spaces for each drive through window or station. 13. Carry-out (with no eating on premises) One for each employee and one for each 60 square feet of usable floor area with a minimum of four spaces. 14. Establishments for sale and consumption, on the premises, of beverages, food or refreshment One for each 75 square feet of usable floor area or one for each two persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local, county or state fire, building or health codes, whichever is greater. 15. Furniture and appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade, shoe repair, and other similar uses One for each 800 square feet of usable floor area. (For that floor area used in processing, one additional space shall be provided for each two persons employed therein.) 16. Gasoline service stations (full-service) Two for each lubrication stall, rack or pit; and one for each service vehicle used by the service station, in addition to space provided at each fuel pump dispenser. Gasoline service stations providing car wash facilities, sale of food, beverages and other products shall provide additional off-street parking spaces based on the requirements for such uses. 17. Gasoline service stations (self-service) One parking space for each 50 square feet of floor area in the cashier and office areas in addition to space provided at each fuel pump dispenser. In no instance shall such facility provide fewer than three spaces for cashier's and office use. Gasoline service stations providing car wash facilities, sale of food, beverages and other products shall provide additional off-street parking spaces based upon the requirements for such uses. 18. Ice skating or roller rink One for each seat or six feet of benches, or one for each 150 square feet of skating area, whichever is the greater. 19. Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners One for each two washing and/or dry-cleaning machines. 20. Miniature or "par 3" golf courses Three for each one hole plus one for each one employee. 21. Golf driving range Two spaces for each driving tee plus three spaces for employees. 22. Mortuary establishments One for each 50 square feet of assembly room usable floor area. 23. Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishments One for each one occupancy unit plus one for each one employee plus spaces as required for accessory uses such as a bar, restaurant, meeting rooms, etc. 24. Motor vehicle sales and service establishments One for each 200 square feet of usable floor area of sales room and one for each one auto service stall in the service room. 25. Retail stores except as otherwise specified herein One for each 150 square feet of usable floor space. 26. Telephone exchange buildings One for every one employee on the largest working shift. 27. Open front stores such as, but not limited to: dairy bars and fruit and vegetable stands Eight parking spaces plus one space per employee. 28. Tennis club paddleball club, racquetball club and other similar uses Four spaces per court, plus such additional spaces as may be required herein for affiliated uses such as restaurants, plus one space per employee. 29. Commercial outdoor recreation facilities (such as archery ranges, batting cages, etc.) Four for each batting cage, archery range or similar activity. e. Industrial 1. Industrial or research establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every 11/2 employees in the largest working shift or one for each 450 square feet of usable floor area in those instances where shift size is not known. Space on the site shall also be provided for all construction workers during periods of plant construction. 2. Warehouses and wholesale establishments and related accessory offices Five plus one for every one employee in the largest working shift, or five plus one for every 1,700 square feet of usable floor space, whichever is greater.  
_____
(b)  Parking for handicapped (all districts). Parking for handicapped in all districts shall comply with the provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) and shall comply with the Michigan Barrier Free Design Law. The number and layout of spaces required shall comply with ADA accessibility guidelines including the following: 
Accessible Parking Spaces* 
 (Required Minimum) Accessible 
Spaces   1 to 25 1       26 to 50 2      51 to 75 3      76 to 100 4      101 to 150 5      151 to 200 6      201 to 300 7      301 to 400 8      401 to 500 9      501 to 1,000 2**    1,001 and over 20***  
*Accessible spaces are required to be 8' 0? wide, with an adjacent access aisle 5' 0? wide. One in every eight accessible spaces shall have an access aisle 8' 8? wide (rather than five feet) and shall be signed "van accessible." 
** Percent of total. 
*** Plus one space for each 100 over 1,000. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.480) 
Sec. 102-477. - Off-street parking space layout, standards, construction and maintenance. 
    Whenever the off-street parking requirements in section 102-476 require the building of an off-street parking facility, or where P-1 vehicular parking districts are provided, such off-street parking lots shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
(1)  No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit therefore is issued by the building inspector. Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the city in such form as may be determined by the building inspector and shall be accompanied with two sets of plans for the development and construction of the parking lot showing the provisions of this section will be fully complied with. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 102-131 of this chapter, in those instances where an existing building use has provided adequate parking under this chapter and a change of use is proposed wherein parking requirements for such proposed new use are equal to or lesser than those available on the site, site plan review by the planning commission shall not be required. Such parking lot shall receive the review of the building inspector. 
_____ 
(2)  Off-street parking facilities shall provide spaces for the handicapped in accordance with the provision of Act 230 of the Public Acts of the State of Michigan, 1972, as amended. 
Plans for the layout of off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with the following minimum requirements, except as modified by Act 230: 
Parking 
Pattern 
(Degrees) Maneuvering 
Lane Width 
(Feet) Parking 
Space 
Width 
(Feet) Parking 
Space 
Length 
(Feet) Total Width of 
One Tier 
of Parking 
Spaces Plus 
Maneuvering Lane 
(Feet) Total Width of 
Two Tiers of 
Space Plus 
Maneuvering Lane 
(Feet) 0 (parallel 
parking) 12 8 20 20 28 30 to 53 12 81/2 20 32 52 54 to 74 15 81/2 20 361/2 58 75 to 90 20 9 20 40 60  
(3)  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. 
Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall not be across land zoned for single-family residential use. 
(5)  All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the 90-degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
(6)  Each entrance and exit to and from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned for other than single-family residential use shall be at least 25 feet distant from adjacent property located in any single-family residential district and from any street corner. 
(7)  The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall not less than four feet six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the next zoning district is designated as a residential district. 
When a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
(8)  The parking area shall be so designed as to provide a landscape plan in accord with section 102-491. 
(9)  The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the city engineer. The parking area shall be surfaced prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or, in case of seasonal difficulties, a guarantee acceptable to the city. Except for single-family residential uses, the perimeter of all hard surfaced parking areas and landscaped islands shall be constructed of concrete curbing. In those instances where a parking area is nonconforming with respect to paving, the expansion of the use of land or structure shall require the paving of such parking area in conformity with this section. 
Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. All plans for surface with drainage shall be reviewed and approved by the city engineer. 
(10)  All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
(11)  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
(12)  The board of appeals, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.485; Ord. of 8-11-97) 
Sec. 102-478. - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    On the same premises with every building, structure or part thereof, involving the receipt or distribution of vehicles or materials or merchandise, there shall be provided and maintained on the lot, adequate space for standing, loading, and unloading in order to avoid undue interference with public use of dedicated rights-of-way. Such space shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  All spaces shall be provided as required in article VII, division 2, of this chapter under minimum rear yards (footnote (g) sections 102-456 and 102-457), except as hereinafter provided for I districts. 
(2)  Within an I district all spaces shall be laid out in the dimensions of at least ten by 50 feet, or 500 square feet in area, with a clearance of at least 14 feet in height. Loading dock approaches shall be provided with a pavement having an asphaltic or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent durable and dustless surface. All spaces in I districts shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to usable floor area. 
Gross Floor Area 
(in Square Feet) Loading and Unloading 
Space Required 0-1,400 None 1,401-20,000 One space 20,001-100,000 One space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet 100,001 and over Five spaces  
(3)  All loading and unloading in an I district shall be provided off street in the rear yard or interior side yard, and shall in no instance be permitted in a front yard. In those instances where exterior side yards have a common relationship with an industrial district across a public thoroughfare, loading and unloading may take place in said exterior side yard when the setback is equal to at least 50 feet. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.490) 
Secs. 102-479-102-490. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 102-491. - Plant materials and landscaping requirements. 
    Whenever in this chapter a greenbelt or planting is required, it shall be planted to completion within three months, and no later than November 30, from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy if said certificate is issued during April 1-September 30 period; if the certificate issued during the October 1-March 30 period, the planting shall be completed no later than the ensuing May 31; plantings shall thereafter be reasonably maintained, including permanence and health of plant materials to provide a screen to abutting properties and including the absence of weeds and refuse. Spacing, as required by this section, shall be provided in any greenbelt or planting. 
(1)  Site plan. Whenever a greenbelt or planting screen is required under the provisions of this chapter, a site plan of the parcel to be developed, together with a detailed planting plan of said greenbelt, shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval prior to the issuance of a building permit. The site plan shall be prepared by a registered or degreed landscape architect and shall indicate, to scale, the proposed location and height of buildings and other structures, the location of public walks, roadways and utilities, and the proposed location of off-street parking, loading, service, and outside storage areas and points of ingress/egress to the site. The planting plan shall indicate, to scale, the location, spacing, starting size, and description for each unit of plant material proposed for use within the required greenbelt area, together with the finished grade elevations proposed therein. Plantings will be inspected by the City of South Lyon's designated registered landscape architect to ensure conformity with the ordinance. The expense of the inspection shall be covered by a performance bond. 
(2)  Plant material spacing and size. 
a.  Plant material shall not be located within four feet of the property line. 
b.  Where plant materials are placed in two or more rows, plantings shall be staggered in rows. 
c.  Evergreen trees shall not be less than eight feet in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 20 feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than 12 feet on centers. 
d.  Narrow evergreen trees shall not be less than five feet in height When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than ten feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall be spaced not more than 12 feet on centers. 
e.  Large shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in height. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than six feet on centers. When planted in rows, they shall not be more than four feet on centers. 
f.  Small shrubs shall not be less than 30 inches in spread. They shall be planted not more than four feet on centers. 
g.  Large deciduous trees shall not be less than 21/2 inches in caliper. When placed informally, they shall be planted not more than 30 feet on centers. 
h.  Small deciduous trees shall not be less than 11/2 inches in caliper. When planted informally, they shall be spaced not more than 15 feet on centers. 
_____ 
(3)  Spacing requirements. A mixture of plant materials (evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs) is required in all landscape plans as a protective measure against disease and insect infestation. Plant materials used together informally shall meet the following on-center minimum spacing requirements: 
MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN PLANT MATERIALS 
Plant 
Material 
Types 
(Feet) Evergreen 
Trees 
(Feet) Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees 
(Feet) Large 
Deciduous 
Trees 
(Feet) Small 
Deciduous 
Trees 
(Feet) Large 
Shrubs 
(Feet) Small 
Shrubs 
(Feet) Evergreen Trees Min. 10 Min. 12 Min. 20 Min. 12 Min. 6 Min. 5 Narrow Evergreen Trees Min. 12 Min. 5 Min. 15 Min. 10 Min. 5 Min. 4 Large Deciduous Trees Min. 20 Min. 15 Min. 20 Min. 15 Min. 5 Min. 3 Small Deciduous Trees Min. 12 Min. 10 Min. 15 Min. 8 Min. 6 Min. 3 Large Shrubs Min. 6 Min. 5 Min. 5 Min. 6 Min. 4 
Max. 6 Min. 5 Small Shrubs Min. 5 Min. 4 Min. 3 Min. 3 Min. 5 Min. 3  
(4)  Parking lot landscaping and screening. 
a.  Parking lots which are visible from a public right-of-way (excluding a public alley) shall have the following landscaping between the parking lot and the right-of-way: 
1.  A landscaped strip at least ten feet in width or wider as may be required in article VII, division 2, of this chapter. 
2.  One tree for every 40 feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the parking lot. 
b.  Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet in area shall meet the following landscaping requirements for the interior of the parking lot: 
1.  Within the interior of the parking lot there shall be one square foot of landscaped area for each 15 square feet of the parking lot. In computing the lot area for this subsection, the area 20 feet from the required perimeter landscaping may be excluded. 
2.  Each interior landscaped area shall have at least 150 square feet. 
3.  The landscaped areas shall be located in a manner that breaks up the expanse of paving throughout the parking lot. 
4.  There shall be at least one deciduous tree for each 100 square feet or fraction thereof of interior landscaped area. Each individual landscaped area shall contain at least one tree. 
c.  Parking lots of greater than 5,000 square feet, but less than 10,000 square feet, shall have interior landscaping located within the lot or around its perimeter. 
d.  A parking lot of an office, commercial or industrial use adjacent to a public park facility or land principally used or zoned for residential purposes shall have the following between it and all areas of such park or residential land: 
1.  A landscaped area at least 15 feet wide. 
2.  One tree for each 30 feet or fraction thereof abutting land. 
3.  A hedge, berm or combination thereof forming a continuous screen at least four feet high. 
(5)  Trash receptacle landscaping and screening. Trash receptacles shall be screened from public view as follows: 
a.  In all nonresidential districts trash receptacles shall be located at the rear of buildings and shall be screened with a constructed enclosure, earth berm or landscaping to effectively obscure the receptacle from abutting properties or public streets. In those instances where trash receptacles cannot be located in the rear of the buildings, a location that is obscured from any abutting residential district and from public streets may be allowed by the planning commission. 
b.  In residential districts, trash receptacles shall be located and screened with a constricted enclosure, earth berm or landscaping to effectively obscure the receptacle from abutting properties or public streets. 
_____
SUGGESTED PLANT MATERIALS 
EVERGREEN TREES Pine Douglas Fir Fir Hemlock Spruce NARROW EVERGREENS Red Cedar Arborvitae Junipers Oaks Ginkgo (male) Birch Linden Hard Maples Beech Honeylocust (seedless and thornless) Ash (seedless) SMALL DECIDUOUS TREES Hornbeam Hawthorn Magnolia Mountain Ash Redbud Flowering Dogwood Flowering Crabs (disease resistant varieties) LARGE SHRUBS Deciduous: Honeysuckle Lilac Forsythia Border Privet Buckthorn Sumac Pyracantha Barberry Flowering Quince Sargent Crabapple Dogwood (Red Osier, Grey) Cotoneaster (Pekin, Spreading) Evergreen: Irish Yew Hicks Yew Mugo Pine Pfitzer Juniper Savin Juniper SMALL SHRUBS Deciduous: Regal Privet Fragrant Sumac Japanese Quince Potentilla Compact Burning Bush Cotoneaster (Cranberry, Rockspray) Evergreen: Dwarf Mugo Pine Big Leaf Winter Creeper Arborvitae Low Spreading Junipers (Andora, Hughes, Tamarack. etc.) Spreading Yews (Dense, Brown's, Ward, etc.) TREES NOT SUGGESTED Box Elder Willows Soft Maples Poplars Horse Chestnut (nut bearing) Tree of Heaven Elms Catalpa Russian Olive  
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.500; Ord. of 1-22-01(2), § 1; Ord. of 11-9-09) 

Sec. 102-492. - Tree protection removal replacement; permit required. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of the tree protection removal requirements set forth in this section is to protect to the extent practical, the existing tree cover in the city and when trees must be removed, to sustain tree cover in the city by replacing trees in the community that are removed. It is the intent of this provision not to grant a permit for the removal of any tree when an alternative design solution may exist that would be consistent with the applicable requirements that would be imposed on the development by the City of South Lyon Zoning Code. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be a violation of this section for any person, except as otherwise provided herein, to remove a tree or trees or to cause a tree or trees to be removed in the City of South Lyon without first obtaining a tree removal permit. Tree removal permits are issued by the city in accordance with the applicable standards of this section. 
(c)  When issuance of a tree removal permit is required. The issuance of a permit to remove a tree or trees on property in the city shall be required for: 
(1)  The removal, relocation or destruction of any tree, except as may be otherwise exempted in subsection (g) of this section. 
(2)  The construction of any building, structure, or off-street parking area, the depositing of any materials, land clearing, grubbing or grading within the drip line of any protected tree. 
(3)  The removal of trees that pose a safety hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or threaten to cause disruption to public utility service. 
(4)  The removal of trees that pose a safety hazard to buildings, structures or off-street parking areas. 
(5)  The removal of trees that completely prevent access to a lot or parcel. 
(6)  The removal of trees that unreasonably prevent development of a lot or parcel, or the physical use thereof. The removal of trees that impede development may be allowed when the following conditions exist: 
a.  When it is necessary due to the location of a building, structure or off-street parking area, or site improvement and when the planning commission has concluded that no reasonable alternative location for these improvements can be achieved without causing undue hardship. 
b.  The tree is dead, diseased, injured and in danger of falling, is too close to an existing or proposed building, structure or off-street parking area, or interferes with existing utility services, safe vision clearances, or conflicts with other ordinances or regulations. 
c.  The tree is diseased or so weakened by age, damage or injury that it poses a danger to persons, property, improvements, or to other trees with a rating of 16 or greater. 
d.  The tree is a landmark tree and there is no reasonable alternative that will allow for the preservation of the tree and development to proceed. 
(d)  Permit application and review. When a tree permit is required, an application shall be filed in the following manner for review by the city: 
(1)  The application shall be submitted together with a tree location survey and all other documentation as required elsewhere in the South Lyon Zoning Code, as amended, prior to, or concurrent with, the submission of a site plan or application for building permit, whichever may be required. 
(2)  When a site plan is required, the tree location survey along with accompanying documentation shall be part of the review process. Site plan approval shall precede issuance of a tree permit. The city shall have a registered landscape architect verify the survey. The expense of the survey shall be covered by a performance bond. 
(3)  When a site plan is not required, the city shall review the application and other documentation as required within 15 working days of their receiving the application in an acceptable form. 
(e)  Tree location survey. The tree location survey data shall be presented in a form acceptable to the city and shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  The scale of the tree location survey map shall be drawn at the same scale as the site plan, except a scale shall not be used that will make detail information illegible. 
(2)  The shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel, together with the existing and proposed locations of structures and improvements, including existing and proposed utilities. 
(3)  The location and related setback dimensions of all buildings, structures and off-street parking areas, along with all existing or proposed easements. 
(4)  All such trees shall be tagged in the field with identifying numbers, using non-corrosive metal tags. 
(5)  The location of all existing trees measuring six inches or more in diameter at breast height (DBH), including: 
a.  All such trees within any adjoining street right-of-way, and 
b.  All such trees on any abutting properties that are within 25 feet of the property lines of the subject property, and 
c.  All such trees that may be affected by the development, including all such trees located in any off site right-of-way or utility easement or other easement in which improvements, including off site utility work necessary to serve the new development will be extended. 
d.  All such trees that are proposed to remain, or which are proposed to be relocated, and all such trees that are proposed to be removed shall be clearly identified on the tree location survey map. The tree location survey map shall also contain a list of all of these trees. Their tag number will key the trees on the list to the trees on the survey map. The list shall include the common name of each tree, its DBH number, its condition, and the existing and proposed grade at the base of each tree. The condition of each such tree shall be determined by using the tree-rating matrix set forth in subsection (o)(2), in this section. 
(6)  All tree location surveys shall be performed on the site as field surveys. A registered land surveyor shall map the location of each such tree, and record the existing and proposed grades at the base of each such tree. The type, size and condition of each such tree shall be determined in the field by a registered landscape architect, certified arborist or forester. The name, address, and the phone and fax number, and any email address of those performing these responsibilities shall be provided on the tree location survey map, along with the date the field information was obtained. 
(7)  Identify existing trees that will be relocated, their new location on the property, along with a statement as to how they will be protected and/or stored during land clearance and construction, and how these trees will be maintained in a living and growing condition, as required by ordinance. 
(8)  A statement explaining how trees not included in item (7), in this subsection, and which will remain on site will be protected during land clearance, construction, including the proposed use of tree wells, protective barriers, tunneling or retaining walls, and explaining thereafter, how these trees will be maintained as a permanent part of the site's landscaping. 
(9)  Figures that represent the number of trees that are six inches in DBH that will be removed from: 
a.  The property; 
b.  The public rights-of-way along the property; 
c.  Any abutting property, if applicable; 
d.  Any affected easements, if applicable; and 
e.  Any rights-of-way and/or easements beyond the site in which such trees must be removed to extend services to the site, if applicable. 
(10)  A tree location survey may be waived by the city for any area or areas of a development site that lie 50 feet or more outside of the development's construction zone. For the purpose of this section the construction zone shall mean any area of the property that will be disturbed in any way by any new development taking place on the property. Prior to receiving a waiver, the applicant shall submit a statement to the city identifying the most predominant species of trees in the waiver area, the total number of trees in the waiver area, and the estimated predominate tree size in the waiver area. A waiver area shall be physically separated from any designated construction zone on the property by a snow fence prior to any activity taking place on the property. 
(f)  Large land tracts. For tracts of land five acres or larger, a tree location survey meeting all of the applicable conditions set forth in subsection (c) of this section shall be submitted with the following supplemental requirements: An aerial photograph taken within three years prior to the date of application of suitable quality with a scale equal in size to the scale of the tree location survey map. 
(g)  On site-examination of trees in lieu of tree location survey. The city or its designee in lieu of the applicant submitting a tree location survey may make an on-site examination of the trees when any one of the following conditions is found to exist on the property: 
(1)  Where a permit is required to remove or relocate trees on an occupied single-family subdivision lot, or a single family site condominium lot, or on a metes and bounds property containing an occupied single family home. 
(2)  Where a permit is required to remove fewer than three trees. 
(h)  Exemptions. The following conditions shall exempt a property owner from compliance with the numerical tree replacement requirements of this section. 
(1)  Any tree that is less than six inches DBH. 
(2)  Any tree that must be removed that was found to have a health condition rating of less than 16 as determined from applying the rating matrix set forth in subsection (o)(2), in this section. 
(3)  The removal of up to four trees in one calendar year that are not landmark trees on property with less than one acre of land, and which is occupied by a single-family home. 
(4)  The removal of up to eight trees in one calendar year that are not landmark trees on property containing one acre or more of land, and which is occupied by a single family home, or not more than ten percent of the total number of trees on the lot, whichever number is less. 
(5)  When development activity is located on a site that contains no trees of six-inch DBH or greater the applicant shall so indicate it in their application and submit a "no tree" affidavit. In such case the city or its designee shall conduct an inspection of the site. If the inspection substantiates the applicant's claim, the applicant shall be relieved of the necessity of providing information, such as the topographic survey, etc. However, where there are trees less than six inches DBH that are otherwise potentially good specimens additional information will be required such as quality, size, species, health and such additional information as the city or its designee may request. 
(i)  Non-exemptions. Any tree replacement exemptions permitted in this section shall not exempt anyone from complying with the landscape planting requirements set forth in division 4, in the South Lyon Zoning Code that are applicable to the development. Acceptable trees placed on the site to comply with a landscape planting requirement, may be counted towards meeting any numerical tree replacement requirement assigned to the development property. 
(j)  Tree protection during site development. 
(1)  Prior to the land clearing stage of development and before a tree permit will be issued, the owner, developer, or agent shall do the following: 
a.  Clearly identify the on-site trees that are to be removed and those that are to be relocated by fluorescent orange, spray paint or by red flagging tape. This responsibility shall be completed before any field inspection shall be conducted by the city or its designee. 
b.  Erect barriers of four-foot high wooden fencing or similar sturdy stock material staked with metal stakes ten feet on center (OC) which will shield and protect trees, no closer than six feet from the trunk or at the edge of the tree canopy, whichever is greater, of all such trees or groups of trees. 
c.  Keep the area within the protective barrier clear of all debris or fill, and any equipment and material. 
(2)  During the construction stage of development, the owner, developer or agent shall not cause or permit any activity within the drip line of any protected tree or group of trees including but not limited to the storage of equipment, dumpsters, boulders, dirt and excavated material, building or waste material or any other material harmful to the life of a tree. 
(3)  No damaging attachment, wires (other than cable wires for trees), signs or permits may be fastened to any tree protected by this section. 
(4)  The city or its designee shall conduct periodic inspections of the site during land clearing and construction in order to ensure compliance with this section. 
(k)  Standards pertaining to replacement trees. All replacement trees shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  All trees that are six inches DBH, except landmark trees, that will be replaced, shall be replaced on a one for one basis. 
(2)  When a landmark tree is permitted to be removed, replacement trees shall be provided at a ratio equal to not less than 25 percent of DBH of the tree to be removed. 
(3)  All deciduous replacement trees, including those for landmark trees, shall be at least two and one-half inches in caliper at the time of planting and all evergreen replacement trees shall be at least ten feet in height at the time of planting. 
(4)  Trees that replace deciduous trees shall be deciduous trees, and trees that replace evergreen trees shall be evergreen trees. Replacement trees shall have shade potential and other characteristics comparable to the removed trees and shall be state department of agriculture nursery grade No. 1 or better. 
(5)  Replacement trees shall be staked, wrapped and mulched and shall be guaranteed for one year. Refer to the general guidelines and specifications for landscape plan approval for a list of acceptable replacement trees. 
(6)  When it is not physically possible, or desirable to replace or relocate trees on-site, the planning commission may: 
a.  Allow the replacement trees to be placed at other locations in the city with city approval; 
b.  Allow the applicant/developer to place money in an amount or amounts established by the city, in the city's tree bank revenue fund; or 
c.  May waive or reduce the numerical tree replacement count and substitute in their place a greater size (caliper) tree for each replacement tree that will be planted on site. 
(7)  As an alternative or partial alternative to the requirements of this subsection, the planning commission may approve trees that are smaller in caliper size in situations where the intent is to create a densely wooded area. Such groupings of trees shall consist of tightly grouped trees and shall be a minimum of three-fourth-inch caliper and shall be used only in situations and locations where it is appropriate to create a densely wooded effect. The planning commission shall approve spacing between trees. When this alternative is used, the sum of the caliper of all of the replacement trees shall be at least equal to the sum of the minimum required caliper of all of the replacement trees that would have been planted had this alternative not been used. 
(8)  Any tree that was originally indicated and intended to remain undisturbed on the property that has been excessively damaged during construction to the extent that it puts the tree at risk of death as determined by the city or its designee, shall be replaced by the applicant or the developer. In such instances the replacement tree shall have at least equal shade potential as well as other characteristics comparable to that of the damaged tree it is replacing and be a minimum five inches in caliper, excluding landmark trees. Any landmark tree so damaged, shall be replaced at a ratio of 100 percent of its DBH, using, minimum five-inch caliper stock. 
(9)  Any tree required to be planted in accordance with this section shall be in place and properly supported prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy by the city. The center of all such trees shall be located no closer than four feet to any property line or ten feet to any utility line. 
(10)  All trees relocated, or planted as replacement trees, shall exhibit a normal live growth cycle. If any plant materials required by this section die or become diseased, they shall be replaced within 30 days of written notice from the city or within an extended time period as specified in such notice. All planting materials shall be placed (planted) between April 1 and May 30 or between October 1 and November 30 in the same calendar year. 
(l)  Emergency tree removal. When high winds, storms, tornadoes, floods, freezes, fires or other manmade or natural disasters damage or destroy trees in the city, making it necessary to expedite the removal of these trees in the interest of promoting the public safety, health and general welfare of the city, the requirements of this chapter may be suspended by the city for a period of 30 days in the affected areas. 
(m)  Penalties. Each unauthorized removal of a tree that is protected by this section shall be deemed a separate offense. Section 102-10 in the city's zoning code, as amended, shall be applicable to violations and penalties involving the unauthorized removal of a protected tree. 
(n)  Landmark trees. The following is the list of landmark trees that are protected by this section. The trees are identified by their common name, species and DBH size: 
(1)  The listed DBH size for the landmark trees represent the minimum size protected for each species. 
(2)  The landmark trees herein listed are prevalent in the City of South Lyon and in the surrounding area 
(3)  Landmark tree list: 
Common Species Size DBH in inches American Beech Fagus grandifolia 18 American Chestnut Castanea dentata 8 Birch Bertula spp. 18 Black Alder Alnus glutinosa 12 Black Tupelo Nyssa sylvatica 12 Black and White Walnut Juglans nigra, J. cinerea 20 Buckeye Aessculus glabra 18 Cedar, Red Juniperus 12 Choke Cherry Prunus spp. 18 Crabapple (cultivar) Malus spp. 12 Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga menziesii 18 Eastern Hemlock Tsuga cnandensis 12 Flowering Dogwood Dornus Florida 8 Ginkgo Ginkgo biloba 18 Hickory Carya spp. 18 Horse chestnut Aesculus carnea 18 Kentucky Coffeetree Bymnocladus dioicus 18 Larch/Tamarack Larix Laricina (Eastern) 12 London Planetree/Sycamore Plantanus spp. 18 Maple Acer spp. 18 Oak Quercus spp. 20 Pine Pinus spp. 18 Sassafras Sassafras albidunt 15 Spruce Picea spp. 18 Tuliptree Liriodendron tulipfera 18  
(4)  Any tree that is not listed as a landmark tree but which has a DBH of 24 inches or greater, and which scores 16 points or higher on the rating matrix is to be considered a landmark tree and is to be protected under this section as though it was a listed landmark tree. 
(o)  Tree health condition ranking matrix. Except as may be otherwise waived herein, the applicant shall be responsible for determining the condition (health) in the field of all trees that are to be removed or relocated. Compliance with the applicable requirements of this subsection may be waived by the city, provided the applicant has properly requested a waiver from the applicable requirements of this section, in the manner set forth in this section. 
(1)  The applicant or his designee shall evaluate the condition of the tree trunk, the growth rate of the tree, its general structure, identify any insect infestations and/or diseases, the crown development of the tree, and the life expectancy of the tree. From this evaluation the expert examining the trees shall assign a point value to each such tree using the tree condition rating matrix provided in subsection (o)(2), of this section. The rating number shall be placed in the column listing all the trees as outlined in subsection (e)(5)d. of this section. 
(2)  The ranking matrix that the expert shall use in the field to calculate the condition (health) of a tree is outlined below. 
RANKING MATRIX 
Factor 5 or 4 3 or 2 1 Trunk Sound and solid Sections of bark missing Extensive and hollow Growth/rate More than 6" twig elongation 2"-6" twig elongation Less than 2" twig elongation Structure Sound 1 major or several minor limbs dead 2 or more major limbs dead Insects/diseases No pests present 1 pest present 2 or more pests present Crown/development Full and balanced Full but unbalanced Unbalanced and lacking a full crown Life expectancy Over 30 years 15-20 years Less than 5 years  
(3)  When the city or its designee evaluates the applicant's tree condition data in the field, the rating matrix set forth in subsection (o)(2), of this section shall be used. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.505; Ord. of 3-6-06; Ord. of 11-9-09) 
Sec. 102-493. - Signs. 
    Signs as permitted shall be subject to the requirements of chapter 70. 
(Ord. of 2-13-95(2), § 5.510) 
Secs. 102-494-102-510. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - REGULATIONS CONCERNING MEDICAL USE OF MARIHUANA AND RELATED LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, adopted May 11, 2015, set out provisions intended for use as §§ 102-494-102-502. For purposes of allowing future expansion of the code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as §§ 102-511-102-519. 

Sec. 102-511. - Intent. 
(a)  The City of South Lyon recognizes that the citizens of the State of Michigan, by initiative, approved the medical use of marihuana and the possession of marihuana for such purposes by persons suffering from debilitating conditions defined in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, Initiated Law 1 of 2008, MCL 333.26421 to 333.26430 (the "Act"). In addition, the Act authorizes registered qualifying patients to be assisted in such use by registered primary caregivers. The medical use of marihuana is a unique land use with ramifications not addressed by more traditional zoning regulations. This division is intended to address the medical use of marihuana and related land uses and activities within the city and to provide appropriate and reasonable zoning regulations of the medical use of marihuana allowed by the Act. 
(b)  Also, although some specific medical uses of marihuana are allowed by the Act, marihuana remains a class 1 controlled substance under federal and state law, and the use, possession, and manufacture of marihuana remains illegal. Nothing in this division grants, nor shall anything in this division be construed as granting, immunity from or affirmative defenses against criminal or other prosecution under state laws or local ordinances, including without limitation this article, for the acquisition, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer or transportation, sale, distribution, or possession of marihuana which is not in strict compliance with the Act and the General Rules of the Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA), or other applicable department of the State of Michigan. Also, since federal law is not affected by the Act or LARA's General Rules, nothing in this division is intended to grant, nor shall anything in this division be construed as granting, immunity from or an affirmative defense against criminal prosecution under federal law. Moreover, nothing in this division shall be construed or interpreted as endorsing, aiding, or abetting violations of federal, state, or local laws. The Act and this division do not protect qualifying patients, primary caregivers, users, or the owners of properties on which the medical use of marihuana occurs from federal prosecution, or from having property seized by federal or state authorities under the federal Controlled Substances Act or other federal laws. 
(c)  Nothing in this division allows, nor shall anything in this division be construed as allowing, persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a nuisance, or to allow use, possession, control, or the manufacture of marihuana for non-medical purposes or to allow activity relating to cultivation, manufacture, distribution, use or consumption of marihuana that is otherwise illegal. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-512. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases shall have the following definitions when used in this division. 
(a)  Words and phrases contained in the Act. This division contains some words and phrases that are defined in the Act. As used in this division they have the same meaning as provided in the Act, except that if at any time the definition of a word or phrase set forth below conflicts with the definition in the Act, then the definition in the Act shall apply. These words and phrases are as follows: 
(1)  Department means the State of Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(2)  Marihuana means that term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106. 
(3)  Medical use means the acquisition, possession, cultivation, manufacture, use, internal possession, delivery, transfer, or transportation of marihuana or paraphernalia relating to the administration of marihuana to treat or alleviate a registered qualifying patient's debilitating medical condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition. 
(4)  Primary caregiver means a person who is at least 21 years old and who has agreed to assist with a patient's medical use of marihuana and who has never been convicted of a felony involving illegal drugs, as defined in the Act. 
(5)  Qualifying patient means a person who has been diagnosed by a physician as having a debilitating medical condition in accordance with the Act. 
(6)  Registry identification card means a document issued by the State of Michigan that identifies a person as a registered qualifying patient or a registered primary caregiver. 
(b)  Other words and phrases. The words and phrases in this subsection, as used in this division, shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Child care organization means a governmental or non-governmental organization having as its principal function receiving minor children for care, maintenance, training, and supervision. Child care organizations include organizations commonly described as child care institutions, child placing agencies, children's camps, children's campsites, children's therapeutic group homes, child care centers, day care centers, nursery schools, parent cooperative preschools, foster homes, group homes or child care homes as defined in 1973 PA 116, MCL722.111, as amended. 
(2)  Marihuana or medical marihuana means that term as defined in Section 7106 of the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.7106, as amended. 
(3)  Medical marihuana caregiver growing facility means a property, parcel, premises, building or structure from where no more than one primary caregiver cultivates, grows, manufactures, processes and/or stores or holds medical marihuana for up to five qualifying patients to whom he or she is connected through the department's registration process in compliance with the Act and this division. 
(4)  Michigan Medical Marihuana Act and Act mean the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act, MCL 333.26421 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-513. - Compliance with state rules and regulations. 
    The medical use of marihuana shall comply at all times and in all circumstances with the Act and the general rules of the department and this division, as amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-514. - Locations. 
(a)  A medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall be allowed only in the I-1 light industrial and I-2 general industrial zoning districts as a use permitted subject to special conditions as provided for in this division and subject to review and approval by the planning commission pursuant to the special land use procedures provided for in section 102-66, as amended from time to time, and this division. 
(b)  No medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall be located within 1,000 feet of a parcel on which a public or private elementary or secondary school, child care organization, place of worship, public or private park, or another medical marihuana caregiver growing facility is located. 
(c)  No medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall be located within 50 feet of a residential dwelling or a structure which is principally used for residential purposes which distance shall be measured structure to structure. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-15-15) 
Sec. 102-515. - Additional special land use application information. 
    In addition to the information and documentation to be submitted pursuant to section 102-66 for a special land use application, a primary caregiver shall also submit the following: 
(a)  Proof of his or her valid, unexpired registry identification card(s) identifying him or her as a primary caregiver and/or qualifying patient. 
(b)  Proof of Michigan residency in the form of a valid lawfully obtained Michigan driver license or a valid Michigan voter registration, or other equivalent proof of residency. 
(c)  Photographic identification in the form of a valid Michigan driver license, photo identification card issued by a state or federal or state agency, passport, current military identification card, current student identification card with a photograph, or an equivalent photographic identification. 
(d)  Medical marihuana history of the applicant. 
(e)  A statement whether such person has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason(s) therefore, who revoked it, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(f)  A description of the proposed medical marihuana caregiver growing facility, including detailed specifications of equipment, lights, and other electrical, plumbing and mechanical equipment or improvements to be used in the storage, growing, cultivation, manufacturing, harvesting, or processing of marihuana for medical use. 
(g)  A list or description of any fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides and any hazardous materials that will be used or stored at the medical marihuana caregiver growing facility. 
(h)  A description of security measures or plans designed to ensure that the premises is secure at all times, including lighting, alarms, locks, barriers, recording or monitoring devices, or security services. 
(i)  Proof of insurance for the premises, building and contents thereof in an amount equal to or greater than the value thereof, and general commercial liability insurance or other equivalent insurance in a minimum amount of $100,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-516. - Medical marihuana growing facility regulations. 
(a)  Only a registered primary caregiver who is an individual person is eligible for a special land use approval for a medical marihuana caregiver growing facility which approval shall not run with the land. 
(b)  The medical use of marihuana and the amount of marihuana and marihuana plants in the possession of the primary caregiver on the premises in connection with a medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall comply, at all times and in all circumstances, with the Act and general rules of the department, as amended from time to time. 
(c)  Marihuana on or at the premises shall be limited to the number of plants and the amount of usable marihuana permitted under the Act for each registered qualifying patient connected to the primary caregiver through the department's registration process as receiving assistance from the registered primary caregiver, plus an amount which may be legally possessed by the registered primary caregiver, if he or she is also a qualifying patient. But, in no event shall more than 72 marihuana plants be located on the premises. 
(d)  All medical marihuana shall be contained within the main building in a secure, enclosed, locked facility inaccessible on all sides, including top and bottom, and equipped with locks or other security devices that permit access only by the primary caregiver. 
(e)  No person shall reside in or permit any person to reside in a medical marihuana caregiver growing facility. 
(f)  No one under 18 years of age shall be allowed to enter a medical marihuana caregiver growing facility unless accompanied by his or her parent or guardian. 
(g)  No smoking, inhalation, or consumption of marihuana shall take place on the premises. 
(h)  All activities shall be conducted indoors. 
(i)  No equipment or process shall be used in which creates noise, dust, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses beyond the property boundary. 
(j)  The premises, including any building(s) and structure(s), shall be designed, operated and maintained, at all times, consistent with responsible business practices and so that no excessive demands are placed on public services, including public safety services, nor any excessive risk of harm to the public health, safety, welfare, sanitation, interference with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or parking, or the continuance of maintenance of any unlawful conduct or nuisance. 
(k)  No delivery, distribution, dispensing, or transfer of marihuana shall occur on the premises. The primary caregiver shall deliver medical marihuana to his or her qualifying patients off premises, at the residence of the qualifying patient, or elsewhere. 
(l)  A medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall comply with all applicable fire, building, plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes, regulations and statutes and obtain required permits and approvals. 
(m)  A medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall be subject to inspection from time to time by authorized officials of the City of South Lyon, including the police department, to ensure compliance with applicable laws, codes, and rules. 
(n)  Information treated as confidential under the Act, including the primary caregiver registry identification card, and any information about qualifying patients connected with the primary caregiver which is received by the city, shall be treated as confidential and maintained separate from the public information submitted in support of an application, shall not be distributed or otherwise made available to the public, and shall not be subject to disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act. 
(o)  A medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall comply with all other regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, except when they are in conflict with this division, in which case this division shall prevail. 
(p)  A zoning compliance certificate from the city's planning department is required. 
(q)  A primary caregiver who receives special land use approval for a medical marihuana caregiver growing facility shall immediately notify the city of any change regarding any action, determination or other event affecting the validity or invalidity of his or her status as a primary caregiver and his or her registry identification card including its revocation, suspension, expiration, and non-renewal. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-517. - Qualifying patient regulations. 
(a)  An individual residing in the city who is a registered qualifying patient with valid registry identification card may grow up to 12 marihuana plants for his or her own use at his or her residential dwelling in compliance with the Act and the conditions of this section. 
(b)  The principal use of a qualifying patient's dwelling unit shall be residential occupancy, and it shall be in actual use as such. 
(c)  A qualifying patient's use of his or her residential dwelling for the cultivation or growing or other lawful activity relating to the medical use of marihuana for solely personal use shall comply at all times and under all circumstances with the Act, the general rules of the department and this section, and the requirements of the zoning district in which his or her dwelling is located. 
(d)  All required fire, building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical permits shall be obtained for any portion of the dwelling in which electrical wiring, lighting, or watering devices used to support the cultivation, growing, harvesting, and processing of marihuana are located, and for any improvements to the dwelling relating to the medical use of marihuana. 
(e)  If a room with windows is utilized as a location for growing and cultivation marihuana, any lighting methods associated with or required by or for growing and cultivation that exceed typical residential periods between the hours of 11 p.m. and 7 a.m. shall employ shielding methods, without alteration to the exterior of the dwelling, to prevent ambient light spillage that may create a distraction for adjacent dwellings and residential properties. 
(f)  The portion of the dwelling where energy usage and heat exceeds typical levels for residential use, such as a grow room, and the storage of chemicals such as fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides shall be subject to inspection and approval by the South Lyon Fire Department to ensure compliance with the Fire Prevention and Protection Code and other applicable fire codes and regulations. 
(g)  The cultivation and growing of marihuana is prohibited in an accessory structure. 
(h)  A qualifying patient shall not use equipment or a process in connection with the medical use of marihuana, including the cultivation, growing, harvesting or processing of marihuana plants, which creates noise, dust, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses outside the dwelling. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-518. - Prohibited uses. 
(a)  The cultivation and growth of more than 12 marihuana plants by a qualifying patient for his or her own personal use is prohibited in any zoning district except the I-1 and I-2 zoning districts subject to planning commission review and special land use approval and compliance with this division. 
(b)  Medical marihuana dispensaries are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city. 
(c)  Collective, cooperative, joint, or shared medical marihuana growing facilities are prohibited in all zoning districts in the city. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
Sec. 102-519. - Limitation. 
    The medical use of marihuana was not permitted prior to adoption of this division, and accordingly any such use shall not qualify as a nonconforming use. 
(Ord. No. 04-15, Pt. I, 5-11-15) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1988 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1988 Code, as updated through January 3, 1992, which are included herein. Sections of the 1988 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1988 Code 
Section Section  
this Code tit. I, ch. 1 1-1 1.1-1.3 1-10-1-12 1.4 1-8 1.5 1-2 1.6, 1.7 1-4, 1-5 1.8 1-3 1.9 1-6 1.10 1-3 1.11 1-7 1.12 1-14 1.13 1-9 1.14 1-15 1.51 2-1 1.56 2-51 1.61-1.66 54-31-54-36 1.71-1.76 46-61-46-66 1.81-1.85 38-31-38-35 1.91 2-116 1.111 2-31 1.115-1.122 2-71-2-78 1.141 2-131 1.151-1.157 34-81-34-87 1.161-1.163 2-191-2-193 1.165-1.170 62-31-62-36 1.175-1.180 2-151-2-156 1.185-1.188 2-171-2-174 1.190 2-206 1.231-1.236 2-221-2-226 1.251-1.295 78-1-78-45 1.301-1.306 1-13 2.1-2.7 74-31-74-37 2.21-2.36 94-51-94-66 2.41 94-81 2.42-2.45 94-101-94-104 2.47-2.50 94-131-94-134 2.52-2.57 94-151-94-156 2.59-2.68 94-105-94-114 2.76-2.80 94-171-94-175 2.111-2.120 94-191-94-200 3.1-3.13 62-61-62-73 3.20-3.25 30-1-30-6 4.1-4.8 82-46-82-53 4.15 82-31 4.21, 4.22 82-79 4.31, 4.32 82-54 4.36 82-1 4.41, 4.42 82-2, 82-3 4.46 82-55 4.47 82-32 4.61-4.68 82-71-82-78 5.401, 5.402 86-1, 86-2 5.411-5.418 86-31-86-38 5.431-5.437 86-61-86-67 5.439, 5.440 86-68, 86-69 5.450-5.452 86-39-86-41 5.453, 5.454 86-3, 86-4 5.460 86-5 5.471-5.473 34-61-34-63 5.501, 5.502 70-1, 70-2 5.503(1) 70-3 5.504(1) 70-4 5.505-5.511 70-5-70-11 6.1-6.15 50-31-50-45 7.1-7.25 22-31-22-55 7.26 22-56 
22-58 7.31, 7.32 22-57, 22-58 7.33-7.36 22-59 7.41-7.47 22-121-22-127 7.51-7.55 22-181-22-185 7.71-7.77 22-141-22-147 7.81-7.85 22-161-22-165 7.101-7.106 66-31-66-36 7.111-7.116 22-96-22-101 7.171-7.174 10-31-10-34 7.181-7.186 10-51-10-56 7.200 10-131 7.201-7.210 10-148-10-157 7.222, 7.223 10-146, 10-147 7.224 10-1 7.241 10-71 7.242-7.252 10-91-10-101 7.254-7.256 10-72-10-74 7.281-7.285 6-31-6-35 8.1-8.8 18-31-18-38 8.9, 8.10 18-51, 18-52 8.11, 8.12 46-31, 46-32 8.13, 8.14 18-71, 18-72 8.15, 8.16 18-81, 18-82 8.17, 8.18 18-61, 18-62 8.21-8.27 18-131-18-137 8.41-8.44 42-101-42-104 8.81 18-182 8.85-8.90 18-183-18-188 8.95 18-181 8.96 18-189 8.101-8.111 18-226-18-236 8.116-8.123 18-251-18-258 8.128-8.133 18-291-18-296 8.138-8.141 18-271-18-274 8.146-8.155 18-311-18-320 8.160-8.167 18-336-18-343 8.171-8.185 18-356-18-370 8.191 18-190 8.192 18-211 8.193 18-182 9.1 42-81 9.4-9.7 42-82-42-85 9.10-9.12 42-61-42-63 9.31-9.34 98-31-98-34 9.51-9.58 42-31-42-38 9.71-9.74 14-1-14-4 9.81-9.89 14-31-14-39 9.101-9.113 14-61-14-73 9.121-9.123 14-91-14-93 9.131-9.133 58-1-58-3 9.136-9.142 58-51-58-57 9.145-9.152 58-60-58-67 9.154, 9.155 58-69, 58-70 9.156-9.170 58-72-58-86 9.171 58-222 9.181-9.192 58-111-58-122 9.198-9.205 58-236-58-243 9.206-9.215 58-211-58-220 9.231-9.240 58-136-58-145 9.251, 9.252 58-261, 58-262 9.254, 9.255 58-263, 58-264 9.271-9.278 58-186-58-193 9.279, 9.280 58-171 9.291-9.293 42-39 9.301, 9.302 58-4, 58-5 9.351-9.356 46-91-46-96 9.360-9.365 54-61-54-66 9.901-9.905 90-66-90-70 9.907-9.910 90-71-90-74 10.1-10.4 90-31-90-34 10.21-10.30 90-151-90-160 10.41 82-101 10.42-10.50 82-121-82-129 10.51 82-102 10.52 82-130 10.61-10.63 90-131-90-133 10.81-10.101 90-91-90-111 10.202-10.208 38-51-38-57  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1988 Code, as updated through January 3, 1992, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1988 Code, as supplemented. This table contains some ordinances which precede January 3, 1992, but which were never included in the 1988 Code, as supplemented, for various reasons. Ordinances adopted since January 3, 1992, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Date Section  Section 
this Code  9-14-81 1-23 26-1-26-23  1-13-92 1 90-34  4-12-93 1-10 18-151-18-160  4-26-93 I 46-141 II, III 46-121, 46-122 IX-XI 46-142-46-144 XV-XVIII 46-123-46-126 XXI 46-127  5-24-93 8.200 18-111 8.202 18-112  6-14-93 I 46-141 II, III 46-121, 46-122 IV-IX 46-142-46-147 X 46-147, 46-148 XI-XIV 46-123-46-126 XV 46-149 XVI 46-127 XVII 46-150  6-26-93 VI, VII 46-145, 46-146 XII, XIII 46-147 XIII 46-148 XX 46-149 XXII 46-150  6-28-93 10.102-10.106 66-61-66-65 12-13-93 18-51, 18-52 18-61, 18-62 18-71, 18-72 18-81, 18-82  3-28-94(1) 12.16.010 98-61 12.16.020 98-62 12.16.030 98-63 12.16.040 98-64 12.16.050 98-65 12.16.060 98-91 12.16.070 98-92 12.16.080 98-93 12.16.090 98-94 12.16.100 98-95 12.16.110 98-100 12.16.120 98-66 12.16.130 98-67 12.16.140 98-68 12.16.150 98-69 12.16.060(A)-12.16.060(D) 98-96-98-99  3-28-94(2) 70-7  6-27-94 1 62-61-62-67 62-70, 62-71 62-74, 62-75  9-24-94 1 70-2  9-26-94 1 70-1 11-28-94(1) 1 2-241 2-5 2-242 6-12 2-243-2-249 11-28-94(2) 1 1-13 11-28-94(3) 1 98-69 11-28-94(4) 1 94-173 11-28-94(5) 1(4.48) 82-33 11-28-94(6) 1(4.69) 82-80 11-28-94(7) 1(5.470) 86-6 11-28-94(8) 1 70-10 11-28-94(9) 1(6.16) 50-46 11-28-94(10) 1(7.28) 22-60 11-28-94(11) 1(7.56) 22-186 11-28-94(12) 1(7.78) 22-148 11-28-94(13) 1(7.86) 22-166 11-28-94(14) 1 22-101 11-28-94(15) 1(7.175) 10-35 11-28-94(16) 1(7.187) 10-57 11-28-94(17) 1(7.225) 10-132 11-28-94(18) 1(7.257) 10-75 11-28-94(19) 1(7.286) 6-36 11-28-94(20) 1 18-36 11-28-94(21) 1 18-137 11-28-94(22) 1(8.45) 42-105 11-28-94(23) 1 18-190 11-28-94(24) 1 18-112 11-28-94(25) 1(9.13) 42-64 42-86 11-28-94(26) 1(9.35) 98-35 11-28-94(27) 1 42-37 11-28-94(28) 1 46-96 11-28-94(29) 1(10.53) 82-103 11-28-94(30) 1(10.64) 90-134 11-28-94(31) 1 90-111 11-28-94(32) 1 66-65 12-12-94 1 90-34  1-23-95 1 18-111, 18-112  2-13-95(1) 1-5 34-31-34-35  2-13-95(2) 5.1 102-1 5.55 102-181 5.60 102-182 5.65 102-183 5.70 102-184 5.75 102-185 5.80 102-186 5.85 102-187 5.90 102-201 5.95 102-202 5.100 102-203 5.105 102-204 5.115 102-216 5.120 102-217 5.125 102-218 5.135 102-231 5.140 102-232 5.145 102-233 5.150 102-234 5.155 102-246 5.160 102-247 5.165 102-248 5.170 102-249 5.180 102-261 5.185 102-262 5.190 102-263 5.200 102-264 5.210 102-276 5.215 102-277 5.220 102-278 5.225 102-279 5.230 102-291 5.235 102-292 5.240 102-293 5.245 102-294 5.250 102-306 5.255 102-307 5.260 102-308 5.265 102-309 5.270 102-321 5.275 102-322 5.280 102-323 5.285 102-324 5.290 102-336 5.295 102-337 5.300 102-338 5.305 102-339 5.315 102-351 5.320 102-352 5.325 102-353 5.330 102-354 5.335 102-366 5.340 102-367 5.345 102-368 5.350 102-369 5.355 102-381 5.360 102-382 5.365 102-383 5.370 102-384 5.375 102-385 5.380 102-386 5.385 102-387 5.390 102-388 5.395 102-389 5.400 102-390 5.405 102-391 5.410 102-406 5.415 102-407 5.420 102-408 5.425 102-409 5.430 102-410 5.435 102-456 5.440 102-457 5.445 102-458 5.450 102-459 5.455 102-460 5.465 102-5 5.470(1)-5.470(12) 102-151-102-162 5.475 102-431 5.480 102-476 5.485 102-477 5.490 102-478 5.495 102-432 5.500 102-491 5.505 102-492 5.510 102-493 5.515 102-433 5.520 102-434 5.525 102-435 5.530 102-436 5.535 102-437 5.540 102-131 5.545 102-132 5.550 102-438 5.555 102-439 5.560 102-440 5.570 102-101 5.575 102-102 5.580 102-103 5.585 102-104 5.590 102-105 5.595 102-106 5.600 102-107 5.605 102-108 5.610 102-109 5.615 102-110 5.620 102-111 5.625 102-31 102-112 5.630 102-32 5.635 102-33 5.640 102-34 5.645 102-35 5.650 102-36 5.655 102-37 5.660 102-38 5.665 102-39 5.670 102-61 5.675 102-63 5.680 102-64 5.690 102-65 5.695 102-66 5.700 102-67 5.705 102-68 5.710 102-81 5.715 102-82 5.720 102-83 5.725 102-84 5.730 102-85 5.735 102-86 5.740 102-87 5.745 102-88 5.750 102-62 5.755 102-6 5.760 102-8 5.765 102-9 5.770-5.780 102-10  2-13-95(1) 6-10 34-36-34-40  2-13-95(2) art. XXVI 102-7  9-11-95 102-293  4-22-96(1) 94-191 94-196, 94-197  4-22-96(2) 1 58-70, 58-71  4-22-96(3) 1 58-242, 58-243  9- 9-96(1) 1 74-36  9- 9-96(2) 1 22-101  9- 9-96(3) 1 38-51-38-57  9- 9-96(4) 1 46-121-46-127 46-141-46-150  9- 9-96(5) 8.12(1)-8.12(4) 46-33-46-36 8.12(5), 8.12(6) 46-1, 46-2  2-10-97 art. 1 58-222  4-14-97(1) 1 86-2  4-14-97(2) 1 90-34  4-28-97 1 58-51  6-23-97(1) 18-51, 18-52 18-61, 18-62 18-71, 18-72 18-81, 18-82  6-23-97 1 18-112  6-28-97 1 18-111  7-28-97(1) 1 90-34  7-28-97(2) 1(9.217) 58-221  8-11-97 102-477 5.492 102-441 5.536 102-442  9- 8-97 34-35 11-24-97 1(9.193) 58-123 12- 8-97(1) 1-5 58-262 12- 8-97(2) 102-108  6-22-98 1 Adopting Ord., p. xi 102-10(a)  1-11-99 1       Added 90-1  6-14-99 1       Added 58-68  6-28-99 1 70-2  7-12-99 1 58-76  9-13-99 1 74-31       Added 74-38 10-11-99(1) 1 90-34 10-11-99(2) 1 102-336-102-339 12-13-99 1       Added 94-140-94-142  2-28-00 1 18-31-18-36 18-38 18-51       Rpld 18-52 18-61       Rpld 18-62 18-71       Rpld 18-72 18-81       Rpld 18-82  8-14-00 1       Added 36-1-36-65  1-22-01(1) 1 70-1  1-22-01(2) 1 102-203(14) 102-277 102-292(8) 102-293(5) 102-307(3)-(6) 102-491(1)  9-10-01 1       Added 94-31, 94-32  3-25-02       Added 102-443-102-453  1-27-03 90-2  2-24-03 102-460(3)  3-10-03 70-1-70-14  5-12-03 87-1-87-21  7-28-03       Added 14-5 14-31, 14-32 14-33(b), (c), (d)       Added 14-33(e) 14-35-14-37       Added 14-40 14-61 14-67-14-70 14-72, 14-73  7-28-03 102-459  7-28-03 102-460  8- 9-04 58-242(4), (5) 58-243 10-11-04(1) 82-48 10-11-04(2) 90-72 10-11-04(3) 102-85(b)  9-12-05(1) 90-31-90-34  9-12-05(2)       Rpld 90-2       Added 90-35-90-38  3- 6-06 102-492  5- 8-06(1) 102-131(g)  5- 8-06(2) 102-308(1)  5-22-06       Rpld 102-391       Added 102-391, 102-392  7-24-06 46-31, 46-32 46-34, 46-35  8-14-06       Added 58-124  9-11-06       Added 18-39-18-42  3-26-07 1-3 90-31-90-33  6-11-07(1) 94-65(a)  6-11-07(2)       Added 102-263(7) 10- 8-07 2-46 12-10-07(1) 70-2 12-10-07(2)       Added 86-62(n) 12-10-07(3)       Rpld 102-293(4)       Added 102-323(12)  2-11-08(1) 70-2  2-11-08(2)       Added 102-131(c)(11)  4-14-08 102-6 102-11 102-37 102-39 102-61, 102-62 102-64 102-81-102-83 102-85-102-87 102-158  8-25-08       Added 102-454  1-26-09(1) 70-2       Added 70-6(h)  1-26-09(2) 102-3 102-459(8)  2- 9-09(1) 46-31 46-32(d)  2- 9-09(2) 82-79(b)  4-13-09       Added 46-37-46-39  6-22-09(1)       Added 22-201-22-217  6-22-09(2) 54-63  7-12-09 62-64 11- 9-09 102-491(1) 102-492(d)(2)  1-25-10(1) 94-194 94-196  1-25-10(2) 98-33  1-25-10(3)       Added 102-203(16)  2- 8-10(1)       Added 94-67  2- 8-10(2) 98-31, 98-32  5-24-10 102-442  1-10-11 74-35       Added 74-39  6-29-11 1-15 46-1 11-28-11 2-155, 2-156  3-12-12 102-321, 102-322  5-14-12       Added 2-210-2-215  7-23-12 18-133  
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 08-12  9-24-12 Pt. 1       Rpld 46-121-46-127, 46-141-46-150 Pt. 2       Added 46-121-46-127 09-12 11-26-12 Pt. I 46-62-46-66 01-13  2-11-13 Pt. I 58-243(5) 02-13  1-14-13 Pt. I 90-38 07-13  7-22-13 Pt. I 46-122 08-13  8-19-13 Pt. I       Added 90-39 11-13 10-28-13 Pt. I 90-1 01-14  2-10-14 Pt. I       Rpld 70-1-70-14 Pt. II       Added 70-1-70-16 02-14  4-14-14 Pt. I 26-20 03-14  5-12-14 Pt. I 58-77 04-14  7-28-14 Pt. I 62-31 03-15  3- 9-15 Pt. I 70-7(e) 04-15  5-11-15 Pt. I       Added 102-510-102-519 05-15  5-26-15 Pt. I 82-78 10-15 10-26-15 Pt. I 38-53 02-16  2- 8-16 Pt. II 18-111, 18-112 03-16  2- 8-16 Pt. I       Added 18-401-18-411 10-16  3-28-16 Pt. I       Added 2-301, 2-302 11-16  3-28-16 Pt. I       Added 58-251-58-254 Pt. IV       Rpld 58-217 12-16  3-28-16 Pt. I 58-221 13-16  3-28-16 Pt. I       Added 22-231-22-234       Added 22-241-22-251       Added 22-261-22-267       Added 22-271 15-16 11-28-16 Pt. I       Rpld 34-87 Pt. II 34-84 16-16 10-10-16 Pt. I Art. I (title)       Added 22-1-22-4 05-17  9-11-17 Pt. I       Rpld 2-191-2-193 Pt. II       Added 2-191-2-198 06-17  9-11-17 Pt. I       Rpld 2-221-2-226       Added 2-221-2-227 08-17 10- 9-17 Pt. I       Rpld 58-83 10-17 10-23-17 Pts. I, II 58-239, 58-240 Pts. III, IV 58-242, 58-243 01-18  3-12-18 Pt. I 102-81 02-18  3-12-18 Pt. I       Rpld 2-71-2-78       Added 2-71-2-79 03-18  5-14-18 Pt. I       Added 8-31-8-41 05-18  6-21-18 Pt. II 58-53 11-18 11-12-18 Pt. I       Added 56-31 01-19  2-11-19 Pt. I 46-121 Pt. II 46-122 Pt. III 46-123 Pt. IV 46-127 02-19  2-11-19 Pt. I 46-31 Pt. II 46-32 03-19  4- 8-19 Pt. I       Added Ch. 87, Art. I(tit.) Pt. II       Added 87-51-87-68  
