
Charter and Code of Ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights, Michigan


Charter
and
Code of Ordinances
of the
City of Sterling Heights, Michigan




COUNTY OF MACOMB
STATE OF MICHIGAN





1992










Republication of the 1968 Charter adopted on May 25, 1968.





Code of Ordinances adopted by Ordinance No. 306
on March 2, 1993, effective March 8, 1993.










2019 S-8 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 463, passed 4-16-19










Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
One West Fourth Street, Third Floor
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com




2019 Municipal Officials



 




Michael C. Taylor, Mayor




Liz Sierawski, Mayor Pro-Tem





 





Council Members




Deanna Koski

 

Michael V. Radtke Jr.




Maria G. Schmidt

 

Henry Yanez




Barbara A. Ziarko





 





Mark D. Vanderpool, City Manager




Melanie D. Ryska, City Clerk




Marc Kaszubski, City Attorney





 



ADOPTING ORDINANCE



CITY OF STERLING HEIGHTS
COUNTY OF MACOMB, MICHIGAN
ADOPTING ORDINANCE NO. 306



CITY OF STERLING HEIGHTS ORDAINS:



Section 1.  The Code of Ordinances consisting of Chapter 1-53 each
inclusive, is adopted under authority of M.C.L.A. 117.5b as the "Code of
Ordinances, City of Sterling Heights, Michigan."



Section 2.  All provisions of this Code shall be the law on March 8, 1993.
All ordinances adopted before December 22, 1992, that conflict with this Code
are repealed on March 8, 1993.



Section 3.  Unless another penalty is clearly provided, a violation of any
provision of this Code shall be punished by either a fine, imprisonment, or
both fine and imprisonment, as provided in Section 1-9 of this Code.



Section 4.  When an amendment to this Code is passed and the form of the
amendment indicates the intention of the City Council to make the amendment a
part of this Code, it shall be incorporated in this Code. References to the
"Code of Ordinances, City of Sterling Heights, Michigan" or "The Sterling
Heights City Code" shall be understood to include such amendments.



Section 5.  A copy of this Code shall be kept on file in the Office of the
City Clerk preserved in looseleaf form. It shall be the duty of the City
Clerk or someone authorized by the Clerk to insert in their designated
places, all amendments which indicate the City Council’s intent to make
them part of this Code. This shall be done when the amendments have been
printed in page form. It shall also be the duty of the City Clerk or someone
authorized by the Clerk, to remove from the Code all provisions which are
repealed by the City Council. This copy of the Code shall be available for
all persons who want to examine this Code.



Section 6.  It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by
additions or deletions, and to alter or tamper with any part of this Code in
any manner which will cause the City of Sterling Heights law to be
misrepresented. Any person violating this section shall be punished as
provided in Section 3 of this ordinance.



Section 7.  Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to affect any
suit or proceeding pending in any Court: rights acquired; liability incurred;
or any other cause of action under any ordinance repealed by this Code of
Ordinances. No just or legal right or remedy of any character shall be lost,
impaired or affected by this ordinance.



Section 8.  That all provisions of the Sterling Heights Zoning Ordinance,
Text and Map, except as amended, shall remain in full force and effect.



Section 9.  This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon
publication on March 8, 1993.



This Ordinance was introduced at a regular meeting of the City Council of The
City of Sterling Heights on the 16th day of February, 1993 and was duly
adopted at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Sterling
Heights on the 2nd day of March, 1993.



BY ORDER OF CITY COUNCIL



INTRODUCED:  2-16-93



ADOPTED:  3-2-93



PUBLISHED:  3-8-93



EFFECTIVE:  3-8-93



CHARTER




1968 Charter





Adopted by Election held on May 25, 1968, as amended.




CHAPTER 1.  INCORPORATION AND BOUNDARIES



1.01.  Name and boundaries.*



   The municipal corporation created by the vote of the electors on the
25th day of May, 1968, to be known as the "City of Sterling Heights" shall be
the body corporate and politic and shall have perpetual succession in
accordance with the provisions of this Charter and the Constitution and the
laws of the state which are applicable thereto. It embraces the following
described territory in the County of Macomb, State of Michigan, together with
such territory as may from time to time be attached thereto and less such
territory as may from time to time be detached therefrom in accordance with
law: (All that territory known as the Township of Sterling located in
Township 2 North, Range 12 East, Macomb County, Michigan, except the
following described parcels: All that territory situated in Township 2 North,
Range 12 East, Macomb County, Michigan, now incorporated within the
corporation limits of the City of Utica, Mich.)



*Editor’s note:



The Charter is printed herein as adopted at an election held on May 25, 1968.
The Charter became effective at 8:00 p.m. on July 1, 1968. Any words
appearing in brackets [ ] were added by the editor for clarity.



Chapter 21 of the Charter contained provisions concerning the election to be
held on its adoption and other provisions which have accomplished their
purpose. Pursuant to § 21.01, that chapter is no longer a part of the
Charter, and it has, therefor, been omitted.



CHAPTER 2.  MUNICIPAL POWERS



2.01.  General powers.



   Unless otherwise provided or limited in this chapter, the city and its
officers shall be vested with any and all power, privileges and immunities,
expressed and implied, which cities and their officers are, or hereafter may
be, permitted to exercise or to provide in their Charters under the
Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan, including all powers,
privileges and immunities which cites are, or may be, permitted to provide in
their Charters by Act Number 279 of the Public Acts of 1909, as amended, as
fully and completely as though those powers, privileges and immunities were
specifically enumerated in and provided for in this chapter, and in no case
shall any enumeration of particular powers, privileges or immunities in this
chapter be held to be exclusive.



2.02.  Additional powers.



   (A)   The city may sue and be sued in its corporate name; may plead
or be impleaded in all courts of law or in equity and in all actions
whatsoever; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire by condemnation,
purchase, lease, construction, gift, or otherwise, any property, real,
personal and mixed, and hold, lease, use and dispose of the same, whether the
same may lie within or without its boundaries. In any emergency when the
necessities of life may not be obtained or essential services performed
necessary to the health or welfare of the people, the city may take charge
of, and supply such necessities or services, but shall not do such acts for
gain or profit.



   (B)   In addition to the powers provided above, the city shall have
power and may:



      (1)   Provide for the use, regulation, improvement and control
of the surface of its streets, alleys and public ways, and of the space above
and beneath them.



      (2)   Provide for the use, by other than the owner, of
property located in streets, alleys and public places, in the operation of a
public utility, upon payment of a reasonable compensation to the owners
thereof.



      (3)   Provide for a plan of streets and alleys within and for
a distance of not more than three miles beyond its limits.



      (4)   Acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease,
construction or otherwise, either singly or in conjunction with other
governmental bodies, either within or without its corporate limits and either
within or without the corporate limits of the County of Macomb, the following
improvements, including the necessary lands therefor, viz: city hall, police
stations, fire stations, boulevards, streets, alleys, public parks,
recreation grounds, municipal camps, public grounds, zoological gardens,
museums, libraries, airports, cemeteries, public wharves and landings upon
navigable waters, levees and embankments, watch houses, city prisons, and
work houses, penal farms, institutions, hospitals, quarantine grounds,
electric light and power plants and systems, gas plants and systems,
waterworks plants and systems, sewage disposal plants and systems, garbage
disposal plants, rubbish disposal plants, market houses and market places,
office buildings for city officers and employees, public works and public
buildings of all kinds; and for the costs and expenses thereof.



      (5)   Acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease or
otherwise, private property, either within or without the corporate limits of
the County of Macomb, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its
powers, whether herein specifically mentioned or not. If condemnation
proceedings are resorted to for the acquisition of private property, such
proceedings may be brought under the provisions of Act 149 of the Public Acts
of 1911, as heretofore or hereafter amended, or under such other provisions
as shall be made by law.



      (6)   Maintain, develop and operate its property and upon
discontinuance thereof to lease, sell or dispose of the same subject to
restrictions placed thereupon by law; provided, that on the sale of any
capital asset of a municipally owned utility the money received shall be used
in procuring a similar capital asset, or placed in the sinking fund to retire
bonds issued for said utility.



      (7)   Acquire by construction, condemnation, or purchase and
own, equip, possess, lease, operate and maintain transportation facilities
including a rapid transit system consisting of a tunnel, subway, surface or
elevated system or any combination or qualification of these, in and through
said city, and for a distance of not more than ten miles beyond its limits,
for the purpose of furnishing transportation facilities to the city and to
the people hereof; the city may provide by ordinance or resolution for the
preparation and publication of plans for such construction, equipment and
maintenance; for the operation of such facilities independently or in
connection with other transportation facilities, or transportation system,
owned, operated or controlled by the city or existing therein, or in the
territory in which any such rapid transit system is established; for the
appropriate designation of such facility; for the taking of the fee of or
easement of right-of-way on, under, above and through any property for the
purposes thereof; by gift, grant or purchase, and by condemnation proceedings
in accordance with any law of the State of Michigan providing therefor; and
for the management of such facilities, for the purposes for which the same is
or may be acquired or constructed and for the execution of contracts
incidental to the carrying out of the purposes hereby contemplated, subject
to the general laws of the state.



      (8)   Negotiate, execute and perform contracts with any other
municipality or municipalities, duly authorized and empowered to that end,
with reference to the construction, equipment, operation, maintenance and
management of a rapid transit system and facilities, and finance any
obligations assumed under or imposed by any such contract.



      (9)   Provide for the use, control and regulation of streams,
waters and watercourses within its boundaries, subject to any limitation
imposed by law.



      (10)   Secure by condemnation, by agreement or purchase, or by
any other means, an easement on property abutting or adjacent to any
navigable stream for the purpose of securing the privilege and right to
construct, own and maintain along or adjacent to any navigable stream an
elevated structure of one or more levels for the use as vehicular or
pedestrian passageway or for any other municipal purposes.



      (11)   Acquire, establish, operate, extend and maintain
facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles within its corporate
limits, including the fixing and collecting of charges for services and use
thereof on a public utility basis, and for such purposes to acquire by gift,
purchase, condemnation or otherwise the land necessary therefor.



      (12)   Acquire, construct, establish, operate, extend and
maintain facilities for the docking of pleasure water craft within its
corporate limits, including the fixing and collection of charges for use
thereof, and for such purpose to acquire by gift, purchase, condemnation or
otherwise the land necessary therefor.



      (13)   Regulate and restrict the locations of oil and gasoline
stations.



      (14)   Establish districts or zones within which the use of
land and structures, the height, the area, the size and location of buildings
and required open spaces for light and ventilation of such buildings and the
density of population therein may be regulated. Such regulations in one or
more districts may differ from those in other districts.



      (15)   Regulate trades, occupations and amusements within its
boundaries, not inconsistent with state and federal laws, and prohibit such
trades, occupations and amusements as are detrimental to the health, morals
or welfare of its inhabitants.



      (16)   License, regulate, restrict and limit the number and
location of billboards within the city.



      (17)   Enact and enforce all such local, police, sanitary and
other regulations for the public peace and health and for the safety of
persons and property as are not in conflict with the general laws.



      (18)   Establish any department that the council shall deem
necessary for the general welfare of the city and provide for the separate
incorporation thereof, subject to general law and the provisions of this
Charter.



      (19)   The city and its officers shall have power to exercise
all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and
in the administration of municipal government, whether such powers be
expressly enumerated or not; to do any legal act to advance the interest of
the city, the good government and prosperity of the municipality and its
inhabitants, and through its regularly constituted authority, to pass and
enforce all laws, ordinances, and resolutions relating to its municipal
concerns, subject to the constitution and general laws of the state and
provisions of this Charter.



2.03.  Construction.



   The powers of the city under this chapter shall be construed liberally
in favor of the city, and the specific mention of particular powers in the
Charter shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general power
stated in this chapter.



2.04.  Intergovernmental cooperation.



   The city may exercise any of its powers or perform any of its functions
and may participate in the financing thereof, jointly or in cooperation, by
contract or otherwise, with any one or more states or civil divisions or
agencies thereof, of the United States or any agency thereof.



2.05.  Appropriation of private property for public use.



   Subject to any limitations in the Constitution or general laws of the
state or contained in this Charter, the city shall have power to appropriate
private property either within or without the city limits for the use or
benefit of the public and shall have the power and authority to institute and
prosecute proceedings for that purpose. All proceedings to condemn private
property either before commissions or in court shall be taken in accordance
with the provisions of any state law providing for the condemnation of
property for public use, applicable to the purpose for which the city seeks
to condemn any particular property, in as close a manner as possible.



CHAPTER 3.  ELECTIONS



3.01.  Qualification of electors.



   The residents of Sterling Heights having the qualifications of voters
in the State of Michigan shall be the electors of the city. All electors
shall satisfy the requirements of registration as prescribed by general
election statutes or as otherwise provided in this Charter.



3.02.  Wards and precincts.



   The City of Sterling Heights shall consist of one ward. The election
precincts heretofore established for the Township of Sterling within the
boundaries of the City of Sterling Heights shall continue to be the election
precincts for the City of Sterling Heights unless otherwise changed pursuant
to the laws of the state.



3.03.  Election procedure.



   The election of all city officers shall be on a non-partisan basis. The
general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as nearly as
possible, all procedures relating to registration and city elections except
as such general laws relate to political parties or partisan procedure and
except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



3.04.  Notice of elections.



   Notice of the time and place of holding any city election and of the
officers to be nominated or elected and the questions to be voted upon shall
be given by the clerk in the same manner and at the same time as provided in
the state election statutes for the giving of notice by township or city
clerks.



3.05.  Primary elections.



   The primary election, for the nomination of candidates for elective
offices, shall be held on the third Saturday in February preceding the
regular municipal election. Primary elections shall be conducted as nearly as
possible in the manner provided for holding elections under this Charter.



3.06.  Regular city elections.



   A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday in September
in each odd numbered year.



3.07.  Informalities in conducting elections.



   No informalities in conducting any city primary or election shall
invalidate the same, if they have been conducted fairly and in substantial
conformity with the requirements of this Charter and the general law of the
state.



3.08.  Challengers, state law.



   Challengers may be appointed in such manner and with such rights and
privileges as are provided in the general laws of the state.



3.09.  General or special election; alternating names; state law.



   The names of candidates for the several offices shall be printed upon
the ballots and the provisions of the general primary law for transposing and
alternating the names of candidates shall apply to said ballot.



3.10.  Special elections.



   Special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the
council at least forty-five (45) days in advance of such election or when
required by this Charter or the general laws of the state. Any resolution
calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. No
more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year.



3.11.  Voting hours.



   The polls of all elections shall be opened and closed at the time
prescribed by law for the opening and closing of polls at state elections.



3.12.  Nominations.



   Candidates for any elective office to be voted for at any municipal
election under the provisions of this Charter shall be nominated at a primary
election, and no other names shall be placed on the election ballot for the
election of such officers, except those nominated in the manner hereinafter
prescribed; provided however, that whenever the number of candidates for
nomination to any office does not exceed twice the number to be elected to
that office, then in such case, no primary election for the nomination of
candidates for such office shall be held, and such candidates shall be deemed
to be nominated for such office, and the names of such candidates for any
such office shall be placed on the election ballot to be voted for at the
next regular municipal election, the same in all respects as though the said
candidates had been nominated at a primary election. The names of all
candidates for an elective office to fill a vacancy shall be placed on the
election ballot for the special election under the provisions of this Charter
except that no primary election shall be held.



Footnote: 



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held
November 8, 1994.



3.13.  Statement of candidacy.



   Any qualified voter of the city who has been a resident of the city for
a period of not less than one year prior to the primary election in which he
desires to become a candidate for nomination to any elective office shall
file his statement of candidacy, including his nomination petitions with the
clerk at least thirty days and not more than forty days prior to the date of
holding the primary election. The clerk shall publish notice of the last day
permitted for filing nomination petitions, at least one week before and not
more than three weeks before, that date. Each candidate shall file petitions
of candidacy with the clerk containing signatures of a minimum of 1% and no
more than 4% of the total registered voters of the city.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to sign more petitions for any
office than there are persons to be elected to such office. Upon receipt of
any nomination petition, the city clerk shall affix his certificate thereto
certifying as to the number of signers who are registered voters of the city
according to the records in his office.



3.14.  Form of petition.



   The form of nominating petition shall be substantially that required by
state law for state and county officers, except for references to political
parties. A supply of petition forms shall be provided and maintained by the
clerk.



3.15.  Approval of petition.



   The clerk shall accept for filing only nomination petitions as
described in section 3.14 containing the required number of signatures for
candidates having those qualifications required for elective city officials
by this Charter. When petitions are filed by persons other than the person
whose name appears thereon as a candidate, they may be accepted for filing
only when accompanied by the written consent of the person in whose behalf
the petition(s) were circulated. The clerk shall provide those persons
submitting petitions with an affidavit indicating receipt of nominating
petition(s). Upon filing the clerk shall forthwith notify any candidate whose
petition does not meet the requirements as to validity and sufficiency
according to this Charter and the laws of this state pertaining thereto. No
later than seventy-two (72) hours after the final time for filing nominating
petitions, the clerk shall notify all candidates, in writing, whose petitions
are valid and sufficient. The names of the candidates who file valid and
sufficient nominating petitions shall be certified by the clerk to the
election commission to be placed upon the ballot for the next subsequent
primary city election.



3.16.  Ballots.



   Ballots for primary elections, regular and special elections, shall
conform as nearly as possible with the provisions of the state election laws
with respect to ballots, except that they shall contain no party mark, emblem
vignette or designation whatsoever. It shall be the duty of the city election
commission, hereinafter provided, to provide for the printing of such ballots.



3.17.  Election commission.



   An election commission is hereby created consisting of the clerk who
shall serve as chairman, and two (2) additional members appointed by the city
council from the qualified voters of the city. Except for the clerk who is
designated as chairman, other elective or appointive officials shall not be
eligible for appointment to the election commission. The members shall serve
without compensation for a period of two (2) years and shall take office
sixty (60) days after the municipal regular election. Any two (2) members of
such board shall be a quorum.



3.18.  Duties of election commission.



   The election commission shall provide all necessary voting booths,
equipment and supplies for the conduct of all elections. The election
commission shall have charge of all activities and duties required of it by
statute and this Charter relating to the conduct of elections in the city. In
any case where election procedure is in doubt, the election commission shall
prescribe the procedure to be followed. When a city election is held on the
same day as a state or county election, the same election officials shall act
in both the city and state or county elections.



3.19.  Appointment and compensation of election inspectors.



   The election commission shall, before each election, appoint for each
election precinct of the city a board of such number of inspectors of
election as the commission may determine. They shall receive such
compensation as shall be fixed by the council.



3.20.  Canvass of votes.



   Four (4) persons having the qualifications of electors shall be
appointed by the council as provided by statute (M.S.A., Sec. 6.1030(1)-(7)
incl.); and shall be the board of canvassers to canvass the votes of all city
elections. The board of canvassers shall convene at its regular place of
meeting at 8 o'clock p.m. within three (3) days following any primary,
general or special election and shall publicly canvass the results of such
election and shall determine the vote upon all questions and propositions and
declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and what persons have
been nominated or elected to the several offices. When only one person is to
be elected to any one office at any election, then the two (2) candidates
receiving the highest number of votes for nomination to that office at the
preceding primary election shall be deemed to have been nominated thereto and
shall be the candidates and the only candidates whose names shall be placed
on the ballot for that office at such election. When more than one person is
to be elected to any office at any election, then the candidates equal in
number to twice the number of persons to be elected to that office receiving
the highest number of votes for nomination to said office at the preceding
primary election, shall be deemed to have been nominated thereto and shall be
the candidates and only candidates whose names shall be placed on the ballot
for said office at such election. At any election the person receiving the
highest number of votes for any office to which one person only is to be
elected shall be deemed to have been duly elected to that office. If more
than one person is to be elected to any office, then the persons equal in
number to the number to be elected to that office receiving the highest
number of votes, shall be deemed to have been duly elected to that office.
The clerk shall notify within five (5) days, in writing, by certified mail,
the successful nominees or candidates of their nomination or election.



3.21.  Election by lot in case of tie vote.



   If, at any election, it shall appear that two (2) or more persons have
an equal number of votes for the same office for which but one person is to
be nominated or elected and such number shall be the highest number cast
therefore, the election commission shall determine the successful candidate
by lot as provided in the general election laws of the state.



3.22.  Proposition submitted at primary election.



   Any question or proposition which may be submitted at any election may
be submitted at a primary election.



3.23.  Recount.



   A recount of the votes cast at any city election for any office, or
upon any proposition may be had in accordance with the general election laws
of the state. Unless otherwise provided by state law, a petition for the
recount of votes cast at any city primary or election shall be filed with the
clerk within six (6) days after the board of canvassers has canvassed the
votes cast at such primary or election. Any counter petition shall be filed
within twenty-four (24) hours thereafter. No officer shall be qualified to
take office until the final determination of any recount of the votes cast
for such office.



3.24.  Same (recount); deposit required.



   Such petitioner shall deposit or cause to be deposited with the clerk
the sum of ten dollars for each and every election precinct referred to in
his petition, but no petitioner shall be required to deposit more than one
hundred dollars. Said deposit shall not be returned unless the result of the
original count is substantially changed.



3.25.  Recall.



   Any elected official may be recalled from office by the voters of the
city in the manner provided by statute. A vacancy created by such recall
shall be filled in the manner prescribed by this Charter.



3.26.  General election laws.



   The general election laws of the state, when applicable, shall apply to
all primary, general and special elections in the city; provided however,
that when there is a conflict between such general laws and this Charter as
to any matter which may be lawfully regulated by charter, then the provisions
of this Charter shall control.



CHAPTER 4.  GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING ELECTIVE AND APPOINTIVE OFFICERS OF
THE CITY



4.01.  Council-Manager government.



   The city shall have the council-manager form of government.



4.02.  Officers to be elected at large.



   The elective officers shall be the mayor and six (6) councilpersons all
of whom shall be elected from the city at large as provided in section 5.01
of this Charter.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1992.



4.03.  Qualifications of elective or appointive officers in city.



   (A)   No person shall hold any elective office under this Charter,
except as otherwise herein provided, unless he has been a resident of the
city for at least one year immediately prior to the primary election in which
he desires to become a candidate for nomination or prior to the time of his
appointment to fill a vacancy; and unless such person is a registered and
qualified voter at the time of the filing of his petition for said office. No
person shall hold any elective office unless he is a qualified and registered
voter of the city on such last day for filing or at such time of appointment
and throughout his tenure of office except as hereinbefore provided.



   (B)   No person shall be eligible for any elective or appointive
office who is in default to the city. The holding of office by any person who
is in such default shall create a vacancy unless such default shall be
eliminated within thirty (30) days after written notice thereof by the clerk
or unless such person shall in good faith be contesting the liability for
such default.



   (C)   Each candidate for elective office shall file with his
petition his affidavit that he possessed the qualifications for such office
provided in this section. Failure to file such affidavit shall invalidate his
petition.



   (D)   Each member of a city board or commission shall have been a
resident of the city for at least one year prior to the date of his
appointment and shall be a qualified and registered voter of the city on such
day and throughout his tenure of office.



   (E)   No person who has been removed from office by recall or
removed pursuant to sections 3.25 or 4.04 of this Charter, or who has
resigned from office after a petition for recall has been filed with the
clerk, shall be eligible to be elected or appointed to any office within two
(2) years after such removal or resignation.



4.04.  Vacancy in elective office.



   In addition to the other provisions of this Charter, a vacancy shall be
deemed to exist in any elective office when such officer fails to qualify
within ten (10) days after his election or appointment, fails to perform the
duties of his office for a period of ninety (90) days, dies, resigns, is
removed from office, moves from the city, is convicted by a court of
competent jurisdiction of a felony, or misconduct in office, or is judicially
declared to be mentally incompetent.



4.05.  Vacancy on boards and commissions.



   In addition to the other provisions of this Charter, a vacancy shall be
deemed to exist on any board or commission [to] which members are appointed
for a specific term of office, when such board member fails to qualify within
ten (10) days after his appointment, fails to perform the duties of his
office for a period of ninety (90) days, dies, resigns, is removed from
office, moves from the city, is convicted by a court of competent
jurisdiction of a felony, or of misconduct in office or is judicially
declared to be mentally incompetent.



4.06.  Filling vacancies in elective office.



   (A)   If a vacancy occurs in any elective office, then the Council,
by a majority vote of its members, shall fill such vacancy within sixty (60)
days. If the Council fails to do so, then the City Clerk shall conduct a
special election within the next ninety (90) days to fill such vacancy
following procedures set forth in Sections 3.12 through 3.15 of this Charter.



   (B)   No vacancy arising within one hundred fifty (150) days of the
general city election shall be filled by special election.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held
November 8, 1994.



4.07.  Filling vacancies in appointive office.



   Vacancies that occur in appointive offices of an unspecified term shall
be filled in the manner provided for making the original appointments, and
vacancies that occur in appointive offices of a specified term shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term in the manner provided for
making the original appointments.



4.08.  Resignations.



   Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing, filed with
the clerk and shall be acted upon by the council at its next regular meeting,
following receipt thereof by the clerk. Resignations of appointive department
heads, board and commission members shall be made in writing to the
appointing officer and shall be acted upon immediately.



4.09.  Change of term of office.



   (A)   Except by procedures provided in this Charter, the terms of
office of the elective officers and of the members of boards and commissions
appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened.



   (B)   The terms of elective officers shall not be extended beyond
the period for which any such officer was elected, except that an elective
officer shall, after his term has expired, continue to hold office until his
successor is elected and has qualified.



4.10.  Compensation: Elective and appointive officers.



   (A)   Compensation for all members of boards and commissions where
permitted by law shall be established by council ordinance.



   (B)   The compensation of all employees and officers of the city
whose compensation is not provided for herein shall be fixed by ordinance and
shall be within the limits of budget appropriations and shall be in
accordance with any pay plan adopted by the council.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the respective
salaries and compensation of officers and employees as fixed by, or pursuant
to this Charter, shall be in full for all official services of such officers
or employees and shall be in lieu of all fees, commissions and other
compensation receivable by such officers or employees for his services.



   (D)   Such fees, commissions and compensations shall belong to the
city and shall be collected and accounted for by such officers or employees,
and paid into the city treasury and a statement thereof filed periodically
with the council. The provisions of paragraph (C) of this section shall not
apply to fees, commissions, or other compensation paid by the County of
Macomb to any officer or employee serving as a city representative on the
Board of Supervisors.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the payment
of necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city.



   (F)   The council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to
any officer or employee after his service has been rendered.



4.11.  Oath of office and bonds.



   (A)   All of the officers of the city before entering upon the
duties of their office shall file with the clerk such bonds as are required
by law or this Charter.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1992.



   (B)   All bonds shall be surety company bonds subject to approval as
to form and content by the city attorney, or by an assistant in his office,
and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. The council shall have
the authority to require bonds of a larger amount than is required by law and
shall have the authority to authorize the issuance of a blanket surety bond
to cover all of the officers and such employees of the city as they deem
proper in lieu of individual bonds.



   (C)   Failure on the part of the officers or employees to furnish
such bonds as are required by this section or upon their failure to qualify
for such bonds shall be deemed sufficient grounds for removal from office by
the council.



4.12.  Officers must not have interest in city contracts.



   (A)   No officer of the city shall be financially interested,
directly or indirectly, in any contract, sale, job, work or service (other
than official service), to be performed for the city except as hereinafter
provided in paragraph (B), nor shall he stand as, give, or provide any bail,
security, or bond required by this Charter or the ordinances of the city; nor
personally, nor as an agent, provide any bond required by law of any liquor
licensee whose license is subject to approval by the council. Any officer of
the city offending against the provisions of this section shall be guilty of
misconduct in office.



   (B)   A contract in which an officer or member of his family has a
financial interest may be made by the city if the members of the council
having no such interest shall unanimously determine that the best interests
of the city will be served by the making of such contract after comparative
prices are obtained.



4.13.  Solicitation of political contributions or support.



   No elective officer of the city shall orally, by letter or otherwise
solicit, or be in any manner concerned in soliciting any assessment,
subscription, contribution, or support for any political party, or for any
candidate for public office, from any classified employee of the city. Any
elective officer of the city who offends against the provisions of this
section shall be guilty of misconduct in office.



4.14.  Officer shall hold no office except elective office.



   No elective officer shall hold more than one elective or appointive
office, the compensation for which is paid out of city funds. No classified
employee of the city shall seek any elective city office, unless he first
resigns from his position with the city.



4.15.  Department regulations: Hiring of employees.



   Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the department heads,
commission or board in charge of the city government shall formulate all
rules and regulations required for the organization and conduct of its
department and unless otherwise specifically provided to the contrary in this
Charter, each department head, commission or board shall hire the necessary
employees for his or her department, subject, to the approval of the council
and to any civil service provision that may be hereinafter enacted by the
council in accordance with the Charter.



4.16.  Employees maybe appointed to two or more appointive offices.



   The city manager, with the approval and consent of the council, shall
have the authority to appoint one person to fulfill the functions and duties
of two (2) or more offices provided that the functions of such appointive
offices are not incompatible with each other, unless otherwise provided in
this Charter.



4.17.  Residence requirements for employees.



   All full-time employees of the city, if not residents of Macomb County
at the time of their appointment, shall become residents thereof within six
(6) months thereafter and shall remain so while so employed. The council may,
by resolution or by ordinance, extend the six (6) month period.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1990.



4.18.  Private use of public property.



   No officer or employee of the city shall devote any city property or
labor to his own personal use.



4.19.  Delivery of office.



   When any elective or appointive officer or employee of the city has
qualified and is entitled to assume the duties of his office his predecessor
in such office or position shall surrender to him forthwith, all the books,
papers, records and other city property which may be in his possession. The
failure of such predecessor to comply with this provision shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



4.20.  Anti-nepotism.



   Unless the council shall by five-sevenths vote, which shall be recorded
as part of its official proceedings, determine that the best interests of the
city shall be served and the party considered by such a vote has met the
requirements for such a classified position as are specified in section 8.19
(1-4 of this Charter), the following relatives of any elective or appointive
officer are disqualified from holding any appointive office or employment
during the term for which said elective or appointive officer was elected or
appointed: Spouse, child, parent, grandchild, grandparent, brother, sister,
half-brother, half-sister or the spouses of any of them. All relationships
shall include those arising from adoption. This section shall in no way
disqualify such relatives or their spouses who are bona fide appointive
officers or employees for the city at the time of the election or appointment
of said official.



CHAPTER 5.  THE CITY COUNCIL



5.01.  The council: Composition and term of office.



   The legislative and governing body of the city shall be the city
council, which shall consist of the mayor and six (6) councilpersons, all of
whom shall serve a two-year term of office. At the regular city election to
be held in 1993, the mayor and three (3) councilpersons shall be elected for
a two-year term of office. At each biennial election thereafter, the mayor
and six (6) councilpersons shall be elected for a two-year term of office.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1992.



5.02.  Compensation of mayor and councilmen.



   Each councilman shall receive as compensation thirty dollars for each
regular and special meeting of the council which he attends, but the
compensation so paid shall not exceed $1800 in any fiscal year. The mayor
shall receive as compensation forty dollars for each regular and special
meeting of the council which he attends, but the compensation so paid shall
not exceed $2500 in any fiscal year. Such compensation shall be paid monthly
and except as otherwise provided in this Charter shall constitute the only
compensation which may be paid the mayor or councilmen for the discharge of
any official duty for or on behalf of the city during their tenure of office.
However, the mayor and councilmen may, upon order of the council be paid such
necessary bona fide expenses incurred in service in behalf of the city as are
authorized and itemized.



5.03.  Election; mayor pro tem.



   The highest vote-getter in each regular city election for councilperson
shall serve as mayor pro tem. Vacancies in the office of mayor pro tem shall
be filled by the next highest vote-getter.



   In the event of absence or disability of both the mayor and mayor pro
tem, the council may designate another of its members to serve as acting
mayor during such absence or disability.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1992; amended and approved at the General Election held November 8,
1994.



5.04.  Duties of mayor.



   (A)   Insofar as required by statute, and for all ceremonial
purposes, the mayor shall be the executive head of the city. He shall have a
voice and vote in all proceedings of the council, equal with that of other
members of the council, but shall have no veto power. He shall be the
presiding officer of the council.



   (B)   The mayor shall be a conservator of the peace and in
emergencies may exercise within the city the powers conferred upon sheriffs
to suppress riot and disorder, and shall have authority to command the
assistance of all able-bodied citizens to aid in the enforcement of the
ordinances of the city and to suppress riot and disorder.



   (C)   The mayor shall execute or authenticate by his signature such
instruments as the council, this Charter, or statute or laws of the United
States shall require.



   (D)   Except as may be required by statute, the mayor shall exercise
only such powers as this Charter or the council shall specifically confer
upon him.



   (E)   In the absence or disability of the mayor, the mayor pro tem
shall perform the duties of mayor. In the absence or disability of both, the
designated acting mayor shall perform such duties.



5.05.  Regular meetings of the council.



   The council shall meet not less than twice each month commencing at a
time to be set by council resolution at the usual place of holding meetings
of the council. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the
council shall fall on a legal holiday, then such regular meeting shall be
held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a
holiday.



5.06.  Special meetings of the council.



   Special meetings may be called by the clerk of the council on the
written request of the mayor or any three (3) members of the council on
twenty-four (24) hours written notice to each member of the council,
designating the purpose of such meeting and served personally or left at his
usual place of residence by the clerk or someone designated by him. Any
special meeting at which all members of the council are present or have
waived notice in writing, shall be a legal meeting for all purposes, without
such notice.



5.07.  Business at special meetings.



   No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the council
unless the same has been stated in the notice of such meeting. However, if
all the members of the council are present at any special meeting of the
council, then any business which might lawfully come before a regular meeting
of the council, may be transacted at such special meeting.



5.08.  Meetings of the council to be public.



   All regular and special meetings of the council shall be open to the
public and rules of order of the council shall provide that citizens shall
have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.



5.09.  Quorum.



   The majority of the council shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business at all meetings of the council, but in the absence of
a quorum two (2) or more members may adjourn any regular or special meeting
to a later date.



5.10.  Rules of procedure; journal of proceedings required.



   The council shall determine its own rules, policies and order of
business and shall keep a written or printed journal of all its proceedings
in the English language which shall be signed by the mayor and the council
clerk. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of
all resolutions shall be taken by "yes" and "no" votes and entered upon the
record except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to
so state. An affirmative vote of the majority of the quorum of the council is
necessary to validate any resolution except as otherwise required by law or
this Charter. Neither the mayor nor any councilperson shall vote on any
question in which he has any financial interest other than the common public
interest. Any citizen or taxpayer of the city shall have access to the
minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the council at all
reasonable times. There shall be no standing committees of the council.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held in
November, 1992.



5.11.  Discipline.



   The council may by vote of not less than a majority of its members,
compel the attendance of its members at its regular meetings and enforce
orderly conduct therein; and any member of the council who refuses to attend
such meetings and conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be
deemed guilty of misconduct in office. The council may require the attendance
of the city manager and that of any elective or appointive officer of the
city for the purpose of securing from them any information upon the affairs
of the city within their jurisdiction.



5.12.  Investigations.



   The council, by majority of its members, or any person or committee
authorized by it for the purpose, shall have power to inquire into the
conduct of any department, office or officer of the city and to make
investigations as to municipal affairs, and for that purpose may subpoena
witnesses, administer oaths, and compel the production of books, papers, and
other evidence. Failure on the part of any officer of the city to obey such
subpoena or to produce books, papers, or other evidence as ordered under the
provisions of this section shall constitute misconduct of office and shall
also constitute a misdemeanor. If such failure shall be on the part of any
employee of the city, it shall constitute a misdemeanor.



5.13.  Official newspaper.



   The council, after investigating the circulation, rate, quality of
printing, deliveries and responsibility of available newspapers, and after
receiving bids, shall designate at least one newspaper of general circulation
in the city which is qualified to publish legal notices under the laws of the
State of Michigan, as the official newspaper of the city for the next twelve
(12) months. All notices, ordinances, and other records required by the
provisions of this Charter to be published, shall be published in said
official newspaper in the manner and form [prescribed] in this Charter;
provided, however, that the council may order additional publications of any
such notice, ordinance or other record in other newspapers, in any financial
or trade paper, journal or magazine. If at any time, no newspaper had been
designated as the official newspaper of the city, or in case the newspaper
designated as the official newspaper of the city ceases regular publication
or is violating any of the terms of its contract, the council shall order
publication of such notices, proceedings, ordinances, or other records as are
required to be published, in some other newspaper printed in the English
language and circulated in the city; provided, however, that the city shall
not be without an official newspaper more than thirty (30) days.



5.14.  Publication of council proceedings.



   No proceedings of the council shall be published in the official
newspaper of the city until the meeting following the meeting at which said
proceedings were adopted. A synopsis of such proceedings, prepared by the
clerk of the council and approved by the presiding officer, showing the
substance of each separate proceeding of the council, shall be sufficient
compliance with the requirements of this section except for ordinances
adopted by the council. Ordinances shall be published in the complete form.



5.15.  Public hearings.



   The council shall have the power to hold hearings on any matter within
its province, and to compel by subpoena, the attendance of witnesses and the
production of books, papers and data in any hearing pending before it. Such
subpoena may be served by any person of legal age. Each witness shall be
entitled to receive the same fees for attendance as is provided by law for
the payment of witness fees in the circuit court for the County of Macomb.
The council may by ordinance prescribe the method to more effectually carry
out the foregoing provisions. Any person who having been personally served
with subpoena willfully refuses to comply with the same, may be punished with
a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment not to
exceed ninety (90) days, or both in the discretion of the court.



5.16.  Claims and accounts.



   The council shall audit and pass on all accounts and claims against the
city. All claims whether arising out of contract or tort shall be made under
oath and shall be filed with the clerk for consideration by the council
within sixty (60) days after the cause of action in every case has arisen. It
shall be a sufficient defense to any action for the collection of any demand
or claim against the city that such claim has not been filed with the clerk
as hereinbefore provided.



5.17.  Power to enter into insurance contracts.



   The council shall have the power to adopt and make available to the
administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments any
recognized standard plan of group life, hospital health or accident insurance.



5.18.  Licenses: Requiring council approval.



   (A)   The council shall by ordinance prescribe the terms and
conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may
require an exact payment of such reasonable sums for any licenses as it may
deem proper. The persons receiving the licenses shall, before the issuing
thereof, execute a bond to the city, when required by any ordinance, in such
sum and with such securities as prescribed by such ordinance, conditioned for
the faithful observance of the Charter of the city, the ordinance under which
the license is granted and otherwise conditioned as any such ordinance may
prescribe.



   (B)   The licensing power granted to cities by state law shall be
vested in the council unless otherwise provided by ordinance.



5.19.  Depository of city funds.



   The council shall select a depository or depositories in which the
funds of the city shall be deposited.



CHAPTER 6.  CITY LEGISLATION: ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS, INITIATIVE AND
REFERENDUM



6.01.  Legislative power, council authority.



   The legislative power of the city is vested exclusively in the council,
except as otherwise provided by law.



6.02.  Prior township legislation.



   All valid ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the
Township of Sterling which are not inconsistent with this Charter and which
are in full force and effect at the time of the effective date of this
Charter shall continue in full force and effect until repealed or amended.
Provided, however, that if any such ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation
provides for the appointment of any officers or members of any boards,
commissions or departments, such officers, members of such boards,
commissions or departments, shall, after the effective date of this Charter,
be appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Charter.



6.03.  Ordinances and resolutions.



   The official actions of the council shall be by ordinance or
resolution, adopted by not less than a majority of the council in the case of
ordinances or not less than a majority of quorum of the council in the case
of resolutions, unless otherwise required by law or this Charter. Action of
the council by resolution shall be limited to matters required or permitted
to be so done by law or relating to the internal affairs or concerns of the
city. All acts of the council carrying a penalty for the violation thereof
shall be by ordinance. Each ordinance shall be identified by a short title
and by a number or by a Code section number when and after the ordinances are
codified. All other acts of the council which do not constitute ordinances
shall be deemed to be resolutions.



6.04.  Ordination, amendment, repeal, effective date, penalties.



   (A)   The enacting clause of all ordinances shall read "The City of
Sterling Heights Ordains." Such caption may be omitted when said ordinances
are published in book form by authority of the council. Each proposed
ordinance shall be introduced in written or printed form in the English
language.



   (B)   No ordinance shall be passed at the same meeting at which it
is introduced, unless the same is declared to be an emergency action by a
vote of not less than five (5) members of the council.



   (C)   An ordinance may be repealed, amended or modified by
re-enacting the section or sections of the ordinance to be amended.



   (D)   An ordinance may be repealed by reference only to its number
and title.



   (E)   All ordinances shall become effective immediately after
publication and recording pursuant to law; unless a different effective date
is provided in the ordinance.



   (F)   The council shall have the authority to provide in any
ordinance for the punishment of those who violate the same, by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment in the city prison, a
county jail, or such other penal institution authorized to receive city
prisoners for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or both such fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the court.



   (G)   Prosecution for violation of any ordinance of the city shall
be commenced within two (2) years after the commission of the offense;
provided, that the limitation herein imposed shall not be construed as a
limitation of the city's rights to forfeit any franchise, grant or license
for violation of the terms and conditions thereof after said two (2) year
period.



6.05.  Ordinance book: Publication.



All ordinances shall be recorded in an indexed book marked "Ordinance Book,"
and the record of each ordinance shall be authenticated by the signature of
the mayor and clerk. Such record and authentication shall be done promptly
after the final passage of the ordinance, but failure to so record and
authenticate any ordinance shall not invalidate or suspend its operation.



   It shall be the duty of the clerk to cause every ordinance to be
published by printing the same in the official newspaper of the city. The
publication of an ordinance in the council proceedings shall be deemed a
sufficient publication. The clerk shall immediately after such publication,
enter in the "Ordinance Book," under the record of the ordinance, a
certificate under his hand stating the time and method of such publication.
Such certificate shall be prima facie evidence of the due publication of the
ordinance.



6.06.  Proof of ordinances in judicial proceedings.



   City ordinances may be proved in any judicial proceedings by the
following methods:



   (A)   By a certified copy of an extract of the clerk's records.



   (B)   By a copy of the ordinance duly certified as a true copy by
the clerk under the seal of the city.



   (C)   From any volume purporting to have been published, printed,
and compiled by authority of the council.



6.07.  Codes of technical regulations: Adoption by reference.



   The council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by
reference thereto in an adopting ordinance and without publishing such code
in full. Provided that, such code is clearly identifiable in said ordinance
and that the purpose of such code shall be published with the adopting
ordinance. Printed copies thereof shall be kept in the office of the clerk,
available for inspection by and distribution to the public at all times. The
publication shall also contain a notice to the effect that a complete copy of
said Code is available for public use and inspection at the office of the
clerk.



6.08.  Compilation: Codification.



   The city council shall, within a period of three (3) years after the
adoption of this Charter, enact such ordinances as are necessary for the
efficient operation of the city and shall provide for the compilation or
codification of the Charter and all ordinances of the city in book or loose
leaf form. Such compilation or codification shall be made available to the
public in the office of the clerk, at a reasonable charge.



6.09.  Initiative and referendum.



   (A)   Any ordinance which may be legally adopted by the council of
the City of Sterling Heights, may be proposed by a petition signed by
registered electors of the city not less in number than fifteen percent (15%)
of all votes cast for governor of the State of Michigan at the last fall
election held in the state, but in no case less than fifteen hundred (1500).
Such petition shall be addressed to the council of the City of Sterling
Heights, and shall set forth at length the ordinance proposed to be enacted.
With each signature attached thereto shall be given the place of residence,
with the street and number of the elector so signing, and the date when such
signature was attached. Such signatures need not all be on one paper, but all
petitions shall be filed with the clerk at one and the same time. An
affidavit or affidavits shall be made by one or more registered electors of
the city, which affidavits shall state that each signature, appearing upon
the petition to which such affidavit is attached, is the genuine signature of
the person whose name it purports to be, and that to the best of applicant's
knowledge and belief, the signers whose names are attached to said petition
are registered electors of the City of Sterling Heights. The petition
proposing an ordinance shall be in the following form:



   "To The Honorable Council of The City of Sterling Heights, Michigan:”



   We, the undersigned registered electors of the City of Sterling
Heights, under and by virtue of the authority granted by Act No. 279 of The
Public Acts 1909, as amended, and by Chapter VI of the Charter of The City of
Sterling Heights, do hereby propose and initiate for submission to the
qualified electors of the City of Sterling Heights, the following proposed
ordinance:



   (Here set forth proposed ordinance in full)



and your petitioners will ever pray, etc.



   Name
         Number         Street            Date
of Signing



      AFFIDAVIT



   STATE OF MICHIGAN)



   COUNTY OF MACOMB)



   STATE SEAL:



                     being first duly sworn, deposes and says
that the names appearing upon the foregoing petition are the genuine
signatures of the persons whose names appear thereon, and that to the best of
applicant's knowledge and belief, such persons are registered electors of the
City of Sterling Heights.



Subscribed and sworn to before me this                  day of    
          19         .



   Notary Public, Macomb County, Michigan



   My Commission Expires                                
              ”.



   (B)   Said petitions, when signed by the requisite number of
registered electors, shall be filed with the clerk. Such clerk shall attach
thereto a certificate, setting forth the name and address of the person or
persons filing the said petition in his office, and the date when said
petition was filed. A copy of said petition, exclusive of signatures,
together with said certificate, shall be entered in a record book to be kept
for that purpose in the office of the clerk.



6.10.  Petition: When sufficient; procedure after filing.



   (A)   Within ten (10) days from the date of the filing of said
petition with the clerk, it shall be the duty of such clerk to ascertain, by
comparison of said petition with the registration records of the City of
Sterling Heights, whether or not such petitions contain the requisite number
of signatures of registered electors as the same appear on the registration
records of the city, and following such examination, the clerk shall attach
to such petition his certificate showing the result of such examination. If
the certificate of the clerk so attached shows the petition to be
insufficient, he shall, within ten (10) days, cause notice in writing,
setting forth the fact that such petitions are found to be insufficient, to
be served upon one or more of the persons designated in the certificate
attached by him to said petition as the persons who filed said petition in
his office. Additional signatures properly verified as hereinbefore provided
may be filed with the clerk at anytime fifteen (15) days from the date of the
service of such notice. The clerk shall attach his certificate to such
additional petitions and shall cause them to be entered in the record book as
herein provided shall be done when the original petitions are filed. The
clerk shall, within five (5) days after the filing of such additional
petitions make like comparisons of the additional signatures with the
registration books and attach thereto his certificate of the result. If the
number of signatures are still shown to be insufficient, or if no additional
signatures are so filed, the clerk shall, upon demand, return the petition to
any of the persons designated as filing it, without prejudice however, to the
filing of a new petition for the same purpose. Whenever the petition shall be
found by the clerk to be sufficient, he shall so certify and submit the same
with his certificate to the council at its next regular meeting.



   (B)   At such next regular meeting, the council shall proceed to
consider such petition, including the form and purpose of the ordinance
thereto attached. If such ordinance be determined by the city attorney to be
illegal, in form or otherwise, the council shall so declare by resolution and
shall direct the clerk to return said petition immediately to any of the
persons designated as filing it, without prejudice to filing a new petition
for the same purpose. If the council, upon consideration, finds such
ordinance legal, then it may provide for public hearings on such ordinance;
and if it deems the same advisable, shall pass such ordinance within four (4)
weeks from the day of the filing of such petition with the clerk. If the
council finds such petition and ordinance legal and does not pass such
ordinance within the time herein limited, it shall within two (2) weeks after
its failure to pass such ordinance, provide for the submission of such
ordinance to the qualified electors of the city at the next election
occurring more than thirty (30) days thereafter, at which questions of
propositions submitted by the council may be voted upon by the electors; but
no special election shall ever be called by the council for the purpose of
referendum only.



   (C)   A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition
shall be subject to court review. A final determination of insufficiency,
even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new
petition for the same purpose.



6.11.  Referendum on ordinance passed by council.



   Within forty-five (45) days after the publication of any ordinance duly
passed by the council, a petition may be presented to the council protesting
against such ordinance continuing in effect. Said petition shall contain the
text of such ordinance and shall be signed by registered electors of the
city, not less in number than fifteen percent (15%) of all votes cast for
governor of the State of Michigan at the last fall election held in the
state, but in no case less than fifteen hundred (1500). Said ordinance shall
thereupon and thereby be suspended from operation, and the council shall
immediately reconsider such ordinance.



   If the ordinance be not entirely repealed, the council shall submit the
question of whether or not it shall become effective to a vote of the
electors of the city. The procedure in regard to such petition of protest and
referendum shall be the same as hereinabove in this chapter provided for the
initiative and referendum of a proposed ordinance, with such modification as
the case may require.



6.12.  Referendum may be provided by council without petition.



   The council may, on its own motion, submit to a referendum for adoption
or rejection by the electors of the city at any election any proposed
ordinance or measure or a proposal for the repeal or the amendment of any
ordinance in the same manner and with the same force and effect as provided
in this chapter for submission on petition.



6.13.  Referendum elections.



   (A)   The ordinance or other measure or proposal submitted to the
electors shall be published at least once in a newspaper or newspapers
published in the city and printed in the English language at least ten (10)
days prior to the election at which it is to be submitted. If the majority
vote of the electors voting at the election is "for the ordinance" (or other
proposition), the same proceedings shall be taken, after the canvass of the
returns and declaration of results by the council, as would be necessary if
the same action upon such proposition had been taken by the council itself,
except that in the case of ordinances, no further publication thereof shall
be required.



   (B)   Except as in this chapter otherwise provided, all of the
provisions of chapter 3 of this Charter for the calling and holding of city
elections shall apply to referendum elections as near as may be, and the
proposition upon the ballot shall state the nature and purpose of the
ordinance in terms sufficient to identify it. The voting lines on such ballot
shall be as follows:



      (   )   FOR THE ORDINANCE



      (   )   AGAINST THE ORDINANCE



   (C)   No referendum shall be held upon any ordinance required to be
passed by the general laws of the state.



   (D)   No ordinance adopted under this Charter by referendum vote
shall be repealed or amended except by referendum vote.



6.14.  Where referendum fails.



   If at such election such ordinance shall fail, a similar ordinance on
the same subject shall not be submitted to the electors for one year after
the date of such election. The council may by ordinance or resolution make
such regulations not in conflict herewith as it may deem necessary to carry
out the provisions of this chapter.



CHAPTER 7.  THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE



7.01.  Administrative officers.



   (A)   The administrative officers of the city shall be the city
manager, clerk, treasurer, assessor, director of finance, chief of police,
fire chief, superintendent of public works, city attorney, director of parks
and recreation and such other additional administrative officers as may be
created by ordinance. The council may designate an administrative officer to
conduct the operations of more than one administrative office if deemed
necessary or advisable for the proper and efficient operation of the city
except that the offices of chief of police and fire chief may not have one
person appointed to both positions. No such designation shall assume or be
granted any of the powers or duties granted to or required of the city
manager by this Charter.



   (B)   The administrative officers of the city except the city
attorney, boards and commissions of the city, shall, in the performance of
the duties of their respective offices, serve under the direction of the city
manager. The administrative officers shall submit monthly reports in
duplicate to the city manager who shall file one copy of each such report
with the council.



   (C)   All administrative officers of the city whose appointment is
not otherwise provided for in this Charter shall be recommended for
appointment by the city manager for an indefinite period, shall be
responsible to the city manager and shall have their compensation fixed by
ordinance. Recommendations of administrative officers by the city manager
shall be subject to confirmation by the council. The city manager may
discharge such officers only with confirmation by the council.



7.02.  City manager: Qualifications; appointment; powers and duties; removal
from office.



   (A)   The city manager shall be chosen by the council on the basis
of his executive and administrative qualifications with special reference to
his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, accepted practice in respect
to the duties of his office. At the time of his appointment he shall have had
at least three (3) years experience as a city manager or assistant city
manager or any three (3) year combination thereof; or he shall be a holder of
a baccalaureate degree from an accredited college or university and possess
three (3) years of administrative experience, but need not be a resident of
the City of Sterling Heights. As promptly as possible after his appointment,
the city manager shall become a resident and a registered elector of the
city, and shall so remain during his tenure of office. In the event that a
petition requesting the removal of the city manager by the council be filed
with the clerk, signed by not less than fifteen percent (15%) of the
registered electors of the city and setting forth as reasons for the
requested removal specific acts or failures to act on the part of the city
manager which constitute violations of the Charter, or failure to perform the
duties of his office as set forth in this Charter, the council shall
designate a committee of three (3) of its members to investigate such
reasons. Such committee shall make a report of its investigation of such
statement of reasons at the second regular meeting of the council following
its appointment. If the committee finds and reports that the statements
contained in the petition do not constitute violations of this Charter or
that the acts or failure to act complained of were performed at the direction
of the council or in conformance with policies established by it, no further
action shall be taken on such petition. If the committee finds and reports
that the reasons set forth in the petition are true and the acts or failure
to act were not in accordance with directives or policies of the council, the
council shall, at its next regular meeting, vote to remove or to retain the
city manager.



   (B)   The city manager shall be the administrative agent of the
council, shall be vested with all administrative powers of the city, and
shall perform the duties of his office under the authority of the council and
shall be accountable to it. He shall devote his entire time to his municipal
employment, and shall not engage in or be engaged or employed in any private
business or private employment.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the city manager to:



      (1)   Supervise and coordinate the work of the administrative
officers and departments of the city, except as otherwise provided in this
Charter;



      (2)   Prepare the annual budget proposals of the city,
together with supporting information in explanation thereof;



      (3)   Maintain an inventory of city-owned property;



      (4)   Keep informed and report to the council concerning the
work of the several offices and departments of the city, and, to that end, he
may secure from the officers and heads of all administrative departments such
information and periodic or special reports as he or the council may deem
necessary;



      (5)   In case of conflict of authority between officers and
administrative departments or in case of absence of administrative authority,
occasioned by inadequacy of Charter or ordinance provision, resolve the
conflict or supply the necessary authority, so far as may be consistent with
law and the ordinances of the city, and direct the necessary action to be
taken in conformance therewith, making a full report immediately to the
council;



      (6)   Attend all meetings of the council, with the right to be
heard in all council proceedings, but without the right to vote;



      (7)   Recommend to the council, from time to time, such
measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the city
or its services;



      (8)   Prepare and maintain an administrative code which, when
adopted by the council, shall supplement this Charter in establishing the
duties and functions of each officer and department of the city;



      (9)   Furnish the council with information concerning city
affairs and prepare and submit such reports as may be required or which the
council may request, including an annual report, which shall consolidate the
reports of the several departments;



      (10)   Possess such further powers and perform such additional
duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time, by the
council, so far as may be consistent with the provisions of the law.



7.03.  Duties of the clerk.



   The clerk shall be the clerk of the council and shall attend all its
meetings and:



   (A)   He shall keep a permanent journal of the council proceedings
in the English language.



   (B)   He shall keep a record of all ordinances, resolutions, and
actions of the council.



   (C)   He shall have power to administer all oaths required by state
law, this Charter and the ordinances of the city.



   (D)   He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix it to
all documents and instruments requiring the seal, and shall attest the same.



   (E)   He shall be the custodian of all papers, documents, and
records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise
provided for by this Charter.



   (F)   He shall give the proper officials of the city ample notice of
the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts,
or agreements.



   (G)   He shall issue and sign all licenses granted after the license
fee has been paid to the city treasurer, and shall register the same.



   (H)   He shall certify by his signature all ordinances and
resolutions enacted or passed by the council.



   (I)   He shall countersign all warrants issued upon the city
treasurer.



   (J)   He shall perform such other duties as are required of him by
state or federal law, this Charter, the city manager and the council or the
ordinances of the city.



7.04.  Duties of the treasurer.



   The city treasurer shall be the tax collector and shall perform all of
the duties as prescribed by this Charter; the general laws of the state,
together with such other duties as may be required or assigned to him by the
city manager [and:]



   (A)   He shall file a bond in such amount and with such sureties as
shall be satisfactory to the council or as may hereafter be required by law.



   (B)   He shall have custody of all monies of the city, the clerk's
bond, and all evidences of value belonging to the city or held in trust by
the city.



   (C)   He shall receive all monies belonging to and receivable by the
city that may be collected by any official or employee of the city including
license fees, taxes, assessments, utility charges and all other charges
belonging to and payable to the city and shall, in all cases, give a receipt
therefore.



   (D)   He shall keep and deposit all monies or funds in such manner
and in such places as the council may determine from time to time and shall
report the same in detail to the clerk.



   (E)   He shall have such powers, duties and prerogatives in regard
to the collection and custody of state, county and school district and city
taxes and monies as are conferred by law to enforce the collection of state,
county, township and school district taxes upon real and personal property.



   (F)   He shall pay no money out of the treasury except in pursuance
of and by the authority of the law and upon warrants issued in the manner as
required by this Charter which warrants shall specify the purpose for which
the amounts thereof are to be paid.



   (G)   He shall collect and keep an account of and be charged with
all taxes and monies appropriated, raised or received for each fund of the
city, and shall keep a separate account of such funds, and shall credit
thereto all monies raised, paid in or appropriated therefore, and shall pay
every warrant out of the particular fund raised for the purpose for which the
warrant was issued.



   (H)   He shall keep all monies in his hands belonging to the city
separate and distinct from his own monies and is hereby prohibited from
using, either directly or indirectly, the city's money, warrants or evidences
of debt which are in his custody or keeping for his own use and benefit or
that of any other person.



7.05.  Deputies of clerk and treasurer.



   (Has been deleted.)



7.06.  Duties of the assessor.



   The assessor shall possess all the powers vested in and shall be
charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by state law. In
addition, the assessor shall make and prepare all regular and special
assessment rolls in a manner prescribed by this Charter, the ordinances of
the city or by state law. He shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed for him by state law, this Charter, ordinances of the city or the
council.



7.07.  Duties of the city attorney.



   (A)   The attorney shall act as legal advisor to, and be attorney
and counsel for the city manager and/or the council and shall be responsible
to the council. He shall advise any officer or department head of the city in
matters relating to his official duties when so requested and shall file with
the clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him.



   (B)   The attorney shall prosecute such ordinance violations and he
shall conduct for the city such cases in court and before other legally
constituted tribunals as the mayor and/or the council may request. He shall
file with the clerk, copies of such records and files relating thereto as the
city manager and/or the council may direct.



   (C)   The attorney shall prepare and review all ordinances,
contracts, bonds and other written instruments which are submitted to him by
the city manager and/or the council and shall promptly give his opinion as to
the legality thereof.



   (D)   The attorney shall call to the attention of the council and
the city manager all matters of law, and changes of developments therein,
affecting the city.



   (E)   The attorney shall perform such other duties as may be
prescribed for him by this Charter, by ordinance or by direction of the
council and/or the city manager.



   (F)   Upon recommendation of the attorney, the council may retain
special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest,
or to assist and counsel with the city attorney therein.



7.08.  Duties of the director of finance.



   (A)   The director of finance shall be the general accountant of the
city, shall keep the books of account of the assets, receipts, and
expenditures, and shall keep the council and the city manager informed as to
the financial affairs of the city. The system of accounts of the city shall
conform to such uniform system as may be required by law.



   (B)   He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the
city. He shall not allow withdrawals from any city fund which, after
deduction of withdrawals therefrom, does not have a sufficient amount therein
to pay such proposed withdrawal.



   (C)   He shall balance all the books of account of the city
quarterly in each year, and shall make a report thereon to the city manager.



   (D)   He shall at any time, upon direction of the council or the
city manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official or
department of the city. He shall examine and audit all books of account of
the clerk, treasurer, and the municipal court at least once each month.



7.09.  Duties of the superintendent of public works.



   The superintendent of public works shall be charged with the
responsibility for the maintenance and lighting of streets and alleys, and
the construction and maintenance of public buildings, streets, sewers, sewage
disposal facilities, motor transportation, construction and maintenance of
water, sewer and drain systems, and such other duties and responsibilities
that may be designated by this Charter, ordinance or state law.



7.10.  Duties of the chief of police.



   (A)   The police chief shall be in charge of the police department.
He shall be appointed by and responsible to the city manager, under the
provisions of Act No. 78 of the Public Acts of 1935, as amended, and as
adopted by this Charter.



   (B)   Police officers of the city shall have all the powers,
immunities, and privileges granted to peace officers by law for the making of
arrests, the preservation of order, and the safety of persons and property in
the city. Any person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or
court for examination or trial, without unnecessary delay. Police officers of
the city shall make and sign complaints to or before the proper officers and
magistrates against any person known to be or, upon complaint or information,
believed to be guilty of any violation of this Charter or ordinances of the
city, or of the penal laws of the state for which a penalty is provided. For
purposes of making arrests, violations of city ordinances shall be deemed to
be misdemeanors.



7.11.  Duties of the fire chief.



   (A)   The fire chief shall be in charge of the fire department. He
shall be appointed by and responsible to the city manager under the
provisions of Act. No. 78 of the Public Acts of 1935, as adopted by this
Charter.



   (B)   The fire department shall be responsible for the prevention
and extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property
against damage and accident resulting therefrom. The fire chief shall be
responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting
apparatus and property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs
to diminish the risk of fires within the city. He, or any of his authorized
subordinates, may command any person present at a fire to aid in the
extinguishment thereof and to assist in the protection of life or property.
If any person willfully disobeys any such lawful requirement, he shall be
deemed guilty of a violation of this Charter.



   (C)   The fire chief or any of his authorized subordinates, with the
concurrence of the city manager or of any two (2) councilmen, may cause any
building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to
arrest the progress of a fire. If the city manager or members of the council
are not available for such concurrence, the fire chief or his subordinate may
act without such concurrence. In such case no action shall be maintained
against the city or any person therefore. If any person having an interest in
such building shall apply to the council within three (3) months after the
fire, for damages or compensation for such building, the council may pay him
such compensation as it may deem just. The council may ascertain the amount
of such damage or compensation by agreement with the owner of the property or
by the appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the case of
juries selected to appraise damages for the taking of property for public
use. No compensation shall be paid on account of any loss which would
probably have occurred to a building if it had not been pulled down or
destroyed under authority of this section.



7.12.  Library; library commission.



   (A)   The city council of Sterling Heights have [has] the power to
establish and maintain a public library for the use and benefit of the
inhabitants of this city.



   (B)   [Deleted at election of 11-3-70]



7.13.  Planning commission.



   (A)   The council shall by ordinance maintain a city planning
commission created under the provisions of Act 285 of Public Acts of 1931, as
amended.



   (B)   The administrative head of the department of planning shall be
the city planner, who shall be appointed by the city manager, provided,
however, that such appointment shall not be effective until confirmed by the
council according to the provisions of this Charter.



7.14.  The duties of other administrative officers.



   The duties of all administrative officers, not otherwise provided for
herein, shall be those established by law and an administrative plan proposed
by the city manager and approved by the council.



7.15.  Department of civil service.



   There shall be a department of civil service which shall be under the
control and management of the civil service commission in accordance with the
provisions of section 8.0. The plan of civil service as established by Act
No. 78 of the Public Acts of 1935, as amended, adopted by the electors of the
Township of Sterling and for the police and fire departments having been
heretofore included in this Charter by reference in section 8.03 is
applicable to those two (2) departments only.



7.16.  Terms of office of department heads and of members of all commissions
and boards.



   (A)   The terms of office of each head of the departments of the
city government and of members of all commissions and boards shall commence
on the twenty-fifth day following the third Monday in April following each
regular biennial city election and upon the date of certification to the city
clerk in the case of appointees to fill a vacancy or to replace the head of
any department or member of a commission or board who is removed from office.



   (B)   Unless a definite term of office is specified in this Charter
for the head of any department of the city government, such department heads
shall hold office at the discretion of the city manager; provided, however,
that no officer shall continue to hold office later than fifteen (15) days
after the third Saturday in April following a regular biennial city election
unless he shall be reappointed for a new term.



7.17.  Restrictions concerning offices.



   No classified employee of the city shall seek any elective city office,
unless he first resigns from his position with the city.



7.18.  Salaries.



   Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the salaries of the
department heads of the administrative departments of the city shall be set
by the council in the annual city budget, but shall not be changed during
term of office under any appointment. Subject to the civil service provisions
of this Charter and subject to budget appropriations, the salaries and
remuneration of subordinates and employees of the departments of the city
government shall be set by the head of each respective department in
accordance with any pay plan adopted by the council.



7.19.  Department rules; appointing authority.



   Subject to the provisions of this Charter, the department head,
commission or board in charge of each department of the city government shall
formulate all rules [and] regulations required for the organization and
conduct of his or its department and of the divisions under his or its
jurisdiction. Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, each such department
head, commission or board shall be the appointing authority for his or its
department, and, as such, shall be responsible for the appointment of all
division heads, subordinates and employees of his or its department, subject
to the civil service provisions of this Charter. For the purpose of this
section, all elective officers, except councilmen, shall be considered
department heads.



7.20.  Independent boards and commissions.



   The council may not create any board or commission, other than those
provided for in this Charter, to administer any activity, department or
agency of the city government except a municipal hospital, recreation or any
activity which by statute is required to be so administered. The council may,
however, establish:



   (A)   Quasi-judicial appeal boards and



   (B)   Boards or commissions to serve solely in an advisory capacity
or to administer activities conducted jointly with other units of government.



CHAPTER 8.  CIVIL SERVICE



8.01.  Creation.



   There is hereby created a system of civil service in the City of
Sterling Heights that will affect the police and fire departments of said
city and all other municipal employees except as provided in section 8.10.



8.02.  General purpose.



   The general purpose of this chapter is to provide for the establishment
of a civil service system of personnel administration based on merit,
principles and scientific methods governing the appointment, promotion,
transfer, layoff, removal and discipline of all employees in the classified
service as hereinafter defined. No personnel changes or personnel actions of
any kind in the classified service shall be made for political or religious
considerations or for causes other than the good of the service.



8.03.  Police and fire departments.



   The plan of civil service, as established by Act No. 78 of the Public
Acts of 1935, as amended, for the police and fire departments having
heretofore been adopted by the electors of the Township of Sterling, is
hereby incorporated in this chapter by reference, with the same force and
effect as though fully set forth in this Charter. Nothing is hereby added to
or deleted from the said Act by such incorporation as a part of this Charter
and there shall be no addition or deletion from the provisions of that Act,
as it was in effect on the effective date of this Charter, except by
amendment of this Charter.



8.04.  Definitions and interpretations.



   The following terms, when used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless the context clearly requires otherwise:



   (A)   "Commission" means the civil service commission set up in this
chapter.



   (B)   "Council" means the council of the City of Sterling Heights.



   (C)   "Appointing authority" means the officers of the City of
Sterling Heights who have charge of directing the work of the city employees
and under the provisions laid down in and by virtue of this chapter, the
Charter of the City of Sterling Heights and city ordinances and resolutions,
of appointing, promoting, demoting and dismissing such employees.



   (D)   "Employees" means any person who is legally an incumbent of a
position in the classified service of the City of Sterling Heights.



   (E)   "Position" means any office or place of employment in the city
classified service, the duties and responsibilities of which are exercised by
one person.



   (F)   "Personnel director" means the officer of the City of Sterling
Heights designated by this chapter to effectuate the provisions of this
chapter under the limitations hereinafter imposed.



   (G)   "Promotion" means an increase in rank from a lower to a higher
classification within the classified service and may, under certain
conditions laid down in this chapter and the personnel rules, include a
transfer from one department or bureau to another.



   (H)   "Demotion" means a reduction in rank from a higher to a lower
classification within the classified service.



   (I)   "Transfer" means a transfer of an employee from one position
in the classified service to another in the same or in a different department
or bureau but with both positions being approximately the same rank in the
classified service.



   (J)   "Probationary period" refers to that period when the newly
appointed or promoted employee of the classified service is being tested as
to his performance on the job and does not have full status as a member of
the classified service.



   (K)   The word "shall" as used herein is to be construed as
mandatory and not merely directory.



8.05.  Department of personnel.



   For the purpose of centrally administering a personnel system, there is
hereby established a department of personnel, whose officers shall be a civil
service commission of three (3) members, and a director of personnel.



   All officers and employees of the city shall grant to the civil service
commission or its authorized representatives free access to premises and
records under their control and shall furnish them such facilities,
assistance, or information as he or they may require in carrying out the
provisions of this chapter.



8.06.  Creation of civil service commission for municipal employees other
than policemen and firemen.



   The commission shall consist of three (3) electors of the city who meet
the qualifications for city board and commission members contained in section
4.03 and who while in office shall not hold any other city office or city
employment and who shall not serve on any municipal political committee or
take part in the management of any municipal political campaign. Within sixty
(60) days of the effective date of this Charter, the civil service commission
as hereinbefore created shall be appointed as follows: One member shall be
selected by the city council for a term of two (2) years; one member shall be
selected by the city employees other than the employees of the police and
fire departments, to serve for a term of four (4) years; the third member of
the commission shall be selected by the other two (2) for a period of six (6)
years. Thereafter, the appointments shall be made in each case by the same
respective authority, and shall be for six (6) year terms commencing on the
day following the first Tuesday in January of each year that a new term
begins, except that vacancies shall be filled only for the unexpired term.
Any member of the civil service commission may be removed by resolution of
the council but only after an opportunity has been given to such member to be
heard before the council in his own defense.



8.07.  Compensation and organization of the civil service commission.



   The members of the commission shall serve without compensation. The
commission, at its first meeting and thereafter at its first meeting after
January 1 of each year shall elect a chairman. It shall determine the order
of its business for the conduct of its meetings. Two (2) members of the
commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of official business.



   The commission shall meet at regular times specified by its rules, upon
call by the personnel director, upon call by its chairman or upon call by any
two (2) of its members. All meetings of the commission shall be held at the
city office.



8.08.  Appointment of the director of personnel.



   There shall be an executive officer of the department of personnel who
shall be designated as director of personnel. Any vacancy in the position
shall be filled by the civil service commission within sixty (60) days after
such vacancy occurs from the three (3) highest successful candidates whose
names appear on an employment list established as the result of an open
competitive examination conducted by a special examining committee of three
(3) qualified examiners appointed by the civil service commission. The
director of personnel shall be in the classified service and shall be removed
only in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Until such time as
the services of a full-time director of personnel is [are] required, the
civil service commission shall assume the responsibilities of the function.



   The personnel director shall act as secretary for the commission. He
shall be custodian of all records of the commission and shall be the official
upon whom all notices, requests for hearing, complaints, and other official
documents shall be served or filed. He shall keep the minutes of meetings and
records of all proceedings of the commission. He shall appoint and remove,
subject to the provisions of this chapter, all employees of the department of
personnel.



8.09.  Civil service commission: Director of personnel: Powers and duties.



   (A)   The civil service commission shall have general supervision
over the broad problems of administrative policy involved in the personnel
matters prescribed in this section, and except for the purpose of inquiry,
the civil service commission and its members shall deal with the specific
technical problems of administration solely through the director of
personnel. It shall be the duty of the civil service commission:



      (1)   To represent the public interest in the improvement of
personnel administration in the city service;



      (2)   To make annual reports and special reports to the
council on the quality and status of personnel administration in the city
government and to make recommendations for improvements;



      (3)   To do any lawful act necessary to effect the purpose of
this chapter and the rules promulgated in accordance therewith;



      (4)   To sit as a body in investigating and hearing personnel
appeals of appointing authorities and employees;



      (5)   To consider such other matters as may be referred to the
committee by the director of personnel, the council or the city manager.



   (B)   The director of personnel shall be the executive officer of
the department of personnel, and shall initiate and direct administrative
work. He shall:



      (1)   Attend all regular and special meetings of the civil
service commission;



      (2)   Make, and may amend, rules for promoting efficiency in
the classified service of the city and for the appointment, promotion,
transfer, layoff, reinstatement, suspension, and removal of city officers and
employees in such service, but no such rule or amendment shall become
effective unless printed [in] full in a newspaper circulated at least once
each week in the City of Sterling Heights prior to a public hearing thereon
held by the civil service commission after twenty (20) days' notice, and
unless thereafter approved by said commission. The rules shall provide:



         (a)   For the standardization and classifications of all
positions and employments in the classified service of the city, based upon
and graded according to duties and responsibilities and so arranged as to
promote the filling of the higher grades, so far as practicable, through
promotions;



         (b)   For open competitive tests to ascertain the
relative fitness of all appointments in the classified service;



         (c)   For public notice of the time and place of all
competitive tests, at least thirty (30) days in advance thereof, by
publication in the official paper of the city and by posting a notice in a
conspicuous place in the city hall and other public buildings;



         (d)   For the creation of eligibility lists upon which
shall be entered the names of the successful applicants in the order of their
standing in the competitive tests;



         (e)   For the rejection of applicants or eligibles who
do not satisfy requirements as to age, sex, physical condition, and moral
character, or who have attempted deception or fraud in connection with any
test or their application thereof;



         (f)   For the certification from the appropriate
eligibility list, for filing a vacancy in the classified service, the names
of the three (3) applicants with the highest standing on such list;



         (g)   For the rejection by the appointing authority of
the persons certified for appointment; provided, that any person rejected
shall have the right to appeal to and a hearing before the civil service
commission;



         (h)   For promotions based on competitive tests and upon
records of efficiency, character, conduct, and seniority;



         (i)   For transfer from a position to a similar position
in the same class and grade;



         (j)   For the immediate reinstatement of his position,
at no loss of classification or pay rate, of any person who, without fault or
delinquency on his part, is separated from the service or reduced in rank;
except where such separation or reduction in rank is caused by normal
procedure as set down in the personnel rules, or for reasons of economy in
the city government;



         (k)   For suspension for purpose of discipline, for not
longer than thirty (30) days, and for leaves of absence;



         (l)   For the discharge or reduction in grade and pay of
any employee after he has been informed in writing, by the person in
authority, of the reason for such action, with copies of the written reasons
submitted to the city manager and the civil service commission for permanent
filing, with the right of the employee to a public hearing before the civil
service commission;



         (m)   For maintaining a record of the efficiency of each
employee by establishing a service rating system.



8.10.  Exemptions from the classified service.



   The following officers and employees are exempt from the provisions of
this chapter:



   (A)   All elective officers and all other officers who may be
hereafter elected by the people.



   (B)   Members of appointed boards and commissions.



   (C)   Head of the present departments and of any departments which
may in the future be created by Charter amendment or council ordinance or
resolution.



   (D)   The city attorney.



   (E)   Municipal court clerk and deputies.



   (F)   The city assessor.



   (G)   The city engineer.



   (H)   The finance officer.



   (I)   All part-time employees, persons serving emergency
appointments, provisional appointments and temporary appointments in
accordance with the sections relating thereto.



   (J)   Persons employed in a professional or scientific capacity to
make or conduct a temporary and special inquiry, investigation or examination.



   (K)   Persons serving in a deputy capacity to any elective or
appointive officer; provided, however, that no more than one such person can
be appointed to each such officer.



   (L)   Administrative assistant to the city manager.



8.11.  The classified service.



   The classified service shall include all other positions now existing
or hereafter created as provided in the city Charter and the provisions of
this chapter shall apply thereto.



8.12.  Status of present employees.



   Except for officers and employees designated in section 8.10, any
person employed by Sterling Township, who shall have served in such position
for a period of at least six (6) months when this chapter takes effect, shall
be retained without preliminary or performance tests and shall thereafter be
subject in all other respects to the provisions of this chapter. All other
persons employed by Sterling Township at the time this chapter takes effect
shall be considered as having been given probationary appointment as covered
by section 8.26 of this chapter. Said probationary period shall extend until
the employee has been holding his position for six (6) months or for the
period of probation which [is] specified by the personnel rules, whichever is
the shorter.



   (A)   The civil service commission may, by resolution, provide for
the appointment on a probationary basis of employees of other governmental
units or privately operated enterprises which have been annexed or taken over
by the city.



8.13.  Classification plan.



   The commission shall prepare, or cause to have prepared, installed and
maintained a position classification plan based on the duties, authority and
responsibilities of all positions in the classified service; and such plan
shall be based upon accepted and established principles of position
classification plans.



8.14.  Salary and wage plan.



   The civil service commission shall prepare the salary and wage plan for
positions in the classified service together with regulations for the
administration of such plan. This plan shall be presented to the city council
for approval and shall, when adopted, constitute the official salary and wage
plan for positions in the classified service.



   (A)   The salary and wage plan shall consist of a salary and wage
range for each class in the classification plan, provided that nothing herein
provided for shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of but one salary
or wage for a single class. Each such range shall be determined with due
regard to the ranges for other classes and to the relative difficulty and
responsibility of characteristic duties of the positions in the class, the
minimum qualifications required, the prevailing rate for similar employment
outside the city service, and any other factors that may properly be
considered to have a bearing upon the fairness or adequacy of the range,
provided that the salary and wage plan in force at the effective date of this
chapter shall remain in effect until amended in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The civil service commission may at any time
recommend to the council changes in the plan which shall take effect when
adopted by the council, provided that any changes increasing the expenditures
for personal services must be reflected in full in the budget. No amendments
shall be made in the plan by the council unless the same have been referred
to the civil service commission for its opinion.



8.15.  Suspensions.



   An appointing authority, may, for disciplinary purposes, suspend a
classified employee without pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days
at any one time. Upon the request of the employee, the appointing authority
shall, within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of such request, give the
employee a written statement of the reasons for such action and shall file a
copy thereof with the personnel director.



   All suspensions shall be subject to the provisions governing dismissals
and demotions hereinafter specified.



8.16.  Dismissal and demotions.



   An appointing authority may dismiss or demote a classified employee
whenever he considers the good of the service to be served thereby. Any
removal or involuntary separation of an employee from the classified service
shall be deemed to be a dismissal except as in this chapter otherwise
provided on suspensions and layoffs. Upon the request of the employee, the
appointing authority shall give the employee a written statement of the
reasons for such action and shall file a copy thereof with the personnel
director. The commission, upon the request of the employee dismissed or
demoted, may investigate such dismissal or demotion, and upon the request in
writing of the employee filed within fifteen (15) days from the receipt of
the notice of dismissal or demotion shall grant to such employee a fair and
impartial hearing. If the commission finds and determines that the dismissal
or demotion is unfounded and not supported by the proper showing of
sufficient facts to substantiate the cause assigned, it shall issue an order
providing for the return of such employee to his position without prejudice,
together with the payment of compensation withheld due to the dismissal or
demotion. Its reason for reversing the dismissal or demotion shall be put in
writing and shall be made a part of the official records of the commission
and a copy of the same shall be furnished to the appointing authority
concerned.



   (A)   Any employee of the classified service who has been reinstated
from dismissal or demotion by the commission and whose dismissal or demotion
was immediately preceded by suspension without pay shall be entitled to
receive the full amount of pay lost during suspension.



   (B)   The personnel rules shall contain a list of the valid reasons
for dismissal and demotion which shall not, however, be deemed to be all
inclusive.



   (C)   The decision of the commission shall be final and conclusive
upon all parties concerned.



8.17.  Layoffs.



   An appointing authority may lay off a classified employee whenever he
deems it necessary because of a material change in duties or organization, or
a shortage or stoppage of work or lack of funds. The rules and regulations
shall specify the method of determining the persons to be laid off and in
every case of layoff for more than two (2) weeks duration the appointing
authority shall, not less than fifteen (15) days before the effective date
thereof, give to the employee a written statement of the reasons for such
action and shall at the same time file a copy thereof with the personnel
director. In the case of layoffs of more than two (2) weeks duration, the
commission shall, upon the written request of the laid-off employee, made
within ten (10) days after the effective date of such layoff, investigate
such layoff. If it shall find as a result of such investigation that the
layoff was made for reasons other than a material change in duties or
organization or a shortage or stoppage of work or a lack of funds, or was not
made in accordance with the method prescribed by the rules and regulations
for determining persons to be laid off, it shall so report to the appointing
authority, and the person so laid off shall thereupon be entitled to resume
his position. The names of all persons who have been laid off for an
indefinite period shall be placed on an appropriate re-employment list in the
manner provided in the personnel rules.



8.18.  Incapacitated employees.



   When an employee has become physically or mentally incapable of or
unfit for the efficient performance of his duties by reason of infirmities
due to advanced age or other disability it shall be the duty of the
appointing authority to recommend his retirement or transfer to less arduous
duties and if necessary to a different classification. Such action shall be
effected under the same methods or procedure as are presented herein for
removals and demotions.



8.19.  Employment procedure.



   Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, no person shall be
appointed to a position in the classified service unless he shall have:



   (1)   Filed a written application on a form prescribed by the
personnel director,



   (2)   Qualified by passing the minimum requirements set for the
position in the classification plan,



   (3)   Qualified by passing the required competitive examinations
after due and proper public notice of such examinations has been given, and



   (4)   Been certified for appointment in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules adopted hereunder.



      (A)   The examinations for unskilled labor classifications in
the classified service may be limited to performance tests under the
direction of the appointing authority concerned, provided that in no event
may a physical examination be prohibited for any class or classes of
positions.



8.20.  Re-employment procedure.



   Employees or officers laid off in accordance with section 8.17 of this
Charter and the provisions of rules and regulations adopted by the commission
relative thereto, shall have their names placed on a re-employment list,
which list shall be the first source for filling appropriate vacancies as
they occur. No names shall remain on a re-employment list for longer than two
(2) years, except by specific action of the commission or except as provided
in section 8.11.



   (A)   Appointments made by re-employment shall not be subject to the
provisions for probationary period as provided in employment from the
original and promotional lists and anyone so appointed shall have his former
rating and seniority restored to him.



   (B)   Persons who, for reasons specified in the rules, have
voluntarily left the city service, may be placed in the same classification
regarding re-employment as employees who have been laid off, provided they
apply for re-employment within a year after having left the service and
provided the appointing authority shall approve, and provided further, that
such persons may be required by the appointing authority to take a qualifying
examination for the position.



8.21.  Promotions.



   Any vacancy in the classified service may be filled by promotion except
where such vacancy may properly be filled from the re-employment list.
Promotional examinations shall be open to all members of the classified
service who have passed the minimum established qualifications for the
position to which promotion is sought.



   (A)   Unless no employee of the department or bureau in which the
promotional appointment is to be made shall apply for the promotion or shall
pass the minimum qualifications, the promotion shall be made from employees
of the aforementioned department or bureau.



   (B)   If not more than one person is eligible or applies to take the
promotional examination, the personnel director, upon the request of the
appointing authority, may in his discretion authorize such promotion without
examination, provided the employee applying for promotion is qualified.



8.22.  Order of eligible list.



   The order of eligible list shall be as follows:



   (1)   Re-employment eligible list;



   (2)   Promotional eligible list; and



   (3)   Original eligible list.



8.23.  Emergency appointments.



   When an appointing authority finds it essential to fill a vacancy and
the personnel director is unable to certify eligibles for such vacancy
because of the lack of an appropriate list or because there is not a
sufficient number of persons on appropriate lists who are willing to accept
appointment, the personnel director may authorize the appointing authority to
fill the vacancy by means of a provisional appointment. Such appointment
shall expire when an eligible list is prepared for the position or four (4)
months after it has been in effect except that the personnel director may
approve the extension of a provisional appointment up to a maximum of eight
(8) additional months.



   (A)   A provisional appointee shall have the right to take the
examination for the permanent appointment to the position he is holding when
such examination is given.



8.24.  Temporary appointments.



   Temporary appointments for short term employment shall be made from
lists if possible. If no list exists or if certification from lists is
impracticable because of nonavailability of eligibles for temporary work, the
personnel director may authorize the temporary appointment of any qualified
individual to be designated by the appointing authority. Successive temporary
appointments of the same person to the same position shall not total more
than six (6) months. The acceptance or refusal by an eligible of a temporary
appointment shall not affect his standing on the list.



8.25.  Transfers.



   The transfer of an employee in the classified service from one position
to another, or from one department or bureau to another shall be made only by
the consent of the appointing authorities involved and the personnel
director, provided the employee may appeal any such action to the commission
which may either sustain or reverse such action.



   (A)   If the new position is at a higher classification this
transfer shall be deemed to be a promotion and shall come under section 8.20,
and under the rules governing promotions.



   (B)   An employee of the classified service who shall fill any
appointive position in the exempt service of the city may preserve his status
in the classified service by an application for approval by the personnel
director. In the event that such employee wishes to return to his former
position in the classified service he shall be immediately reinstated by the
personnel director.



8.26.  Probationary period.



   Every person appointed to a regular position in the classified service
from an original or promotional list shall be required to complete
successfully a probationary period which shall begin immediately upon
appointment and shall continue for the time specified by the personnel rules.
The rules shall not grant to the probationer any right of appeal to the
commission. In the case of a newly promoted employee whose tenure in a new
position is terminated, he shall return to the position held previously;
provided that he may at any time be removed from the classified service for
cause as provided in section 8.18.



8.27.  Veteran's preference.



   The commission shall provide for the granting of employment preference
in original appointments to such honorably discharged veterans of the United
States Armed Forces as shall be consistent with statute but shall not be
contrary to the best interests of the city service; provided, however, that
any such preference shall be allowed to only those applicants who have
attained a passing score on the examination for the position, and provided
further, that no such preference shall be awarded in promotional examinations.



8.28.  Prohibitions.



   No person in the city classified service or seeking admission thereto
shall be appointed, promoted, demoted, dismissed or in any way favored or
discriminated against because of his political or religious opinions or
affiliations. No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false
statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test,
certification or appointment held or made under the provisions of this
chapter, or in any manner commit or attempt to commit any fraud preventing
the impartial execution of such personnel provisions or of the rules and
regulations made thereunder. No person seeking appointment to or promotion or
transfer in the classified service of the city shall either directly or
indirectly give, render or pay any money, service or other valuable thing to
any person for, or on account of, or in connection with his test,
appointment, proposed appointment, promotion, or proposed promotion. No
person elected to the city council shall, during the term for which he is
elected, be appointed to any office or position in the city classified
service. No member or officer of the commission shall continue in such office
after becoming an officer of any political party or a member of any local,
state or national political party committee, nor take part in the management,
operation or conduct of any political party or political campaign. No
employee in the city classified service shall continue in such position after
becoming an officer of any political party or a member of any local, state or
national political party committee or after becoming a candidate for
nomination or election to any public office. No person holding a position in
the city classified service shall make or solicit for any contribution to the
campaign funds of any political party or any candidate for public office, in
the city of Sterling Heights. No person shall orally, by letter, or otherwise
solicit or be in any manner concerned in soliciting an assessment,
subscription, contribution or support for any political party or candidate
for public office in the City of Sterling Heights from any person holding a
position in the classified service of the city. No person shall be prohibited
hereby from exercising his right as a citizen to express his opinion and to
cast his vote, nor shall this section abridge any of the rights guaranteed to
any of the persons named herein by the Constitution of the United States or
the State of Michigan. Any person in the classified service violating any of
the provisions of this section shall be subject to disciplinary action by the
commission in addition to any other penalties [provided for] in this chapter.



8.29.  Certification of payrolls.



   Neither the city finance officer nor any other fiscal officer of the
city shall draw, sign, or issue, or authorize the drawing, signing or issuing
of any warrant or check upon the city treasurer or other disbursing officer
of the city, for the payment of a salary or other compensation for personal
services, nor shall the city treasurer or other disbursing officer of the
city pay any salary or other compensation for personal services unless a
payroll or account for such salary or other compensation, containing the
names of every person to be paid and the amounts to be paid them, has been
certified by the civil service commission or a person designated by them to
the effect that the persons named on the payroll or account are either in the
unclassified service or have been appointed, employed, or otherwise
established in their position according to the provisions of this chapter,
and that the payment of the amounts shown in the payroll or account will not
violate the provisions of the salary plan or the rules pertaining thereto.
Any taxpayer of the city may maintain an action in any court of record to
recover for the city any sum paid contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
or to enjoin the civil service commission from certifying any item on a
payroll or account, or the disbursing officer from paying any such account
for services where the employment is in violation of the chapter or the rules
made pursuant thereto.



8.30.  Oaths and investigatory powers.



   For the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter, any
member of the commission shall have the power to administer oaths. In any
investigation by the commission it shall have the power to subpoena and
require the attendance of witnesses and the producing thereby of books,
papers and records pertinent to the investigation.



8.31.  Penalties.



   Any person who by himself or with others willfully or corruptly
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not
more than $500, or by imprisonment at the discretion of the court. Any person
who is convicted under the provisions of this chapter shall be for a period
of five (5) years ineligible for appointment to or employment in positions in
the city service and shall, if he be an officer or employee of the city,
immediately forfeit the office or position he holds.



8.32.  Appeal to the commission.



   Any employee in the classified service, except one serving in his
probationary period, who is aggrieved because of any action affecting his
status or condition of employment which has not been adjusted to his
satisfaction after consultation with his appointing officer or body may,
within two (2) weeks of the time he has been formally notified of such action
by his appointing officer or body, file a written appeal with the commission
requesting a hearing thereon. This right of appeal shall not apply to one or
more suspensions totaling not over seven (7) days in any calendar year. Such
appeal shall state the pertinent facts relative to the cause of complaint and
shall be signed by the employee. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the
effect of the personnel action complained of. The commission shall
investigate each such appeal and shall promptly hold [a] hearing thereon. A
record of the proceedings of such hearing shall be kept by the commission.



   After considering the facts brought out in the investigation and
hearing the commission shall determine whether such action was made for
political or religious reasons or without just cause; if it so determines
that it was made for such reasons or without just cause, it shall order
[that] the employee be restored to the status existing before such action. If
it finds otherwise, it shall report its decision and order in writing to the
employee making the appeal and to his appointing officer or body. The
commission shall render its decision in all matters affecting an employee
within thirty (30) days after receipt of the appeal.



   Except as hereinafter provided, the decision and order of the
commission shall be final and the affected parties shall comply therewith. If
the decision finds the action was made for political or religious reasons or
without just cause, it shall order the employee reinstated with payment of
any lost salary or wages. Documents which may have been considered by the
commission and decision and order of the commission shall be promptly filed
with the secretary of the commission, and shall be public records.



   The circuit court of Macomb County, upon petition of any party
aggrieved, may review, by certiorari, any final decision or order of the
commission. The issuance of such writ shall not, however, unless specifically
ordered by the court, operate as a stay of such decision or order. The
decision of such court shall be final, subject to appeal to a higher court.



   The removing officer and the person sought to be removed shall at all
times, both before the commission and upon appeal, be given the right to
employ counsel to represent either of them before said commission and upon
appeal.



8.33.  Restrictions concerning other offices.



   No appointive city officer or employee shall seek any elective office
unless he resigns from his position with the city.



CHAPTER 9.  GENERAL FINANCE; BUDGET; AUDIT



9.01.  Fiscal year.



   The fiscal year of the city shall begin on July 1 and end on June 30 of
the following year. Such year shall also constitute the budget year of the
city government.



9.02.  Budget procedure.



   On or before the first day of April of each year, the city manager
shall prepare and submit to the council a complete itemized proposed budget
for the next fiscal year. It shall include at least the following information:



   (A)   Detailed statements, with his supporting explanations, of all
proposed expenditures for each department, office and agency of the city,
showing the expenditures for corresponding items for the last preceding
fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to January 1, and
estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year.



   (B)   Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city
showing the debit redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized
and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any.



   (C)   Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city
from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts
received by the city from each of the same or similar sources for the last
preceding fiscal year in full, and for the current fiscal year to January 1,
and estimated revenues for the balance of the current fiscal year.



   (D)   An estimate of the balance or deficit for the end of the
current fiscal year.



   (E)   An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from current
and delinquent taxes and the amount to be raised from bond issues which,
together with any available unappropriated surplus and any revenues from
other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures.



   (F)   Such other supporting information as the majority of the
council may request.



9.03.  Budget: Public hearings.



   A public hearing on the budget shall be held before its final adoption,
at such time and place as the council shall direct, and notice of such public
hearing shall be published at least one month in advance thereof by the
clerk. A copy of the proposed budget shall be on file and available to the
public for inspection at the office of the clerk during office hours for a
period of not less than two (2) weeks prior to such public hearing.



9.04.  Adoption of budget.



   (A)   The council shall, on or before May 10, adopt a budget for the
ensuing fiscal year and shall, by resolution, designate the sums to be raised
by taxation for the general purposes of the city and for the payment of
indebtedness; provided, however, that failure to act within the time herein
shall not invalidate any tax levy.



   (B)   The council shall not adopt a budget wherein anticipated or
proposed expenditures are in excess of revenues and any unexpended general
funds.



9.05.  Budget control.



   The adoption of a budget shall not be construed as authority to any
officer of the city to expend the amount set forth in such budget unless such
expenditure has been authorized by proper warrant.



   At any meeting after the adoption of the budget and after at least one
week’s notice to the members of the council, the council may amend such
budget so as to authorize the transfer of unused balances appropriated for
one purpose to another purpose, or to appropriate available revenues of a
class not included in the annual budget.



9.06.  Periodic evaluation of budget by council.



   At the end of each quarter during the fiscal year, the city manager
shall submit to the council data showing the relation between the estimated
and actual income and expenses to date. If it shall appear that the income of
the city is less than anticipated, the council may reduce appropriations,
except amounts required for debt and interest charges. At the end of each
fiscal year the unencumbered balance of any appropriation, except that for
the payment of indebtedness, shall be deemed unappropriated.



9.07.  Uniform accounting system.



   Any system of accounts used for the city or any department thereof
shall conform to such uniform system as may be required by law.



9.08.  Disbursement of funds.



   The treasurer shall receive and disburse all monies belonging to the
city, and shall keep an accurate detailed account of all money received and
disbursed by him, and of the particular fund into which or from which the
same is paid. He shall, quarterly and oftener if required, furnish the
council with a statement showing all cash on hand and in the bank at the
beginning of the previous month, the receipts and disbursements for the
previous month, and the condition of the several funds of the city. He shall
make such other reports as the council may require.



9.09.  Warrants: How drawn.



   (A)   No warrant shall be issued until the same has been first
authorized by the council; provided, however, that warrants may be issued for
the payment of any necessary expense without prior authorization of the
council if authorized by the city manager, but the total amount of such
warrants issued between any successive regular meetings of the council shall
not exceed an amount as the council may from time to time establish.



   (B)   Except as provided in paragraph (A) no money shall be drawn
from the treasury except upon the warrant of the city manager or finance
director and countersigned by the clerk of the council. Every warrant shall
specify the funds from which it is payable and shall be paid from no other
fund. No warrant shall be drawn upon the treasury after the fund from which
it should be paid has been exhausted, and if such warrant shall be drawn, it
shall be void.



   (C)   All liquidated accounts and demands against the city shall be
received and audited by the director of finance who shall enumerate them on a
regular form prescribed by council and who, with the city manager, shall
certify as to the correctness or incorrectness of the various amounts on said
list. Each invoice shall be approved by the official incurring the
expenditure.



9.10.  Collection of monies.



   All taxes, special assessments and other monies accruing to the city
shall be collected by the treasurer. All monies received by the treasurer
shall be promptly deposited by him with such responsible banking institution
or institutions as shall be designated by council, and all interest on such
deposits shall accrue to the benefit of the city. The council shall provide
for such security for city deposits as is authorized or permitted by statute
except that personal surety bonds shall not be deemed proper security.



9.11.  Revenue deposit.



   The revenues raised by general taxation or by loan to be paid by such
tax shall be divided into such and so many funds as the council may
determine; provided, that all monies raised for the retirement of debt and
for interest thereon shall be kept in a separate fund and in a separate bank
account.



9.12.  Annual audit; report.



   The council shall provide that a periodical audit be made at least
annually of the accounts of all the officers and departments of the city
government by independent certified public accountants. Copies of such audit
shall be made available for public inspection at the office of the clerk.



   The council shall order the preparation and publication of an annual
report of the affairs of the city; to include a condensed financial statement
of the city, and condensed statements of departmental activities. Such report
shall also be available for inspection at the office of the clerk.



9.13.  Investment of city funds.



   The council may direct the treasurer to invest any surplus funds
belonging to, or under the control of, the city [in] such obligations, bonds
and securities that are permitted by the statutes of the State of Michigan in
such amounts and issues as may be determined by the council.



9.14.  Annual appropriation ordinance.



   The city manager shall submit to the council, at the time he submits
the annual budget, the draft of an appropriation ordinance providing for the
expenditures proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. Upon the submission of the
proposed appropriation ordinance to the council it shall be deemed to have
been regularly introduced therein. The council shall provide for public
hearings on the budget and the proposed appropriation ordinance either before
a committee of the council or before the council sitting as a committee of
the whole. Following the public hearing the proposed appropriation ordinance
may be changed or amended and shall take the same course in the council as
other ordinances but shall not be passed before the first meeting of the
council in January. Upon final passage the appropriation ordinance shall be
published in the manner provided for the publication of other ordinances.



CHAPTER 10.  TAXATION



10.01.  General powers.



   The city shall have the power to assess taxes and levy and collect
rents, tolls, and excises. The annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed
six (6) mills for the first four (4) years beginning with the first fiscal
year under this Charter. The annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed nine
(9) mills for the next four (4) years, beginning with the fifth fiscal year.
Beginning with the ninth fiscal year dating from the adoption of this
Charter, the annual ad valorem tax levy shall not exceed twelve (12) mills.



   In addition to the foregoing authorization, the city may levy an annual
ad valorem millage not exceeding a total of 2.5 mills, which is comprised of
the following dedicated components:  1.7 mills for police and fire
protection, and 0.8 mills for local street improvements. This additional
annual ad valorem millage shall be effective for a period of six (6) years
commencing July 1, 2014 and expiring on June 30, 2020.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held
November 5, 2013.



   In addition to the foregoing authorizations, the city may levy an
annual ad valorem millage not exceeding a total of ninety-seven hundredths
mill (0.97 mill), to acquire, construct, furnish, equip and operate parks and
recreation improvements, including a new community center. This additional
annual ad valorem millage shall be effective for a period of twenty (20)
years commencing July 1, 2017 and expiring on June 30, 2037.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held
November 8, 2016.



   The annual tax levy shall be applied to the assessed valuation of all
real and personal property subject to taxation in the city as equalized by
the state, exclusive of any levy required for the payment of principal and
interest on outstanding bonds of the city and exclusive of any levy
authorized by statute to be made beyond the charter tax rate limitation.



10.02.  Subjects of taxation.



   The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the
same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. Except
as otherwise provided by the Charter, city taxes shall be levied, collected
and returned in the manner provided by statute.



10.03.  Exemptions.



   No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed except as expressly
required or permitted by state law.



10.04.  No municipal income tax except as provided.



   No municipal income tax shall be levied for municipal purposes, except
that such a tax proposal may be placed on the ballot by a five-sevenths vote
of the council and which shall require for approval at least a majority of
those electors of the city voting on the question in the election at which
the tax proposal is considered.



10.05.  Tax day.



   Subject to the exemptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable
status of persons and property shall be determined as of the 31st day of
December or such other date as may subsequently be provided by law, which day
shall be deemed the tax day.



10.06.  Personal property-Jeopardy assessments.



   If the treasurer finds, or reasonably believes that a person who is or
may be liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable sites of which
was in the city on the tax day, intends to depart from the city, or to remove
therefrom personal property, which is, or may be liable for taxation, or to
conceal himself or his property, or to do any act tending to prejudice, or to
render wholly or partially ineffectual the proceeding to collect such tax,
unless proceedings therefore be brought without delay, he shall proceed to
collect the same as a jeopardy assessment in the manner provided by law.



10.07.  Preparation of the assessment roll.



   On or before the first Monday in March of each year, the assessor shall
prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city subject to
taxation. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with the statutes and
this Charter. Value shall be estimated according to recognized methods of
systematic assessment as determined by statute and decisions of the state tax
commission and the Supreme Court. The records of the assessor shall show
separate figures for the value of the land, of the building improvements and
of personal property; and the method of estimating all such values shall be
as nearly uniform as possible.



10.08.  Board of review.



   (A)   A board of review is hereby created, composed of three (3)
members who shall be registered electors of the city, who have the
qualifications for holding office in the city as set forth in this Charter
and are owners of property assessed for taxation in the city.



   (B)   The members of the board of review shall be appointed by the
council.



   (C)   The first three (3) members of the board of review shall be
appointed during the month of July, 1968, for terms expiring on July 1, 1969,
1970, and 1971; thereafter, one member shall be appointed  by the council in
the month of May of each year for a term of three (3) years commencing on the
following July 1.



   (D)   The board shall annually on the first day of the meeting
select one of its members chairman and one of its members clerk for the
ensuing year; the assessor shall attend all meetings of the board of review,
shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any
proposition or question before the board.



   (E)   The members of the board of review shall be paid such
compensation as the council may determine on a per diem basis.



10.09.  Duties and functions of board of review.



   For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the board of
review shall have the same powers and perform like duties, in all respects,
as are by law conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships,
except as otherwise provided in this Charter. At the time and in the manner
provided in the following section, it shall hear the complaints of all
persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessment. If it shall appear
that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the
roll, the board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just.
Except as otherwise provided by law, no person other than the board of review
shall authorize any change upon, or addition to, or correction to the
assessment roll. The clerk of the board of review shall keep a permanent
record of all proceedings of the board and enter therein all resolutions and
decisions of the board. Such record shall be filed with the city clerk on or
before the 15th day of April following the meeting of the board of review.



10.10.  Meetings of board of review; quorum.



   (A)   The board of review shall convene on the third Monday in March
in each year, or on such date as may subsequently be required by law for the
meeting of boards of review in cities, at such places as shall be designated
by the council at its first regular meeting in February and shall sit for no
less than three (3) calendar days; provided however, that if the council does
not so designate a place for the meeting of the board of review, it shall
meet in the council chambers. A majority of the members of the board of
review shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business.



   (B)   The board of review may examine on oath any person appearing
before it respecting assessment property or properties on the assessment
roll. Any member of the board may administer such oath.



10.11.  Notice of meetings.



   Notice of the time and place of the meetings of the board of review
shall be published by the city clerk in the official newspaper of the city
not less than ten (10) days prior to the first meeting thereof.



10.12.  Endorsement of roll.



   After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment
roll, its members then shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a statement
to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year
in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not
affect the validity of such roll.



10.13.  The clerk to certify tax levy.



   Within three (3) days after the council has made the appropriations for
the ensuing year, the city clerk shall certify to the assessor the total
amount which the council has determined shall be raised by general ad valorem
tax, together with such other assessments and lawful charges in amounts which
the council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the property
and persons appearing upon such roll.



10.14.  City tax roll.



   After the board of review has completed its review of the assessment
roll, the assessor shall prepare a copy of the assessment roll to be known as
the "tax roll" and, upon receiving the certification of the several amounts
to be raised as provided in section 10.13, the assessor shall spread upon
said tax roll the several amounts determined by the council to be charged,
assessed or reassessed against persons or property. He shall also spread the
amounts of the general ad valorem city tax, county tax, state tax (if any),
and school tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set
forth in said assessment roll. To avoid fractions in computation on any tax
roll, the assessor may add to the amount of the several taxes to be raised
not more than the amount prescribed by statute. Any excess created thereby on
any tax roll shall belong to the city.



10.15.  Tax roll certified for collection.



   After spreading the taxes and placing other assessments and charges
upon the roll, the assessor shall certify the tax roll and annex his warrant
thereto directing and requiring the treasurer to collect on July 1 of the
same year from the several persons named in the roll the several sums
mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax or assessment, and
granting to and vesting in the treasurer, for the purpose of collecting the
taxes, assessments and charges on such roll all the statutory powers and
immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes;
provided, however, that taxes and other lawful assessments and charges on any
city tax roll which remain unpaid on the 1st day of October may be
transferred, together with any collection fees or charges which have been
added thereto, to the delinquent tax rolls to be collected thereon. The city
tax roll shall be delivered to the treasurer on or before the 15th day of
June.



10.16.  Tax lien on property.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, city taxes shall
be due on July 1 of each year and on that day the taxes assessed to the
owners of personal property shall become a debt due to the city from the
person to whom they are assessed and the amounts assessed on any interest in
real property shall become a lien upon said real property for such amounts
and for interest charges thereon.



   (B)   All personal property taxes shall be a first lien, prior,
superior and paramount on all personal property of such persons assessed.
Such liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances and
liens, to the extent provided by law, and shall continue until such taxes,
interest and charges are paid.



10.17.  Taxes due: Notification thereof.



   (A)   City taxes shall be due on July 1st of each year. The
treasurer shall not be required to call upon the persons named in the city
tax roll, nor to make personal demands for payment of taxes, but he shall
publish between June 15 and July 1 notice of the time when said taxes will be
due for collection and penalties for late payment of the same, and mail a
bill to each person named in said roll, but in case of multiple ownership of
property, only one bill need be mailed.



   (B)   Failure on the part of the treasurer to publish said notice or
mail such bills shall not invalidate the taxes on said tax roll nor release
the persons or property assessed from the penalties and fees provided in this
chapter in case of late payment or nonpayment of the same.



10.18.  Collection fees and interest.



   (A)   All taxes paid on or before September 1st of each year shall
be collected by the treasurer without additional charge. To all taxes,
charges and assessments paid after September 1st there shall be added a
collection fee of one-half of one per cent per month during each and every
month or fraction of a month which shall elapse thereafter before the payment
of such taxes, charges or assessments is made, until the last day of
September next following that date that such taxes, charges and assessments
become due and payable.



   (B)   Upon all city taxes, charges and assessments returned to the
county treasurer upon any delinquent tax roll, a charge of three and one-half
per cent shall be added and the same shall be collected by the county
treasurer in like manner as and together with the taxes, charges and
assessments so returned. Such collection fees shall belong to the city and
shall constitute a charge and shall be a lien against the property to which
the taxes themselves apply, collectible in the same manner as taxes to which
they are added.



10.19.  Protection of city lien.



   The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not
conflict with or contravene the provisions of law, to acquire such an
interest in any premises within the city or purchase at any tax or other
public sale or by direct purchase from the State of Michigan or the owner in
fee as may be necessary to assure to the city the collection of its taxes,
special assessments or charges which are levied against any lot or parcel of
real property or to protect the lien of the city therefore, and may hold,
lease, sell, or exchange the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city
to assure the collection of its taxes or the protection of its tax or other
liens shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. The council may adopt any
ordinance which may be necessary to make this action effective.



10.20.  Disposition of real property.



   The council shall pass an ordinance providing for the care, custody and
disposition of real property, or any interest therein, which it shall
hereafter acquire by reason of any action taken to protect the city's tax
lien thereon. Unless action is taken by the council as provided and permitted
in this section, the owner of any interest therein by fee, title, as
mortgagee or as vendor or vendee under land contract shall be given the right
to purchase the city's interest therein, upon payment to the city of the
amount of money which the city has invested therein in the form of unpaid
taxes, special assessments and charges, fees, penalties, interest and cost.
After the lapse of ninety (90) days after date the city acquires title to any
such property, Council may remove the same from the market by determining
that such property is needed for and should be devoted to public purpose, and
naming such purpose, or may sell the same at a price that shall be not less
than its market value as determined and certified to council by the assessor.



10.21.  Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax.



   If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax on personal
property assessed to him, the treasurer shall collect the same by seizing the
personal property of such person, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax,
fees, and charges, whenever the same may be found in the state. No property
shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property seized, to an
amount sufficient to pay the taxes, charges, fees and penalties in accordance
with law. The treasurer may, if otherwise unable to collect the tax on such
personal property, sue the person to whom it is assessed in accordance with
the power granted to him by statute.



10.22.  Collection of delinquent taxes.



   All taxes and charges together with fees, penalties and interest on
real property on the tax roll remaining uncollected by the treasurer on the
1st day of October following the date when the roll was received by him shall
be returned to the county treasurer to the extent and in the same manner and
with like effect as provided by law for returns of township treasurers on
township and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional
assessments, taxes, fees, penalties and interest hereinbefore provided, which
shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against each property
or person. Taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other
taxes returned by the county treasurer or [are] collected, in accordance with
law, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are
assessed until paid.



10.23.  State, county and school taxes.



   For the purpose of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county and
school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township and all
provisions of law relative to the collection of and accounting for such taxes
and the penalties and interest thereon shall apply. For the purpose of
collecting state, county and school taxes, the treasurer shall perform the
same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under the state
law.



10.24.  Treasurer to report delinquent property to the council.



   At least two (2) weeks before the date of sale of any real estate, upon
which the city has any claim, the treasurer shall report to the council, a
list of the parcels of such real estate and the amount of the city's claims,
together with all fees, penalties and interest which have accumulated thereon
or accrued thereto.



CHAPTER 11.  BORROWING POWER; BONDS



11.01.  General borrowing.



   Subject to the applicable provisions of state law and this Charter, the
council, by proper ordinance or resolution, may authorize the borrowing of
money for any purpose within the scope of the powers vested in the city and
the issuance of bonds of the city or other evidences of indebtedness
therefore, and may pledge the full faith credit and resources of the city for
the payment of the obligation created therefore.



11.02.  Special assessment bonds.



   The council shall, subject to the applicable provisions of the general
laws of the state, have authority to borrow money in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments made for the purpose of defraying the cost of
any public improvement, or in anticipation of the payment of any combination
of such special assessments, and to issue bonds therefore. Such special
assessment bonds may be solely an obligation of the special assessment
district or districts and a general obligation of the city. All collections
on each special assessment roll or combination of rolls shall be set apart in
a separate fund for the payment of the principal and interest of the bonds
issued in anticipation of the payment of such special assessments, and shall
be used for no other purpose.



11.03.  Other bonds.



   The city shall have power to issue revenue or other types of bonds in
the manner and for the purposes permitted by the constitution and general
laws of the State of Michigan.



11.04.  Preparation and record of bonds.



   Every bond issued by the city shall contain on its face a statement
specifying the object for which the same is issued. It shall be unlawful for
any officer of the city to sign or issue any such bond unless such statement
is set forth on the face of the same, or to use such bonds or the proceeds
from the sale thereof for any object other than that mentioned on the face of
such bond. Any officer who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of misconduct in office.



   Bonds and all other evidences of indebtedness issued by the city shall
be signed by the mayor and clerk under the seal of the city. The coupons
evidencing the interest upon said bonds may be executed with the facsimile
signatures of the mayor and the clerk. A complete and detailed record of all
bonds shall be kept by the clerk.



   Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the
same shall be canceled.



11.05.  Unissued bonds.



   No unissued bonds of the city shall be issued or sold to secure funds
for any purpose other than that for which they were specifically authorized.



11.06.  Limitation of indebtedness.



   The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not
at any time exceed ten (10) percent of the assessed value of all the real and
personal property in the city subject to taxation as shown by the last
preceding assessment roll of the city; provided, however, that in the case of
fire, flood or other calamity requiring an emergency fund for the relief of
the inhabitants of the City of Sterling Heights or for the repairing or
rebuilding of any municipal building, works, bridges, or streets, the
legislative body of the city may borrow money due in not more than five (5)
years and in the amount not exceeding three-eighths (3/8 ) of one percent of
the assessed valuation of all the real and personal property in the city,
notwithstanding such loan may increase the indebtedness of the city beyond
the limitation fixed in this Charter. In computing the net bonded
indebtedness for the purposes hereof, bonds issued in anticipation of the
payment of special assessments, even though they are also a general
obligation of the city, mortgage bonds which are secured only by a mortgage
on the property or franchise of a public utility, and bonds issued to refund
moneys advanced or paid on special assessments for water main extensions,
shall not be included, and the resources of the sinking fund pledged for the
retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of
the bonded indebtedness.



11.07.  Applicability of other statutory restrictions.



   The issuance of any bonds, even if not otherwise requiring the approval
of the voters, shall be subject to applicable requirements of statute with
regard to public notice in advance of the authorization of such issue, filing
of petitions for a referendum on such issuance, holding of such referendum
and other applicable procedural requirements.



CHAPTER 12.  SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



12.01.  General power relative to special assessments.



   The council shall have the power to determine by resolution that the
whole or any part of the expense of any public improvement be defrayed by
special assessment upon the property especially benefitted in proportion to
the benefits derived or to be derived.



12.02.  Hazards and nuisances.



   (A)   When any lot, building or structure within the city, because
of accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious
weeds, or age or dilapidation, or because of any other condition or happening
becomes in the opinion of the city manager, a public hazard or nuisance which
is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city
or those residing or habitually going near such lot, building or structure,
the city manager may, after investigation, give notice by publication or by
registered mail addressed to the last known address of the owner or owners of
the land upon which such nuisance exists, or to the owner of the building or
structure itself, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such
owner to abate or remove the nuisance promptly and within a time to be
specified by the city manager, which shall be commensurate with the nature of
the nuisance. If at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the
owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where
the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known,
the city manager may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper
department or agency of the city, or may do the work by contract or by hire,
and the cost of such abatement shall be assessed against the lot, premises,
or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance is located
by special assessment provided same is permitted under state law.



   (B)   The council shall determine what amount or part of each such
expense shall be charged and the person, if known, against whom, the premises
upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment; and as often as
the council shall deem it expedient, it shall require notice of all or
several so reported and determined to be given by the clerk either by
registered or certified mail sent to their last known address as shown on the
assessment roll of the city, or by publication. Such notice shall state the
basis of the assessment, the cost thereof and shall give a reasonable time,
which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, in which payment shall be
made. In all cases where payment is not made within the time limit, the same
shall be reported by the clerk to the assessor who shall spread such amounts
against the several persons or descriptions of real property chargeable
therewith on the next roll for the collection of city taxes.



12.03.  Sidewalks.



   The council may prescribe that sidewalks, except crosswalks, shall be
built and/or repaired, by the owners of platted land within the city in the
public streets adjacent to and abutting upon such lots and premises in the
manner and within the time to be prescribed by ordinances; provided that in
case of the failure of any such owner to comply with the provisions of such
ordinance, the city may build or repair, or cause to be built or repaired,
such sidewalks and assess the cost thereof against such owner and against the
land improved thereby in a manner prescribed by the council by ordinance.



12.04.  Boulevard lighting.



   The council shall have the power to assess the cost of installing a
boulevard lighting system on any street upon the lands abutting thereupon,
provided the property owners of a majority of the frontage on such street or
part thereof to be so improved shall petition therefore.



12.05.  Procedure to be fixed by ordinance.



   The council shall prescribe by ordinance the complete special
assessment procedure concerning the initiation of projects, plans and
specifications, estimates of costs, notice of hearings, making and confirming
assessment rolls, and the correction of errors therein, collection of special
assessments, and any other matters concerning the making of improvements by
the special assessment method, subject to the provisions of this chapter. The
council shall also prescribe in said ordinance procedures for holding a
hearing to determine necessity.



12.06.  Objection to improvement.



   If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more
than fifty (50) percent of the number of owners of privately owned real
property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar
improvements more than fifty (50) percent of the number of owners of frontage
to be assessed for any such improvement, shall object in writing to the
proposed improvement, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings
authorized by this chapter without a five-sevenths vote of the members of the
council, provided that this section shall not apply to sidewalk construction.



12.07.  Rejection of improvement by council.



   Even though more than fifty (50) percent of the number of owners of
privately owned real property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case
of paving or similar improvements more than fifty (50) percent of the number
of owners of frontage to be assessed for any such improvement, shall favor,
through petition, the proposed improvement, the council may, by five-sevenths
vote of its members, reject the petition for such improvement.



12.08.  Installment payments of assessments.



   The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in
annual installments, not to exceed thirty (30) in number, the first
installment being due upon confirmation of the roll and the deferred
installments being due annually thereafter or, in the discretion of the
council, may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll
thereafter until all are paid. Interest may be charged upon deferred
installments at a rate not to exceed six (6) percent per year payable
annually. Under any installment plan adopted, the whole or any deferred
installments with accrued interest to date of payment may be paid in advance
of the due dates established.



12.09.  Additional assessment.



   When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the
costs of the improvements for which it was made, the council may make an
additional pro rata assessment, but the total amount assessed against any one
parcel of land shall not exceed the value of benefits received by said lot or
parcel of land.



12.10.  Refunds or assessments.



   The clerk shall, within sixty (60) days after the completion of each
local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and
certify the same to the assessor who shall adjust the special assessment roll
to correspond therewith. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary by
five (5) percent or less, the same shall be reported to the council, which
may place the excess in the city treasury or make a refund thereof pro rata
according to [the] assessment. If the assessment exceeds the amount necessary
by more than five (5) percent, the entire excess shall be credited to owners
of property as shown by the city assessment roll upon which such assessment
has been levied, pro rata according to the assessment; provided, however,
that no refunds of special assessments may be made which impair or contravene
the provision of any outstanding obligation or bond secured in whole or part
by such special assessments.



12.11.  Special assessment accounts.



   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, moneys raised by special
assessments to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a
special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each
special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for
which the assessment was levied except as otherwise provided in this chapter.



12.12.  Contested assessments.



   Except and unless notice is given to the council in writing of an
intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment for
the construction of any pavement, sewer, or other public improvement, the
construction of any sidewalk, or the removal or abatement of any public
hazard or nuisance, within thirty (30) days after the date of the meeting of
the council at which it is finally determined to proceed with the making of
the improvement in question, which notice shall state the grounds on which
the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be
instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the
collection of such special assessments; and regardless of whether or not any
public improvement is completed in any special assessment district, no owner
of real property located in such district shall be entitled to commence any
suit or action for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of
any such special assessments after he has received the benefits from the
substantial completion of that portion of such public improvement for which
he is assessed.



12.13.  Reassessment for benefits.



   Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or
defective for any reason whatever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction
shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatever, in
whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to
be made for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made,
whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and
whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings
on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same
manner as provided for in an original assessment. If any portion of the
original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be
applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be
deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been
collected, the balance shall be refunded to the persons making such payments.



12.14.  Delinquent special assessments.



   Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date
of confirmation of the roll, shall be and remain a lien upon the property
assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law
for state and county taxes, and by this Charter for city taxes until paid.
From such date and after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, the
same collection fees shall be collected on delinquent special assessments and
upon delinquent installments of such special assessment, beginning on the
following October first of each year, as are provided by this Charter to be
collected on delinquent city taxes. Such delinquent special assessments shall
be subject to the same penalties, and the land upon which the same are a lien
shall be subject to sale therefore, the same as are delinquent city taxes and
the lands upon which they constitute a lien.



12.15.  Lien not destroyed by judgment.



   No judgment or decree, or any act of the council vacating a special
assessment, shall destroy or impair the lien of the city upon the premises
assessed, for such amount of the assessment as may be equitably charged
against the same, or as by a regular vote or proceeding might have been
lawfully assessed thereon.



12.16.  Exemption: Payment by city.



   No lands in a special assessment district which are benefitted by the
improvement therein shall be exempt from assessment, but if the same are
owned by a public or other corporation exempt by law from the payment of
special assessments, then the special assessments against such lands, or the
installments thereof, shall be paid by the city as the same become due or may
be paid in advance of their due dates.



12.17.  Special assessments: Inability to pay; remedy; procedure.



   The council may provide that any person who, in the opinion of the
assessor and council, by reason of poverty, is unable to contribute toward
the cost of the making of a public improvement may execute to the city a deed
conveying to the city such title as to create a lien for the benefit of the
city on all or any part of the real property owned by him and benefitted by
any public improvement for the amount of the special assessment levied for
such public improvement, plus interest at six (6) percent per annum. Such
lien shall mature and be effective from and after the execution of such
instrument and shall be enforceable by the city only in the event that title
to such property is thereafter transferred in any manner whatsoever. Such
deed shall recite that the lien created may be extinguished by the grantor of
the deed by payment of the amount of special assessments covered by such lien
at any time and shall be extinguished by any grantee, heir, or devisee of the
said grantor, within one year after title becomes vested in such grantee,
heir, or devisee, [and failure] to so extinguish the said lien within the
said one year period shall operate to vest title to the real property to
which such deed pertains in the city in fee absolute. The council shall
establish by ordinance the procedure for making this section effective.



CHAPTER 13.  PURCHASES; CONTRACTS; LEASES



13.01.  Contracts: City powers; limitation.



   The city may contract for the performance of any public work or may
perform the same itself through its departments, officers and employees;
provided, however, that it shall not make any public improvements exceeding
an amount set by ordinance until it has first advertised for sealed proposals
therefore. The city shall have the right to reject any or all such proposals.



Footnote:



   This Charter amendment was approved at the General Election held on
November 1989.



13.02.  Material purchases.



   The council shall by ordinance stipulate the maximum dollar amount that
can be expended by the city for the purchase of any materials, tools,
apparatus or any other thing or things without an opportunity for competitive
bidding. The city shall have the right to reject any or all proposals.



13.03.  Specifications.



   No public improvement costing more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) shall be contracted for or commenced until drawings, profiles and
estimates for the same shall have been submitted to the council and approved
by it; and a copy thereof shall thereafter remain on file in the office of
the clerk subject to inspection by the public.



13.04.  Approval of contract; review; appropriation.



   (A)   No contract shall be entered into by the city for the making
of any public improvement or for the purchase of any materials, tools,
apparatus, or any other thing or things, the consideration or cost of which
shall exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), until the same shall have
been approved by a majority of the council elect. All contracts prior to
submission to the council shall be reviewed by the city manager.



   (B)   No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to
the city.



   (C)   No public work or improvement shall be commenced, nor any
contract therefore be let or made, until a valid specific appropriation to
pay the cost thereof shall have been made by the council from funds on hand
and legally available for such purpose, or until a tax or assessment shall
have been levied or bonds authorized and sold to pay the cost and expense
thereof.



13.05.  Restrictions.



   No contract or purchase order shall be subdivided for the purpose of
circumventing the dollar value limitations contained in this chapter.



   No contract shall be amended after the same has been made except upon
the authority of the council.



   No compensation shall be paid to any contractor except in accordance
with the terms of the contract.



CHAPTER 14.  MUNICIPAL UTILITIES



14.01.  General powers respecting utilities.



   The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers
granted to cities by statute and constitution to acquire, construct, own,
operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair and maintain, either within or
without its corporate limits, including, but not by the way of limitation,
public utilities for supplying water, light, heat, power, gas, sewage
treatment and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the
municipality and the inhabitants thereof; and also to sell and deliver water,
light, heat, power, gas and other public utility services without its
corporate limits to an amount not to exceed the limitations set by statute
and constitution.



14.02.  Management of municipal utilities.



   All municipally owned or operated utilities shall be administered as a
regular department of the city government under the management and
supervision of the city manager in such manner as he may direct.



14.03.  Rates.



   The city manager shall recommend to the council from time to time such
just and reasonable rates and other charges as may be deemed advisable for
supplying the inhabitants of the city and others with such public utility
services as the city may provide. No free service shall be permitted. Higher
rates may be charged for service outside the corporate limits of the city.



14.04.  Utility rates and charges-Collection.



   The council shall provide by ordinance for the collection of all public
utility rates and charges of the city. Such ordinance shall provide at least:



   (A)   The terms and conditions under which utility services may be
discontinued in case of delinquency in paying such rates or charges.



   (B)   That suit may be instituted by the city before a competent
tribunal for the collection of such rates or charges.



   With respect to the collection of rates charged for water, the city
shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act 178 of the Public Acts of
1939 of the State of Michigan as amended.



14.05.  Municipal utilities: Disposition; requisites.



   The city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any way dispose of any
municipal public utility or any property, easement, equipment, privilege, or
asset needed to continue the operation of any utility, unless the proposition
to do so is approved by the electors or the council, as the case may be, in
the same manner as was required to acquire the utility. All contracts,
grants, leases, or other forms of transfer in violation of this section shall
be void and of no effect as against the city. The restrictions of this
section shall not apply to the sale or exchange of articles of machinery or
equipment of any utility, which are no longer useful or which are replaced by
new machinery or equipment, or to the sale or leasing of property not
necessary for the operation of the utility, or to the exchange of property or
easements for other property needed for the utility.



14.06.  Utility finances.



   (A)   The rates and charges for any municipal public utility for the
furnishing of water, light, heat, power or gas shall be so fixed as to at
least meet all the costs of such utility.



   (B)   Transactions pertaining to the ownership and operation by the
city of each public utility shall be recorded in a separate group of accounts
under an appropriate fund caption, which accounts shall be classified in
accordance with generally accepted utility accounting practice. Charges for
all service furnished to, or rendered by, other city departments or agencies
shall be recorded. An annual report shall be prepared to show the financial
position of each utility and the result of its operations, which report shall
be available for inspection at the office of the clerk.



CHAPTER 15.  PRIVATELY OWNED UTILITIES



15.01.  Franchises remain in effect.



   All franchises to which the Township of Sterling is a party when this
Charter becomes effective shall remain in full force and effect in accordance
with their respective terms and conditions.



15.02.  Franchise required.



   No person, partnership, association or corporation operating a public
utility shall have the right to the use of the highways, streets, alleys or
other public places of the city of [for] wires, poles, pipes, tracks or
conduits without the consent of the council; nor may it transact a local
business in the city without first obtaining a franchise therefor from the
city.



15.03.  Regulatory powers.



   The city shall have the right:



   (A)   To regulate public utilities;



   (B)   To regulate the location of poles and other facilities used by
public utilities, and



   (C)   To require that wires in streets and alleys be placed
underground.



   The city shall have the right to permit and regulate the use by others
than the owners, of property located in the streets, alleys and public
places, in the operation of a public utility, upon the payment of a
reasonable compensation to the owners thereof.



15.04.  Permit revocable.



   The council may grant a permit at any time in or upon any street, alley
or public place; provided, that such permit shall be revocable by the council
at its pleasure at any time, whether such right to revoke be expressly
reserved in said permit or not.



15.05.  Granting of public utility franchises.



   Public utility franchises and all renewals, and extensions thereof and
amendments thereto shall be granted by ordinance only. No exclusive franchise
shall ever be granted. No franchise shall be granted for a longer period than
thirty (30) years. No franchise ordinance which is not subject to revocation
at the will of the council shall be enacted nor become operative until the
same shall have first been referred to the people at a regular or special
election and received the affirmative vote of three-fifths (3/5) of the
electors voting thereon. No such franchise ordinance shall be approved by the
council for referral to the electorate before thirty (30) days after
application therefor has been filed with the council nor until a public
hearing has been held thereon, nor until the grantee named therein has filed
with the clerk his unconditional acceptance of all terms of such franchise.
No special election for such purposes shall be ordered unless the expenses of
holding such election, as determined by the council, shall have first been
paid to the treasurer by the grantee.



   A franchise ordinance or renewal or extension thereof or amendment
thereto which is subject to revocation at the will of the council may be
enacted by the council without referral to the voters, but shall not be
enacted unless it shall have been complete in the form in which it is finally
enacted and shall have so been on file in the office of the clerk for public
inspection for at least four (4) weeks after publication of a notice that
such ordinance is so on file.



15.06.  Conditions of public utility franchises.



   All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this
Charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be
subject to the following rights of the City of Sterling Heights, but this
enumeration shall not be exclusive or impair the right of the council to
insert in such franchise any provisions within the power of the city to
impose or require:



   (A)   To repeal the same for misuse, nonuse or failure to comply
with the provisions thereof;



   (B)   To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service
and maintenance thereof at the highest practicable standard of efficiency;



   (C)   To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of
products and prevent unjust discrimination in service or products and prevent
unjust discrimination in service or rates;



   (D)   To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public
in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period
thereof;



   (E)   To use, control and regulate the use of its streets, alleys,
bridges and other public places and the space above and beneath them;



   (F)   To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the
council to be conducive to the safety, welfare and accommodation of the
public.



   (G)   Any franchise granted to a public utility which is not subject
to the jurisdiction of and regulation by the Michigan Public Service
Commission, shall make provisions for fixing and adjusting the rates and
charges to be made by such grantee from and after the effective date of the
franchise.



15.07.  Regulation of rates.



   All public utility franchises shall make provision therein for fixing
rates, fares and charges and may provide for readjustments therefor at
periodic intervals. The value of the property of the utility used as a basis
for fixing such rates, fares and charges shall in no event include a value
predicated upon the franchise, goodwill or prospective profits.



15.08.  Use of public places by utilities.



   Every public utility, whether it has a franchise or not, shall pay such
part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of streets, alleys, bridges
and other public places as shall arise from its use thereof and shall protect
and save the city from all damages arising from said use. Every such public
utility may be required by the City of Sterling to permit joint use of its
property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys and other public
places of the city by the city and by other utilities insofar as such joint
use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental
therefor. In the absence of agreement and upon application by any public
utility, the council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and
conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor and the
arbitration award shall be final.



15.09.  Repeal and termination of franchise; acquisition of utility property.



   All ordinances granting franchises, or extensions or renewals thereof,
shall reserve to the city the right to terminate the same and to purchase all
the property of the utility in the streets and highways in the city and
elsewhere, used in or useful for the operation of the utility, at a price
either fixed by the ordinance or to be fixed in the manner provided by the
ordinance granting the same. Nothing in such ordinance shall prevent the city
from acquiring the property of any such utility by condemnation proceedings
or in any other lawful mode; but all such methods of acquisition shall be
alternative to the power to purchase reserved in the ordinance granting such
franchise, extension or renewal as hereinbefore provided. Upon the
acquisition by the city of the property of any utility by purchase,
condemnation or otherwise, all franchises, extensions and renewals shall at
once terminate.



15.10.  Franchise ordinance requirement.



   No ordinance granting such franchise, or extension or renewal thereof,
shall be valid unless it shall expressly provide therein that the price to be
paid by the city for the property that may be acquired by it from such
utility by purchase, condemnation or otherwise, shall exclude all value of
such franchise, extension or renewal, except that, unless otherwise provided
in such ordinance, the utility shall be entitled to the return of the
proportionate amount for the unused period of any compensation paid to the
city for such franchise, extension or renewal.



15.11.  Sale or assignment of franchise.



   The grantee of a franchise may not sell, assign, sublet, or allow
another to use the same, unless the council gives its consent. Nothing in
this section shall limit the right of the grantee of any public utility
franchise to mortgage its property or franchise, nor shall it restrict the
rights of the purchaser, upon foreclosure sale, to operate the same, except
that such mortgagee or purchaser shall be subject to the terms of the
franchise and provisions of this chapter.



CHAPTER 16.  STREETS, SEWERS, WATER SYSTEM AND DRAINS



16.01.  Authority for streets.



   The council shall have authority to lay out, open, widen, extend,
straighten, alter, and improve streets and alleys by grading, graveling,
surfacing, curbing, paving, draining, repairing, illuminating, maintaining
the same free from dust and nuisance, or as otherwise necessary.



16.02.  Closing; vacation.



   The council shall have power to close and/or vacate any street or
alley, or any part thereof, provided, that it shall not have power to vacate
or alter any state or county highway. When the council shall deem it
advisable to vacate any street or alley or any part thereof, it shall, by
resolution, so declare and in the same resolution shall appoint a time, not
less than thirty (30) days thereafter, when it shall meet and hear objections
thereto. Notice of such meeting, with a copy of said resolution, shall be
published two (2) successive weeks before the appointed time for such
meeting, in the official newspaper of the city and posted in not less than
three (3) public places on the street, alley or part thereof proposed to be
vacated or abolished.



16.03.  Establishing grade.



   The council shall have authority to establish and alter the grade of
public streets and alleys within the jurisdiction of the city. Whenever a
grade shall be established or altered a record and diagram thereof shall be
kept on file in the office of the clerk.



16.04.  Constructing, repairing, replacing [sidewalks]; payment of cost.



   The city shall have control of all sidewalks in the public streets and
alleys of the city and may construct, repair and replace such sidewalks as a
public improvement and may provide for the payment of the cost thereof by
special assessment or it may require the abutting owners to so do. If the
latter procedure shall be followed, and any abutting owner shall fail to
construct such sidewalk after being required to do so by resolution of the
council and upon such notice as the council shall provide, then the city may
construct such sidewalk and collect the costs thereof from the abutting
property owner, or may make a special assessment in the same manner as herein
provided for the making of special assessments where any expense has been
incurred by the city upon or in respect to any particular lot or parcel of
land.



16.05.  Name changes; hearings; notice.



   The council shall have power to change the name of any street, but
before doing so shall set a date for hearing any objections thereto and shall
give notice thereof by publication in the official newspaper of the city at
least once not less than ten (10) days prior to such hearing, and by posting
such notice at least ten (10) days prior to such hearing in three (3) public
places on such street.



16.06.  Regulations for planting trees and shrubbery.



   The council may provide for and regulate the planting of shade and
ornamental trees and shrubbery in the streets and public highways of the city
and may provide for the care and maintenance thereof. It shall have power to
prohibit the maintenance of diseased trees and shrubbery on private premises
and if the same will be liable to infect trees and shrubbery on public
property or on the property of others, the council may cause entrance upon
private premises and destroy such diseased trees and shrubbery, if the owner
shall fail to do so after ten (10) days notice served upon him or posted on
the premises, and charge the property or the owner thereof in the discretion
of the council.



16.07.  Removal of sidewalk obstructions.



   The council may by ordinance require abutting property owners to remove
snow, ice, filth and other obstructions from the sidewalks adjacent to their
respective properties and in event of the failure of any person to do so,
such ordinance may provide that the city may perform such work and charge the
cost thereof to such property owner, and to assess him and his property
therefor as in this Charter provided.



16.08.  Authority for drains and sewers.



   The council may acquire, maintain, operate, improve, enlarge and/or
extend, either within or without the city, drains, sewers, water distribution
systems and facilities for the collection and treatment of storm water and/or
sanitary sewage. The council may contract with any other governmental unit or
units for sewage and drainage facilities for the treatment of sewage.



16.09.  Council, authority for connection and privilege fees.



   The owners or occupants of lots and premises shall have the right to
connect their home or lot, by means of private drains, with the city sewers
and drains after payment of the required connection and/or privilege fees and
under such rules and regulations as the council shall prescribe.



16.10.  Council, authority for public health.



   Whenever the council shall deem it necessary for the public health, it
may require the owners and occupants of lots and premises to construct
private drains therefrom to connect with some public sewer or drain, for the
disposal of sewage and/or surface water from such lots and premises, and to
keep such private drains in repair and free from obstruction. If such private
drains are not constructed and maintained according to such requirements, the
council may cause the work to be done at the expense of such owner or
occupant and the amount of such expense shall be a lien upon the premises
drained, and may be collected by special assessments to be levied thereon.



16.11.  Council, authority for charges.



   The city may fix and collect charges for such disposal services,
privilege fees and connection fees [for the] water and sewage disposal
system, the proceeds of which shall be exclusively used for the purpose of
the sewage disposal and water distribution systems, [and] such charges, if
not paid when due, may be levied and collected in the same manner as other
city taxes.



16.12.  Penalties.



   In addition to any other remedy or penalty provided in this chapter,
any person who by himself or with others violates any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred ($500.00)
dollars or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, or by
both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.



(Added 11-4-75)



CHAPTER 17.  BOARD OF SUPERVISORS



17.01.  City representation on county board of supervisors.



   The city shall be represented on the board of supervisors of the County
of Macomb by such members as the city shall be entitled to by appointment of
the council.



   Any additional number of supervisors permitted to the city by state law
may be members of the council or active registered electors of the city, and
shall be appointed by the council thirty (30) days after the effective date
of adoption of this Charter.



17.02.  Term of office.



   The members of the board of supervisors appointed by the council shall
be appointed for two (2) year terms commencing within thirty (30) days next
following their appointment and shall continue to serve until a successor is
appointed and has qualified.



17.03.  Vacancies in the office of supervisors.



   In case of a vacancy in the office of any appointed member of the
Macomb County Board of Supervisors, the council shall within thirty (30) days
appoint some other qualified person to fill the vacancy in the same manner as
the original appointment was made.



17.04.  Compensation of supervisors.



   Each supervisor shall be entitled to retain any compensation and
mileage paid to him by the county but shall receive no extra compensation
from the city for his work as supervisor.



CHAPTER 18. RESERVED*



* Editor's note:



   Chapter 18 (§§ 18.01-18.23) related to the municipal court. The
chapter has been omitted, since the court has been abolished. See M.S.A. §§
27A.9921, 27A.9930; M.C.L. §§ 600.9921, 600.9930



CHAPTER 19.  RETIREMENT SYSTEM



19.01.  Applicability.



   Section 19.02 and section 19.03 of this chapter shall apply to
policemen and firemen in the employ of the city.



   Section 19.03 and section 19.06 of this chapter shall apply to other
city employees.



19.02.  Policemen and firemen retirement system.



   The council shall, within one year from the effective date of this
Charter, adopt Act No. 345 of the Public Acts of 1937 as amended, being
retirement and pension system for employees of the police and fire
departments.



19.03.  Service as township employee.



   Service rendered as the former Sterling Township by an employee of the
city shall be credited to him as city service, provided the said employee was
employed by the said township within a period of one year immediately
preceding the effective date of this Charter and becomes employed by the city
within a period of one year from and after the effective date of this Charter.



19.04.  Federal social security, old-age and survivors coverage.



   The council shall, within one year from the effective date of this
Charter take necessary actions to cover the eligible employees of the city
under the federal social security, old-age and survivors insurance program.



19.05.  Employee retirement system.



   The council shall, within one year from the effective date of this
Charter, adopt an ordinance, herein called the retirement ordinance, to
create and establish the City of Sterling Heights employees retirement
system, herein called the retirement system, for the eligible employees of
the city. The said retirement ordinance shall become effective immediately
upon the adoption of the retirement ordinance, notwithstanding that said
effective date might be within a fiscal year.



19.06.  The retirement ordinance.



   The retirement ordinance shall contain such provisions as the council
shall from time to time deem necessary to provide for the retirement of
covered employees of the city who become superannuated because of age or
total and permanent disability, to provide pensions to be paid said employees
and option elections actuarially equated to said pensions; to provide
pensions for certain primary dependents of employees who die from city
service-connected causes; to provide pensions for certain primary dependents
of employees with not less than twenty (20) years of credited service who die
while in the employ of the city, from nonservice connected causes; to provide
for a board of trustees to administer the retirement system; to provide that
contributions be made to the retirement system by the city and the covered
employees; to provide for the investments of the reserve funds of the
retirement system; and to carry out the provisions of this chapter and the
retirement ordinance; provided, that the retirement ordinance shall be
subject to the following conditions:



   (A)   Provision shall be made to exclude policemen and firemen who
are covered under the City of Sterling Heights policemen and firemen
retirement system from membership in the City of Sterling Heights employees
retirement system. Provisions may be made to exclude certain classes of city
employees from membership in the retirement system; provided, that, with the
exception of the city manager, such exclusions shall not extend to city
employees employed in positions normally requiring one thousand (1,000) or
more hours per annum.



   (B)   Except for his total and permanent disability, in no case
shall voluntary retirement with a pension payable from funds of the
retirement system be allowed any member prior to the date he (1) attains age
sixty (60) years and (2) acquires at least ten (10) years of credited service.



   (C)   In no case shall social security taxes be paid from funds of
the retirement system or from funds due to the retirement system. (As amended
11-4-75)



CHAPTER 20.  MISCELLANEOUS



20.01.  Definitions.



   Whenever used in this Charter:



   (A)   The word "state" shall mean the "State of Michigan;"



   (B)   The word "city" shall mean the "City of Sterling Heights;"



   (C)   The word "council" shall mean the "city council;"



   (D)   Words referring to the several offices where not preceded by
the word "city" shall be deemed to mean such offices of the city unless the
context implies otherwise;



   (E)   The terms "council" and "city council" shall be construed as
meaning "commission," "council," or "commission council," or "governing body"
for the purpose of such general laws of the state as use one or the other of
such latter terms in referring to the legislative body of the city;



   (F)   Words imparting the singular number only may extend to and
embrace the plural number; the words, imparting the plural number may be
applied and limited to the singular number; words imparting the masculine
gender only may extend and be applied to those of the feminine or neuter
gender;



   (G)   The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies
corporate as well as to individuals;



   (H)   The words "written" and "in writing" may be construed to
include printing, engraving, typewriting, and lithographing, and to
telegraphic communications except that this rule shall not apply to
signatures.



   (I)   Wherever used in this Charter, the word "advertisement" shall
mean the solicitation by any of the usual means of publication in newspapers,
by posting, or by letter.



20.02.  Records to be public.



   All records of the city shall be public, shall be kept in offices
except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to
be elsewhere and shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times.



20.03.  Publications: Posting and affidavit.



   When by the provisions of this Charter, or the laws of the state,
notice of any matter or proceedings is required to be published in a
newspaper or posted, an affidavit of the publication or posting of the same,
annexed to a printed copy of such notice or proceeding, taken from the paper
in which it was published, specifying the times of publication, made by the
printer of the newspaper in which same was inserted, or by some person in his
employ knowing the facts, if such notice was required to be by publication in
a newspaper, or by the person posting the same when required to be by
posting, shall be prima facie evidence of the facts therein contained. Such
affidavit of publication or posting shall be filed with the city clerk.



20.04.  Sundays and holidays.



   Whenever the date fixed by this Charter or by ordinance for the doing
or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall
be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or
legal holiday.



20.05.  Books, records, city property.



   When any elective or appointive officer of the city has qualified and
is entitled to assume the duties of his office, his predecessor in such
office or position shall surrender to him forthwith all the books, papers,
records, and other city property which may be in his possession. The failure
of such predecessor to comply with this provision, shall constitute a
misdemeanor.



20.06.  Council; claims and accounts.



   The council shall pass upon all accounts and claims against the city.
Every claim for tort shall, so far as possible, state in detail, the time,
place and cause of alleged injury. All claims, whether arising out of
contract or tort, shall be made under oath and shall be filed with the clerk
for consideration by the council within sixty (60) days after the cause of
action in every case has arisen. It shall be a sufficient defense to any
action for the collection of any demand or claim against the city that such
claim has not been filed with the clerk as hereinbefore provided.



20.07.  Seal.



   The council shall, as soon as possible after the adoption of this
Charter, adopt an official seal of the City of Sterling Heights.



20.08.  Uniform accounting.



   Any system of accounts used for city or any department thereof shall
conform to such uniform system as may be required by law.



20.09.  Vested rights; liabilities; remedies.



   On and after the time this Charter shall become effective the city
shall be vested with all the real and personal property, moneys, contracts,
rights, effects, records, files, books, papers and all other property of
every name and nature, belonging to the Township of Sterling. No right or
liability, either in favor of or against the same township, existing at the
time this Charter shall become effective, and no suit or prosecution or other
legal proceedings of any kind, shall be in any manner affected by the
incorporation of the township as a city, but the same shall stand or proceed
as if no such change had been made. All debts and liabilities of said
township shall be the debts and liabilities of the city. All taxes and
special assessments levied and uncollected at the time of the change from the
township to the city form of government and all fines and penalties imposed
prior thereto, shall be collected by the city. All licenses, permits and
franchises granted by said township, in force when this Charter takes effect,
shall remain in full force and effect until the expiration of the time for
which they were respectively granted. When a different remedy is given in
this Charter or in any ordinance pursuant thereto which can be made
applicable to any rights existing at the time this Charter becomes effective,
the same shall be deemed cumulative to the remedies before provided, and may
be used accordingly.



20.10.  Retention of present ordinances of Township of Sterling.



   The valid provisions of bylaws, ordinances, resolutions, rules and
regulations of the Township of Sterling which are not inconsistent with this
Charter and which are in force and effect and lawfully applicable to the City
of Sterling Heights at the time of the effective date of this Charter, shall
continue in full force and effect and be administered by and for the city
until and unless repealed or amended under provisions hereof or rendered
invalid by law; provided, however, that if any such bylaw, ordinance,
resolution, rule or regulation provides for the appointment by the township
supervisor or the township board of the Township of Sterling of any official
or member of a board or commission, future appointments of such persons shall
be made as otherwise provided in this Charter.



   Fees originally payable to the township under such provisions as to
said territory hereafter shall be paid to the city.



   Those provisions of any such bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation which are inconsistent with this Charter are hereby repealed as to
their application to such territory.



   Any reference in any such bylaw, ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation to a board or commission shall be construed to refer instead to
the council.



20.11.  Effect of illegality of any part of Charter.



   Should any provision or section, or portion thereof, of this Charter be
held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, illegal, or
unconstitutional, such holdings shall not be construed as affecting the
validity of this Charter as a whole or of any remaining portion of such
provision or section, it being hereby declared to be the intent of the
Charter Commission and of the electors who voted thereon that such
unconstitutionality or illegality shall not affect the validity of any other
part of the Charter except that specifically affected by such holdings.



20.12.  Headings.



   The chapter and section headings used in this Charter are for
convenience only and shall not be considered to be a part of this Charter.



20.13.  Quorum.



   A quorum of any board or commission created by or pursuant to this
Charter shall be a majority of the members of such board or commission in
office at the time, but not less than two (2) members.



20.14.  Amendments.



   This Charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by
statute. Should two (2) or more amendments, adopted at the same election,
have conflicting provisions the one receiving the largest affirmative vote
shall prevail as to those provisions.



CHAPTER 1:  GENERAL PROVISIONS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL CODE PROVISIONS



1-1.  HOW CODE DESIGNATED AND CITED.



   The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall
constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Sterling
Heights, Michigan 1992," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as
the "Sterling Heights City Code."



(1978 Code, § 1-1)



Charter reference:



   Duty of Council to provide for compilation or codification of
ordinances, see § 6.08



Statutory reference:



   Codification of ordinance, see M.S.A. § 5.2084(2); M.C.L. § 117.5b



1-2.  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.



   This Code and all ordinances of the city shall be interpreted and
construed in accordance with the following provisions of this chapter, unless
such interpretation and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 1-2)



1-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other person employed by
the city who is legally authorized to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction notices.



   CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY. The City of Sterling Heights.



   CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by a law and is
not a crime under that law or that is prohibited by an ordinance and is not a
crime under that ordinance and for which civil sanctions may be ordered.



   COUNCIL or CITY COUNCIL. The legislative body of the city.



   COUNTY. The County of Macomb.



   GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall apply to firms,
associations, partnerships and corporations and may apply to females if the
intent of the ordinance so requires.



   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such
authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is
otherwise expressly declared in the ordinance granting the authority.



   MONTH. A calendar month.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. A civil infraction involving a violation of
a city ordinance.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION does not include a violation
described in Public Act 236 of 1961, § 113, being M.C.L.A. § 600.113(a) and
600.113(c) (i) through (vi) and (ix), as amended, or any act or omission that
constitutes a crime and is punishable as a misdemeanor under this Code.



   NUMBER. Words in either the singular or plural number shall include
either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person
or persons.



   OATH or AFFIRMATION; SWORN or AFFIRMED. The word OATH shall be
construed to include the word AFFIRMATION in all cases where by law an
affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word SWORN
shall be construed to include the word AFFIRMED.



   OFFICERS, DEPARTMENTS, DIVISIONS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS. The several
officers’ titles mean such officers of the city. The designation of any
department or division of government, or any board or commission, means such
department, division, board or commission of the city.



   OWNER. Applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner,
land contract vendee, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership,
joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.



   PERSON. Includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations,
clubs, congregations and all associations or organizations of natural
persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named
and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and
includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof.



   PRECEDING, FOLLOWING. When used by way of reference to any title,
chapter or section of any ordinance of the city, shall be construed to mean
the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which
such reference is made, unless some other title, chapter or section is
expressly designated in such reference.



   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any street, alley, park, cemetery, public building or any
place of business or assembly, parking lot, parking area or any other
premises open to the public or frequented by the public.



   REPEAT OFFENSE. A second (or subsequent) municipal civil infraction
violation of the same requirement or provision of this ordinance committed by
a person within any six-month period for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible.



   SEAL. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office
shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or
office, the word SEAL shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal
on such paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto
by means of a wafer or wax.



   SHALL or MAY. The word SHALL means imperative or mandatory; the word
MAY means permissive.



   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Include a mark when the person cannot write.



   STATE. The State of Michigan.



   SUNDAYS and LEGAL HOLIDAYS. Whenever any act required to be done
pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance falls on a Sunday or legal
holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day.



   TENSE. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as
including the future as well as the present or past.



   TIME. Whenever time is referred to, it means Eastern Standard Time or
the time officially in force in the city.



   TITLES, HEADINGS, CATCHLINES. The key words used in this Code or in any
ordinance as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, sections and
subsections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same,
and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any
of the provisions thereof.



   WEEK. Construed to mean seven days.



   WRITTEN, IN WRITING. Any form of usual reproduction or usual expression
of language.



   YEAR. A calendar year, and the word YEAR alone shall be equivalent to
the words "year of our Lord."



(1978 Code, § 1-3; Ord. 328, § 2, 11-5-97)



1-4.  OFFICERS; ACTS REQUIRED; PERFORMANCE, AUTHORITY.



   Whenever in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any
ordinance of the city any specific act is required to be done by any
designated officer or official of the city, such act may be performed by any
city employee duly authorized to perform that act by such officer or official.



(1978 Code, § 1-4)



1-5.  COMPUTATION OF TIME.



   The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or
in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be
computed as prescribed by state statute.



(1978 Code, § 1-5)



Statutory reference:



   Computing period of days, see M.S.A. § 2.217; M.C.L. § 8.6



1-6.  REPEAL OF REPEALING ORDINANCE; EFFECT.



   Whenever an ordinance, or any part thereof, is repealed by a subsequent
ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be
revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 1-6)



1-7.  REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT ORDINANCES.



   Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
in conflict therewith shall, to the extent of such conflict, be repealed.



(1978 Code, § 1-7)



1-8.  REPEAL OF ORDINANCE DOES NOT AFFECT PENALTY, FORFEITURE OR LIABILITY
INCURRED.



   The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or
relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance
or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provides and
the ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force
for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution
for the enforcement of the penalty, forfeiture or liability.



(1978 Code, § 1-8)



1-9.  GENERAL PENALTY.



   (A)   Misdemeanor. It shall be unlawful and constitute a misdemeanor
for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of
this Code, unless such violation or failure is, by state statute, declared to
be a felony, or civil infraction, or is declared to be a municipal civil
infraction as specified in division (C) of this section or unless otherwise
specified in this code of ordinances. Every person convicted of a misdemeanor
for a violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this Code or
any regulation lawfully promulgated pursuant thereto shall, unless otherwise
prescribed in this Code, be punished by a fine of not more than $500, by
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment. However, unless otherwise provided by law, and
notwithstanding any charter provisions to the contrary, every person
convicted of a misdemeanor for a violation of or failure to comply with a
provision of this Code which substantially corresponds to a violation of
state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment
is 93 days, unless otherwise prescribed in this Code, shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $500, by imprisonment for a period of time not to
exceed 93 days or by both such fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of
attempting to commit an offense which constitutes a misdemeanor shall be
fined not more than $500, imprisoned for a jail term not to exceed 45 days or
both.



   (B)   Civil infraction. It is unlawful and constitutes a civil
infraction for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of
this Code that substantially corresponds to a law that is included in Public
Act 12 of 1994, being M.C.L.A. § 600.113 that is not punishable as a
misdemeanor.



   (C)   Municipal civil infraction. It is unlawful and constitutes a
municipal civil infraction for any person to violate or fail to comply with
the following provisions of this Code:



 

Chapter
 
Title
 
Section




5
 
Alcoholic Beverages
 
5-1(A) (first offense only, and if no prior judgments for the listed
alcohol-related offenses)


7
 
Amusement Devices
 
7-4(A), (B), 7-9, 7-10, 7-12(A)(13), (14), (15), 7-12(B)(1), (2), 7-12(E),
7-12(F)


8
 
Animals and Fowl
 
8-10(A), 8-10(F), 8-11(B), 8-13, 8-20, 8-26(B), 8-28(D), 8-32(B), 8-36(A),
8-41(A), 8-41(D), 8-41(H), 8-44(B)


9
 
Bicycles
 
9-3(c ), 9-4, 9-6(a), (b), 9-7, 9-8


11
 
Buildings and Building Regulations
 
Michigan Construction Code, with updates, as promulgated by the Director of
Consumer and Industry Services after October 15, 1999, except for the
following sections.


11
 
Buildings and Building Regulations
 
Michigan Building Code:  110.1, 110.2, 110.4, 110.5, 114.2  and 115.1


 
 
 
 
Michigan Residential Code:  R110.1, R110.2, R110.4 and R110.5


 
 
 
 
Michigan Plumbing Code:  P108.5


 
 
 
 
Michigan Mechanical Code:  M108.5


 
 
 
 
Property Maintenance Code, except for the following: 108.1.1, 108.1.2,
108.1.3, 108.1.4, 108.2, 108.4, 108.5, 109.1, 302.8;
All sections of Division 3 of Article VI of Chapter 11


12
 
Business Registration and Regulations
 
12-4(a), (b)


 
 
 
 
Film permits: All sections except 12-160, 12-166, and 12-167


 
 
 
 
12-21 (first offense only)


 
 
 
 
12-47, 12-48(D), 12-50(A), 12-50(D), 12-50A (first offense only)


 
 
 
 
12-272, 12-275(A), 12-275(D), 12-276 (first offense only)


17
 
Earth Changes
 
All sections


19
 
Fences
 
19-3, 19-5 through 19-8, 19-12, 19-15


20
 
Fire Prevention and Protection
 
All sections of the 2015 International Fire Code, except for the following: 
104.11.2, 104.11.3, 104.11.4, 104.11.5, 110, 111.4 (first violation), 401.4,
2703.3; 20-117(A), 20-117(C)


20
 
Fire Prevention and Protection
 
20-101(C), 20-101(G), 20-101(H), 20-115(A) (first offense within 72 hours),
20- 115(B), 20-115(C), 20-115(E) (first offense within 72 hours), 20-115(G)
(first offense within 72 hours), 20-115(I) (first offense within 72 hours),
20-117(A) (first offense only), 20-117(C) (first offense only)


21
 
Flood Damage Prevention
 
21-5, 21-6(1), 21-7


22
 
Food and Food Establishments
 
22-21 through 22-23, 22-24(a), 22-25, 22-26(a), (b), 22-39(b), 22-42 through
22-45


23
 
Garbage and Refuse
 
23-2(a), 23-3, 23-4(a) through (e), 23-5, 23-7, 23-9(a), (b), (c), 23-10(a)
through (d), 23-13, 23-16(a), (b)(i), 23-17, 23-26, 23-34, 23-41, 23-51, 23-52


28
 
Library Thefts
 
28-11(b)


29
 
Licenses and Permits
 
29-13


35
 
Offenses and Miscellaneous P rovisions
 
35-6, 35-39, 35-65(A)(10) (Under 17 Only), 35-65(C), 35-65(D) (first and
second offenses only), 35-65(E) (all offenses under age 18 and first and
second offenses over age 17), 35-67(C)(5), (7), (8), (9), 35-67(C)(11) (first
offense only), 35-67(D)(4), (6), (7), (12), 35-67(D)(8) (first offense only),
35-67(D)(14) (first offense only), 35-68, 35-81, 35-94(A) (first offense
only), 35-95


36
 
False Alarms
 
36-4(D)


37
 
Parking and Storage of Certain Vehicles
 
37-14(a), (b), (c), 37-24, 37-25, 37-31, 37-52


38
 
Parks
 
38-5, 38-8, 38-13(3) through 38-13(6), 38-14, 38-15, 38-18 through 38-22,
38-27, 38-38(a), 38-42, 38-44


43
 
Recreational Waters
 
43-3, 43-5(a), (b), (c), 43-6(a), (b), 43-8, 43-9(a), (b), (c)


44
 
Schools
 
44-7(B), 44-8(A), 44-9


48
 
Streets and Sidewalks
 
48-4 through 48-6, 48-9, 48-19, 48-20, 48-22, 48-23(a), (b), (c), 48-24,
48-35, 48-36(a), 48-37


49
 
Traffic and Vehicle Code
 
49-94(A)


51
 
Vegetation
 
51-6, 51-7, 51-8(a), (b), 51-9 through 51-14, 51-16, 51-39(a), (b), (c),
51-44(a) through (e), 51-46 (a) through (d)


52
 
Vehicles for Hire
 
52-18, 52-19(c), 52-20, 52-22, 52-23(a), (b), 52-24, 52-26(b), 52-27(a), (b),
52-28 through 52-30, 52-33(a), (b), 52-34(a) through (d), 52-49, 52-65


53
 
Water, Sewage and Sewage Disposal
 
53-107 (except repeat offenders within 24 hours)




 



   (D)   Additional remedies. In addition to all other remedies, the
city may commence and prosecute appropriate actions or proceedings in court
to restrain or prevent any noncompliance with or violation of any of the
provisions of this Code or to correct, remedy or abate such noncompliance or
violation.



(1978 Code, § 1-3; Ord. No. 328, § 3, 1-5-97; Ord. No. 328-A, § 1,
5-18-98; Ord. No. 339, § 328B, § 2, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 349, § 1, 10-17-00;
Ord. No. 367, § 12, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 368, § 2, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 374, §
2, 12-21-04; Ord. No. 376, § 2, 3-15-05; Ord. No. 378, § 3, 5-3-05; Ord.
No. 384, § 2, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 388, §§  35 - 36, 1-3-07; Ord. No. 392,
§ 4, 12-18-07; Ord. No. 396, § 15, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 397, § 2, 6-3-08; Ord.
No. 399, § 3, 12-16-08; Ord. No. 401, § 2, 3-2-09; Ord. No. 411, § 12,
2-1-11; Ord. 413, § 17, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 419, § 2, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 425,
§ 3, 3-5-13; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 8-6-13; Ord. No. 431, § 3, 10-1-13; Ord.
No. 435, § 3, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 436, § 3, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14; Ord. No. 439, § 6, 2-17-15; Ord. No. 450, § 2, 12-20-16;  Ord.
No. 453, § 2, 5-3-17; Ord. No. 452, § 4, 6-20-17; Ord. No. 454, § 4,
7-18-17; Ord. No. 209-F, § 2, 12-5-17; Ord. No. 455, § 3, 12-19-17; Ord.
No. 461, § 5, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 462, § 4, 3-18-19; Ord. No. 463, § 4,
4-16-19)



Charter reference:



   Authority of Council to provide punishment for violation of ordinances,
see § 6.04(5);



   Violation of city ordinances deemed misdemeanors for arrest purposes,
see § 7.10



Statutory reference:



   Punishment not to exceed limits set out above, see M.S.A. § 5.2082,
M.C.L. §§ 117.3k, 117.4i



1-10.  CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.



   In addition to the penalties provided in § 1-9 for any misdemeanor or
municipal civil infraction, any condition caused or permitted to exist in
violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be
deemed a new and separate offense for each day that such condition continues
to exist.



(1978 Code, § 1-10; Ord. No. 328, § 4, 11-5-97)



1-11.  SEVERABILITY.



   If any part of this Code or any ordinance, or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance, shall be found to be invalid by any court, the
invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or applications of the Code
or ordinance which can be given effect without the invalid part or
application, provided the remaining parts are not determined by the court to
be inoperable, and to this end the provisions of this Code and other
ordinances are declared to be severable.



(1978 Code, § 1-11)



1-12-1-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS



1-21.  DEFINITIONS.



   In this article, the following words shall have the meaning ascribed to
them.



   BUREAU. The City of Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance Violations
Bureau, as established by this chapter.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or notice to
appear in court upon which an authorized city official records the occurrence
or existence of one or more municipal civil infractions by the person cited.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by an
authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of
Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau to pay the fine and
costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines
adopted by the city.



   MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU. The Bureau established by §
1-25 of this article.



   REPEAT OFFENSE. A second (or subsequent) municipal civil infraction of
the same requirement or provision of this ordinance committed by a person
within any six-month period for which the person admits responsibility or is
determined to be responsible.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97)



1-22.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION; COMMENCEMENT.



   A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance
by an authorized city official of: (1) a municipal civil infraction citation
directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil
infraction notice directing the alleged violator appear at the City of
Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, within ten days, to
pay a civil fine if the alleged violator admits responsibility.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97)



1-23.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; ISSUANCE AND SERVICE.



   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by
authorized city officials as follows:



   (A)   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued;



   (B)   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the
District Court;



   (C)   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in
a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation shall
be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by
the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by § 8705 of the Act;



   (D)   A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an
authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties
of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information,
knowledge and belief;"



   (E)   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a
municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation;



   (F)   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person
if:



      (1)   Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable
cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction; or



      (2)   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who
allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction and if the City Attorney approves in writing the issuance of
the citation;



   (G)   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an
authorized city official as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided by subsection (G)(2), an authorized
city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged
violator;



      (2)   If the municipal civil infraction action involves the
use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last
known address.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97)



1-24.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATIONS; CONTENTS.



   (A)   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.



   (B)   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that
he or she may do one of the following:



      (1)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by mail, in person or by representation at or by the time specified for
appearance;



      (2)   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
"with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or in person
or by representation;



      (3)   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction
by doing either of the following:



         (a)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing before
a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is
requested by the city;



         (b)   Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a
judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



   (C)   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of
the following:



      (1)   If the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility
"with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must
apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or by representation
within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time
for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation;



      (2)   If the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility,
the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone
or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is
specified on the citation;



      (3)   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal
hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city;



      (4)   At an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear
in person before a judge or district court magistrate without the opportunity
of being represented by an attorney;



      (5)   At a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in
person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an
attorney.



   (D)   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the
failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the
citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97)



1-25.  MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS BUREAU.



   (A)   The City of Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance Violations
Bureau ("Bureau") is established as authorized by § 8396 of the Act to
accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions in
response to municipal civil infraction notices issued and served by
authorized city officials and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as
prescribed by ordinance.



   (B)   The Bureau shall be located at a site designated by the City
Manager and shall be under the supervision and control of the City Manager.
The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall adopt
rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint any
necessary qualified city employee(s) to administer the Bureau.



   (C)   (1)   The Bureau may dispose of municipal civil infractions
for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil
infraction notice (as differentiated from a citation) has been issued. The
Bureau may not dispose of a municipal civil infraction citation (as
differentiated from a municipal civil infraction notice).



      (2)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the
city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or
from prosecuting any action for such a violation in a court of competent
jurisdiction. No person shall be required to respond to a municipal civil
infraction notice at the Bureau and may instead have the violation processed
as a citation so that the matter will be handled by a court of competent
jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to respond to any municipal
civil infraction notice at the Bureau shall not prejudice or diminish the
person’s rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.



   (D)   The Bureau shall only accept admissions of responsibility for
municipal civil infractions for which a municipal civil infraction notice has
been issued (as differentiated from a municipal civil infraction citation).
The Bureau shall collect and retain civil fines and costs resulting from
those admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment of a civil fine from
any person who denies responsibility for the offense or who admits
responsibility only with an explanation. In no event shall the Bureau
determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to the alleged violation.



   (E)   Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued
and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon
the same persons as provided for citations as provided in § 1-23(G)(1) and
(2) of this Code. In addition to any other information required by this Code,
the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator
must appear at the Bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made,
the address and telephone number of the Bureau, the hours during which the
Bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation
and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within
the required time.



   (F)   An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction
violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified fine and
costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil
infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person or
by representation.



   (G)   If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal
civil infraction notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and
the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the
violations are not paid at the Bureau within ten days from the date of
issuance of the municipal civil infraction notice, a municipal civil
infraction citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of the
citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at his
or her last known address. The citation filed with the court shall consist of
a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil
infraction notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond
to the citation.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97)



1-26.  SCHEDULE OF MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION FINES.



   (A)   The following schedule of civil fines payable to the Bureau of
admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal civil
infraction notices shall apply, unless another penalty is specifically
provided by division (B) of this section:



      (1)   $150 for each violation;



      (2)   $375 for the first repeat offense;



      (3)   $750 for any second or subsequent repeat offense.



      (4)   $1,500 for any third or subsequent repeat offense.



   (B)   The following specific schedule of civil fines payable to the
Bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal
ordinance violation notices shall apply to the civil infractions listed below.



 

Chapter Title
 
Code Section
 
Fine




Alcoholic Beverages
 
5-1(A)
 
$100 for a first offense (including no prior judgments for the listed
alcohol-related offenses); subsequent violations are misdemeanors


Amusement Devices
 
7-4(A), (B)
 
$500 for each first and second violation, but reduced to $150 if license is
obtained or devices are removed


Animals and Fowl
 
8-10(F), 8-28(D), 8-41(A)
 
$500 for each first violation,
$750 for the first repeat offense,
$1,000 for any second or subsequent repeat offense


Buildings and Building Regulations
 
Unless otherwise excepted in § 1-9(c), all sections of the Michigan
Construction Code, with updates, as promulgated and
by the Director of Consumer and Industry Services after October 15, 1999
 
$150 for each first violation,
$375 for the first repeat offense,
$750 for any second repeat offense
and $1,500 for any third or subsequent repeat offense


 
 
Sections 12-47, 12-48(D), 12-50(A), 12-50(D), 12-50A (first offense only)
 
$500 first violation; subsequent violations are misdemeanors


 
 
Sections 12-272, and 12-275(A), 12-275(D), and 12-276 (first offense only)
 
$500 for first violation; subsequent violations are misdemeanors


Earth Changes
 
All sections of Chapter 17
 
$750 for the first and subsequent repeat offenses


 
 
Except 17-19(F)(1) and (2)
 
 


Earth Charges
 
17-19(F)(1)
 
$5,000 first violation,
$7,500 for first repeat offense, and
$10,000 for second and subsequent repeat offenses


Earth Changes
 
17-19(F)(2)
 
$10,000 for first violation,
$15,000 for first repeat offense,  and
$20,000 for second and subsequent repeat offenses


Fire Prevention and Protection
 
2015 International Fire Code
Section 111.4 (local amendment)
 
$100 first violation; subsequent violations are misdemeanors


Fire Prevention and Protection
 
20-101(C), 20-101(G), 20-101(I)
 
20-101(C): $200

20-101(G): $500

20-101(I): $500 (first offense)

20-101(I): $1,000 (second or subsequent offense)


Fire Prevention and Protection
 
20-115(A), 20-115(B), 20-115(C), 20-115(E)
 
20-115(A): $500

20-115(B): $1,000

20-115(C): $1,000

20-115(E): $1,000


Garbage and Refuse
 
23-9(a)
 
$25 first violation, $50 for first repeat offense, and $300 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses


Library
 
28-11
 
$75 first violation and $150 for first repeat offense and $300 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-65(A)(10)
 
Under 17 years of age: $500 or $100 after completion of class


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-65(C)
 
$100


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-65(D)
 
$500 first violation

$1,000 second violation


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-65(E)
 
$100 first violation

$500 second violation

$1,000 third violation (under 18)


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-81 (youth curfews)
 
$25 first violation and $50 for first repeat offense and $100 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-94 (A)
 
First offense: $500 but reduced to $50 if the offender completes the approved
health program; subsequent violations are misdemeanors


Offenses and Miscellaneous Provisions
 
35-95
 
$500 but reduced to $50 if the offender completes the approved health program


Parking and Storage
 
All sections of Article V
(Snow Emergencies) of Chapter 37
 
$75 first violation, $100 for first repeat offense, and $125 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses


Parks
 
38-14
 
$10 first violation, $25 for first repeat offense, and $50 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses


Water
 
53-107 (except repeat offenders within 24 hours
 
$25 first violation, $50 for the first repeat offense and $100 for second and
subsequent repeat offenses




 



   (C)   A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time, shall be
posted at the Bureau.



(Ord. No. 328, § 5, 11-5-97; Ord. No. 328-A, § 2, 5-18-98; Ord. No. 349, §
2, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 352, § 19; Ord. No. 367, § 13, 12-17-02; Ord. No.
384, § 3, 8-15-06; Ord. No. 388, § 1, 1-3-07; Ord. No. 391 § 3, 4-17-07;
Ord. No. 396, § 16, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 397, § 3, 6-3-08; Ord. No. 411, § 13,
2-1-11; Ord. No. 413, § 18, 5-17-11; Ord. No. 419, § 3, 6-19-12; Ord. No.
430, § 3, 8-6-13; Ord. No. 435, § 4, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1, 10-7-14;
Ord. No. 439, § 7, 2-17-15; Ord. No. 450, § 3, 12-20-16; Ord. No. 453, §
3, 5-3-17; Ord. No. 454, § 5, 7-18-17; Ord. No. 209-F, § 3, 12-5-17; Ord.
455, § 4, 12-19-17; Ord. No. 461, § 6, 12-18-18; Ord. No. 462, § 5,
3-18-19; Ord. No. 463, § 5, 4-16-19)



CHAPTER 2:  ADMINISTRATION



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



2-1.  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.



   (A)   The application dated March 4, 1977 and the articles of
incorporation of the Economic Development Corporation of the City of Sterling
Heights are approved and adopted.



   (B)   A certified copy of the ordinance from which this section is
derived is directed to be filed with the Secretary of State of the State of
Michigan in accordance with Public Act 338 of 1974,  § 5, being M.C.L.A. §
125.1605, as amended, and the applicants in said application dated March 4,
1977 are thereafter authorized to incorporate the Economic Development
Corporation of the City of Sterling Heights as a public corporation pursuant
to Public Act 338 of 1974, as amended.



   (C)   The articles of incorporation of the Economic Development
Corporation of the City of Sterling Heights, as approved in this section, may
be amended from time to time by amendatory ordinance, which amendments shall
be filed with the Secretary of State of the State of Michigan.



   (D)   The articles of incorporation shall be executed in duplicate
and delivered to the Clerk of the County of Macomb, who shall file one copy
in his or her office and the other with the recording officer of the Economic
Development Corporation of the City of Sterling Heights, when such an officer
is selected. The Clerk of the City of Sterling Heights shall cause a copy of
the articles of incorporation to be published once in the Advisor Newspaper
of Utica, Michigan, accompanied by a statement that the right exists to
question the incorporation in court, as provided in Public Act 338 of 1974,
§ 31, being M.C.L.A. § 125.1631, as amended.



(1978 Code, § 2-1)



Statutory reference:



   The act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 5.3520(1) et seq.;
M.C.L. § 125.1601



2-2.  FORFEITURE OF EXPIRED OR UNUSED BONDS AND DEPOSITS.



   All cash deposits or cash bonds heretofore deposited or posted with the
various departments of the City of Sterling Heights pursuant to ordinances or
resolutions of the city, which have been held by the city for a period of two
years after the sum is deemed to be refundable by the city and which have not
been used for the purpose intended, shall be declared canceled and forfeited
and transferred from the fund in which it may have been deposited to the
city’s General Fund; provided, however, that prior to the transfer, the
City Treasurer shall, by certified mail, send a notification to the depositor
and/or its principals at their last known address, notifying them that unless
the cash deposit or bond is claimed within 30 days from the date of mailing
of the notice, the deposit or bond shall be canceled and/or forfeited and the
funds shall be transferred to the city’s General Fund.



   All cash deposits or bonds hereafter deposited with the City of
Sterling Heights to guarantee performance required under various ordinances,
which have not been refunded by the department requiring the deposit or bond
or which have not been used for the purpose intended, shall be forfeited two
years after the sum is deemed to be refundable by the city, unless the
depositor has previously made a written request for refund. Notice of the
forfeiture shall be given by the City Treasurer by certified mail to the
depositor or its principals at their last known address, notifying them that
a claim must be filed within 30 days from the mailing of the notice. All such
forfeitures shall be deposited in the city’s General Fund.



   After the expiration of the 30 day period, all claims by the principal
or surety, their successors and/or assigns shall be invalid and unenforceable.



(1978 Code, § 2-2; Ord. No. 205, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-79)



Cross reference:



   Building regulations, see Ch. 11;



   Water and sewers, see Ch. 53



2-3-2-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE



2-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Administrative
Service Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 2-16; Ord. No. 201C, § 1, 12-16-86)



2-17.  ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS.



   The administrative service of the city shall consist of the following
departments:



   (A)   City Administration;



   (B)   City Development;



   (C)   Community Relations;



   (D)   Fire;



   (E)   Public Library;



   (F)   Parks and Recreation;



   (G)   Police;



   (H)   Public Works.



(1968 Code, § 2-17; Ord. No. 201-C, § 1, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 201-D, § 1,
6-21-88; Ord. No. 201E, § 1, 10-31-88; Ord. No. 201-F, § 1, 5-2-89; Ord.
No. 201-G, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 201-H, § 1, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 201-J, §
1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 201-K, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord.
No. 415, § 1, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 420, § 1, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 444, § 1,
2-2-16)



2-18.  CHARTER-CREATED ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   The charter-created administrative officers of the city are the City
Manager, Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, Director of Finance, Chief of Police,
Fire Chief, Superintendent of Public Works, and Director of Parks and
Recreation.  In the Administrative Code, Clerk is renamed City Clerk,
Director of Finance is renamed Finance and Budget Director, Superintendent of
Public Works is renamed Public Works Director, and Director of Parks and
Recreation is renamed Parks and Recreation Director.



(1968 Code, § 2-18; Ord. No. 201-C, § 1, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 201-K, § 1,
8-17-99; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 389 § 1, 4-3-07; Ord. No.
415 § 2, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 432 § 1, 11-6-13; Ord. No. 444, § 2, 2-2-16;
Ord. No. 457, § 1, 6-19-18)



2-19.  CREATION OF ADDITIONAL ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   The following additional administrative officers are created in
accordance with § 7.01(A) of the City Charter: Public Library Director, City
Development Director, Building Official, City Engineer, City Planner/City
Development Manager, Community Relations Director, Controller, Assistant City
Manager and Human Resources Director, Information Technology Director,
Purchasing and Facilities Maintenance Manager, and Human Resources and
Benefits Manager.



(1978 Code, § 2-19; Ord. No. 201-C, § 1, 12-6-86; Ord. No. 201-D, § 2,
6-21-88; Ord. No. 201E, § 2, 10-31-88; Ord. No. 201-F, § 2, 5-2-89; Ord.
No. 201-G, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 288, § 1, 12-11-90; Ord. No. 201-H, §
1, 6-7-94; Ord. No. 201-J, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 201-K, § 1, 8-17-99; Ord.
No. 357, § 1, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 389 § 2, 4-3-07; Ord. No. 415 § 3,
7-5-11; Ord. No. 420, § 2, 10-16-12; Ord. No. 432 § 2, 11-6-13; Ord. No.
444, § 3, 2-2-16; Ord. No. 457, § 2, 6-19-18)



2-20.  APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS.



   (A)   All administrative officers of the city shall be appointed,
compensated and discharged in accordance with the City Charter or applicable
collective bargaining agreement.  All administrative officers shall be
department heads for the purposes of § 8.10 of the City Charter.



   (B)   The City Manager shall promptly file with the City Clerk an
administrative code (plan) and subsequent amendments thereto, all subject to
approval by the City Council, setting forth the departmental organization and
the duties and functions of the administrative officers, additional
administrative officers, deputy administrative officers and their
subordinates of the city in accordance with §§ 7.02(C)(8) and 7.14 of the
City Charter. The administrative code (plan) shall include an organizational
chart describing the lines of authority and reporting responsibilities of
each administrative officer, deputy administrative officer and their
subordinates.



(1978 Code, § 2-20; Ord. No. 201-C, § 1, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 357, § 1,
12-18-01)



2-21-2-94.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS GENERALLY



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



2-95.  COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   Title. This section shall be known and cited as the "Boards
and Commissions Compensation Ordinance."



   (B)   Compensation prescribed. The annual compensation for appointed
members of boards and commissions of the city shall be as follows.



      (1)   Building Authority. Each member of the Building
Authority shall be compensated $15 per public meeting attended, but not more
than $180 per year. During periods of building constructed management for the
city, to be determined by the City Manager, each member shall be compensated
$20 per public meeting attended with no maximum per year.



      (2)   Code Board of Appeals.  Members shall be compensated
$30 per public meeting attended, but not more than $90 per month.



      (3)   Electrical Board of Examiners. Members shall be
compensated $20 per public meeting attended, but not more than $40 per month.



      (4)   Property Maintenance Code Board of Appeals.  Members
shall be compensated $20 per public meeting attended, but not more than $40
per month.



      (5)   Planning Commission. Members shall be compensated $30
per public meeting attended, but not more than $90 per month.



      (6)   Ordinance Appeals, Board of. Members shall be
compensated $30 per public meeting attended, but not more than $90 per month.



      (7)   Review, Board of.  Members shall be compensated $7.50
per hour, with a minimum of $15 per day, for each public meeting attended,
but not more than $1,000 per member per fiscal year.



      (8)   Zoning Appeals, Board of.  Members shall be compensated
$30 per public meeting attended, but not more than $90 per month.



   (C)   Others not compensated. Unless otherwise provided, members of
all other boards and commissions of the city shall serve without monetary
compensation, except for reimbursement of reasonable expenses incurred in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this section.



   (D)   Reimbursement of expenses.  Appointed members of all boards
and commissions of the city shall be reimbursed for all reasonable expenses
and costs incurred in the performance of their duties, when such costs and
expenses have received prior approval and authorization in accordance with
normal procedures of the city.



(1978 Code, § 2-95; Ord. No. 187-C, § 1, 11-21-89; Ord. No. 187-E, § I,
8-6-91; Ord. No. 187-F, § 1, 10-15-91; Ord. No. 187-G, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord.
No. 187-H, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 187-I, § 1, 6-1-99)



Charter reference:



   Compensation of members of boards and commissions to be established by
ordinance, see § 4.10



2-96-2-100.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  PLANNING COMMISSION



2-101.  CREATED; COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF MEMBERS; COMPENSATION
AND REMOVAL.



   There is created a Planning Commission for the city.  The Planning
Commission shall consist of nine members.  The membership of the Commission
shall be representative of important segments of the community, such as the
economic, governmental, educational, and social development of the City, in
accordance with the major interests as they exist in the city, such as
agriculture, natural resources, recreation, education, public health,
government, transportation, industry, and commerce.  The membership shall
also be representative of the entire geography of the city to the extent
practicable.  The members shall be appointed by the Mayor.  Appointment
shall be subject to the approval by a majority vote of the members elect of
the City Council.  All members of the Planning Commission may be compensated
at a rate to be determined by the City Council and shall hold no other
municipal office, except that one of the members may be a member of the
Zoning Board of Appeals.  The term of office of each member of the Planning
Commission shall be three years, except that three members of the first
commission to be appointed shall serve for a term of one year, three for a
term of two years and three for a term of three years.  All members shall
hold office until their successors are appointed.  A member may, be removed
by the City Council for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office
upon written charges after a public hearing.



(1978 Code, § 2-101; Ord. No. 346, § 1, 4-4-00; Ord. No. 346-A, § 1,
6-5-01; Ord. No. 346-B, § 1, 1-2-02; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 1-6-09)



Statutory reference:



   Local planning commissions, see M.C.L. §§ 125.3801 et seq.; M.C.L. §
125.3815



2-102.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Planning Commission shall possess and exercise all of the
powers and functions of planning commissions under the provisions of Public
Act 33 of 2008, being M.C.L. 125.3801 et seq. and such amendments and
superseding acts as may be enacted.



   (B)   Before casting a vote on a matter on which a member may
reasonably be considered to have a conflict of interest, the member shall
disclose the potential conflict of interest to the Planning Commission.  The
member is disqualified from voting on the matter if so provided by the bylaws
of the Planning Commission or by majority vote of the remaining members of
the Planning Commission.  Failure of a member to disclose a potential
conflict of interest as required by this subsection constitutes malfeasance
in office.  The Planning Commission shall define conflict of interest for
purposes of this subsection if the City Council does not do so by ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 2-102)  (Ord. 400, § 2, 1-6-09)



Statutory reference:



   Local planning commissions, see M.C.L. § 125.3816, M.C.L. § 125.3881



2-103-2-107.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 3.  HISTORICAL COMMISSION



2-108.  CREATED.



   There is created and established in and for the city a commission
hereafter to be known as the City Historical Commission.



(1978 Code, § 2-108)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to create historical commission, provide for its appointment
and prescribe its functions, see M.S.A. § 5.3396; M.C.L. § 399.172



2-109.  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.



   The Historical Commission shall consist of seven members to be
appointed by the City Council. No person shall be eligible to appointment who
has not been a registered elector of the city continuously for at least two
years immediately preceding his or her appointment.



(1978 Code, § 2-109)



2-110.  TERMS OF MEMBERS.



   Members of the Historical Commission shall hold office for terms of
three years, except that, in the first instance, three members shall hold
office for one year, two members shall hold office for two years and two
members shall hold office for three years.



(1978 Code, § 2-110)



2-111.  ELECTION OF OFFICERS; MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE AND RECORDS;
QUORUM.



   The Historical Commission shall each year elect one of its members as
Chairperson and shall elect such other officers from its membership as it may
deem necessary. The Commission shall hold meetings regularly, at least once
in each three months, and shall designate the time and place thereof. It
shall adopt its own rules of procedure and shall keep a record of its
proceedings. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of
business.



(1978 Code, § 2-111)



2-112.  FUNCTIONS.



   The functions of the Historical Commission shall be to further public
interest in all matters relating to the history of the city.



(1978 Code, § 2-112)



2-113.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The powers and duties of the Historical Commission shall be as follows:



   (1)   With the approval of the City Council and in the name of the
city, to acquire, take and hold, by purchase, gift, devise, bequest or
otherwise, such real and personal property as may be proper for carrying out
the objects and functions for which it is established, and any property, real
or personal, received in trust shall be held in the name of the city but in
conformity with the terms of the trust.



   (2)   With the approval of the City Council and in the name of the
city, to acquire, collect, own and exhibit articles of historical interest or
value which pertain to the history of the city.



   (3)   To otherwise promote public interest in, and to preserve, the
history of the city and its environs; provided, however, that nothing herein
shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers and
duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the city.



(1978 Code, § 2-113)



2-114-2-118.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 4.  BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION



2-119.  ESTABLISHED; TO SERVE IN ADVISORY CAPACITY.



   A Beautification Commission is established which shall serve in an
advisory capacity to the City Council and shall be known as the City
Beautification Commission.



(1978 Code, § 2-119)



2-120.  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Beautification Commission shall consist of 12 members to
be appointed by the majority vote of the members of the City Council.
Presently, five members hold office for a term expiring June 30, 2000. The
City Council shall extend the term of one of the members to expire June 30,
2001. Thereafter, each member shall hold office for a full three year term.



   (B)   The Beautification Commission shall consist of the following
ex officio members who shall have no voting powers on the Commission: one
representative from the Office of Parks and Recreation, one representative
from the Planning Commission and one representative from the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 2-120; Ord. No. 145-A, § 1, 12-8-81; Ord. No. 145-B, § 1,
9-15-98)



2-121.  TERMS OF MEMBERS; ELECTION OF OFFICERS; FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   Members of the Beautification Commission shall hold office for terms of
three years, except that four members shall hold office for a term to expire
June 30, 1999, four members shall hold office for a term to expire June 30,
2000 and four members shall hold office for a term to expire June 30, 2001.
Thereafter, each member shall hold office for a full three year term. The
Commission shall, each year, elect one of its members as Chairperson and
shall elect such other officers as it may deem necessary. Any vacancy shall
be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term.



(1978 Code, § 2-121; Ord. No. 145-A, § 2, 12-8-81; Ord. No. 145-B, § 1,
9-15-98)



2-122.  DUTIES, OBJECTIVES AND PURPOSES.



   The Beautification Commission shall have the following duties,
objectives and purposes:



   (1)   To promote public education against the discarding of litter
in city streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks and recreation areas and other
public places;



   (2)   To encourage all residents and owners of property within the
city to accept basic responsibilities of preserving and enhancing the beauty
of public and private properties;



   (3)   To encourage and recommend the placing, planting and
preservation of trees, flowers, plants, shrubbery and other objects of
ornamentation in the city;



   (4)   To sponsor, plan, promote, coordinate and carry out activities
for the restoration, preservation and enhancement of the beauty of the city;
and



   (5)   To otherwise promote public interest in the general
improvement of the appearance of the city; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall be construed to abridge, invade, supplant or change the powers
and duties of the other commissions, departments, boards and agencies of the
city.



(1978 Code, § 2-122)



Cross reference:



   Anti-litter ordinance, see §§ 23-31 et seq.;



   Trees and other vegetation, see Ch. 51



2-123-2-127.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 5.  HOUSING COMMISSION



2-128.  CREATED.



   Pursuant to Public Act 18 of 1933, (Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. §§
125.641 et seq., as amended, a commission is created to be known as the
Housing Commission.



(1978 Code, § 2-128)



Statutory reference:



   The act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 5.3011 et seq.;
M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq.



2-129.  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.



   The Housing Commission shall be composed of five members appointed by
the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 2-129; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 4-3-90)



2-130.  TERMS AND REMOVAL OF MEMBERS; FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   The term of office of members of the Housing Commission shall be five
years. Members of the first Housing Commission existing hereunder shall be
appointed for the terms of one year, two years, three years, four years and
five years respectively; and annually thereafter one member shall be
appointed for the term of five years. Members of the Housing Commission may
be removed from office by the City Council. Any vacancy in office shall be
filled in the same manner as provided in the original appointment for the
remainder of the unexpired term.



(1978 Code, § 2-130; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 4-3-90)



2-131.  MEETINGS; RULES OF PROCEDURE AND RECORDS; QUORUM; OFFICERS AND
EMPLOYEES.



   The Housing Commission shall meet at regular intervals and the meetings
shall be open to the public. The Commission shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and shall keep a record of the proceedings. Three members shall
constitute a quorum in the transaction of business. A President and
Vice-President shall be elected by the Housing Commission. The Housing
Commission may appoint a Director who may also serve as Secretary and such
other employees or officers as shall be necessary. The Housing Commission
shall prescribe the duties of all of its officers and employees and may, with
the approval of the City Council, fix their compensation. The Housing
Commission may, from time to time, as necessary, employ engineers, architects
and consultants.



(1978 Code, § 2-131; Ord. No. 282, § 1, 4-3-90)



2-132.  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Housing Commission shall have all the powers and duties vested or
permitted to be vested in housing commissions by Public Act 18 of 1933,
(Extra Session), being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.651 et seq., and acts heretofore or
hereafter enacted which are supplemental thereto, it being the intention of
this section to vest in the Housing Commission all powers and duties
permitted by law.



(1978 Code, § 2-132)



Statutory reference:



   The act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 5.3011 et seq.;
M.C.L. §§ 125.651 et seq.



2-133-2-137.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 6.  ARTS COMMISSION



2-138.  ESTABLISHED; TO ACT IN ADVISORY CAPACITY.



   There is established a cultural commission of the city, which
commission shall be known as the "Sterling Heights Arts Commission" and shall
act solely in an advisory capacity, whose functions, duties and powers are as
hereinafter set forth.



(1978 Code, § 2-138; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 3-3-15)



2-139.  COMPOSITION; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS;
FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   The Commission shall consist of 12 members who shall be appointed by
the City Council. All appointments to the Commission shall be for a four year
term, with the term of office for three members of the Commission expiring on
June 30 of each year. Vacancies on the Commission occurring before the
expiration of any term shall be filled by appointment as set forth above for
the unexpired terms. Members of the Commission shall be registered electors
of the city upon appointment and shall remain so during their term of office.



(1978 Code, § 2-139; Ord. No. 154-A, § 1, 11-25-75; Ord. No. 440, § 1,
3-3-15)



2-140.  ELECTION OF OFFICERS; ADOPTION OF BYLAWS; MEETINGS.



   The Commission shall, immediately after appointment, meet and organize
by the election of one of its members as Chairperson and by the election of
such other officers as it deems necessary.  The Commission will adopt bylaws
for the orderly conduct of its meetings and for the proper process of its
functions. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be held monthly or as
often as may be deemed necessary by the Commission.



(1978 Code, § 2-140; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 3-3-15)



2-141.  DUTIES.



   The Commission shall:



   (1)   Act as an advisory commission to the City Council;



   (2)   Consider, study and recommend plans for the development of
city-wide cultural programs;



   (3)   Promote, coordinate and develop the performing and creative
arts by making recommendations for programs for cultural opportunities and
experiences for the citizens of the city and further to facilitate
communications with the State Council for Arts and Cultural Affairs.



(1978 Code, § 2-141; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 3-3-15)



2-142.  EXPENDITURES.



   The Commission, or any of its members, shall not incur any expense or
create any obligation or liability upon the city. In the event any
expenditure of city funds may be required in connection with the functioning
of the Commission, prior approval of the expenditures shall first be obtained
from the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 2-142; Ord. No. 440, § 1, 3-3-15)



DIVISION 7.  ELECTED OFFICIALS’ COMPENSATION COMMISSION



2-143.  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE.



   There is established a local officers’ compensation commission which
shall establish the salaries of all local elected officials of the City of
Sterling Heights.



(1978 Code, § 2-143; Ord. No. 214, § 1.01, 12-11-79)



2-144.  MEMBERS, NUMBERS, QUALIFICATIONS, APPOINTMENT, TERM, REMOVAL AND
VACANCIES.



   The Commission shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and
serving on the City Council. No member or employee of the legislative,
judicial or executive branch of any level of government or members of the
immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member
of the Commission. All appointments to the Commission shall be for a term of
seven years, except that of the members first appointed, one each shall be
appointed for terms of one, two, three, four, five, six and seven years.



   The first member of the Commission shall be appointed within 30 days
after the effective date of this division. Thereafter, members shall be
appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. Vacancies shall be
filled for the remainder of the unexpired term.



(1978 Code, § 2-144; Ord. No. 214, § 2.01, 12-11-79)



2-145.  ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS, SALARIES.



   The Commission shall immediately after appointment meet and organize by
the election of one of their members as Chairperson and such other officers
as they may deem necessary. The Commission shall meet for not more than 15
session days in each odd numbered year and shall make its determination
within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of
the Commission constitues a quorum for conducting the business of the
commission. The commission shall not take action or make a determination
without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on
the Commission. As used in this section, SESSION DAY means a calendar day on
which the Commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the
Commission shall not receive compensation but shall be entitled to actual and
necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties.



(1978 Code, § 2-145; Ord. No. 214, § 3.01, 12-11-79)



2-146.  DETERMINATION OF SALARIES.



   The Commission shall determine the salary of each local elected
official which determination shall be the salary unless the legislative body,
by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on
the legislative body, rejects it. The determination of the Commission shall
be effective 30 days following its filing with the City Clerk, unless
rejected by the legislative body. If the determination is rejected, the
existing salary shall prevail. The expense allowance or reimbursement paid to
elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the
course of city business and accounted for to the city.



(1978 Code, § 2-146; Ord. No. 214, § 4.01, 12-11-79)



2-147.  MEETINGS TO BE IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.



   The business which the Commission may perform shall be conducted at a
public meeting of the Commission held in compliance with Public Act 267 of
1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275. Public notice of the time,
date and place of meeting of the Commission shall be given in the manner
required by Public Act 267 of 1976, being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275.



(1978 Code, § 2-147; Ord. No. 214, § 5.01, 12-11-79)



2-148.  DOCUMENTS TO BE PUBLIC.



   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of or retained by
the Commission in the performance of an official function shall be made
available to the public in compliance with Public Act 442 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.231 through 15.246.



(1978 Code, § 2-148; Ord. No. 214, § 6.01, 12-11-79)



2-149.  PROCEDURE SUBJECT TO CHANGE AFTER ONE YEAR.



   The governing body shall implement this division by resolution. After
one year following the date the division goes into effect, the procedure for
establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by charter
amendment or revision.



(1978 Code, § 2-149; Ord. No. 214, § 7.01, 12-11-79)



DIVISION 8.  CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY.



2-150.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   The City Council (the "Council") of the city is strongly
committed to the revitalization and redevelopment of commercial properties
that have historically developed along the city's major arterial roadways
("commercial corridors"). The Council believes that revitalization and
redevelopment of existing commercial corridors in maturing communities is
preferable to the negative effects associated with the continual consumption
of vacant land for commercial purposes in growth communities.



   (B)   There presently exist within the city a number of commercial
corridors which could greatly benefit from the new Corridor Improvement
Authority Act, Public Act 280 of 2005 (the "Act"), through analysis, short
and long-term planning, construction, renovation, repair, remodeling,
rehabilitation, restoration, preservation, and reconstruction of buildings
and facilities. Tax incremental financing is one of many tools available to
finance these activities under the Act.



   (C)   The Council, having heard and considered testimony regarding
the public need and potential benefits that are to be realized through the
Act; and, having determined that it is necessary for the best interests of
the public to redevelop and promote economic growth within commercial
corridors; resolves to proceed with the creation and provide for the
operation of a corridor improvement authority ("authority") within the city
pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of the Act.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.1.  TITLE.



   This division shall be known as "The City of Sterling Heights Corridor
Improvement Authority Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.2.  CREATION OF AUTHORITY.



   There is created pursuant to the Act a corridor improvement authority
for the city. The authority shall be known and exercise its powers under the
name "Corridor Improvement Authority of the City of Sterling Heights." The
authority shall posses all of the powers provided within this division and
the Act. The enumeration of a power in this division or in the Act shall not
be construed as a limitation upon the general powers of the authority.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.3.  BOARD.



   (A)   The authority shall be under the supervision and control of a
seven member Board consisting of the Mayor or his or her designee and six
members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to approval by the
Council. Not less than a majority of the members shall be persons having an
ownership or business interest in property located in the development area.
At least one of the members shall be a resident of the development area or of
an area within one-half mile of any part of the development area. The Board
shall elect a chairperson from among its members.



   (B)   Of the members first appointed, two members shall be appointed
for a term of one year, two members for a term of two years, one member for a
term of three years, and one member for a term of four years. After the
initial appointment terms, each member appointed in the manner provided by
this section shall serve for a term of four years. Before assuming the duties
of office, a member shall qualify by taking and subscribing to the
constitutional oath of office. A member shall hold office until the member's
successor is appointed. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be made by the
Mayor for the unexpired term only. After having been given notice and an
opportunity to be heard, a member of the Board may be removed for cause by
the Council.



   (C)   Members of the Board shall serve without compensation, but
shall be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.4.  DESIGNATION OF DEVELOPMENT AREA.



   The authority shall exercise its powers within the "Development Area,"
designated as the real property particularly described on Exhibit A, and as
depicted in the map on Exhibit B, attached to the city Corridor Improvement
Authority Ordinance and made a part hereof, subject to such amendments as may
be made in accordance with this Division and the Act.  Exhibits A and B
shall be available for inspection at the Office of the City Clerk during
normal business hours.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.5.  OPEN MEETINGS ACT.



   The proceedings and rules of procedure of the Board are subject to the
Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, MCL 15.261 to 15.275, as amended.
The Board shall adopt rules governing its procedure and the holding of
regular meetings, subject to the approval of the Council. Special meetings
may be held if called in the manner provided in the approved rules of
procedure.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.6.  FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.



   A writing prepared, owned, used, in the possession of, or retained by
the Board in the performance of an official function is subject to the
Freedom of Information Act, Public Act 442 of 1976, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as
amended. All expense items of the authority shall be publicized monthly and
the financial records shall always be open to the public.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.7.  FILING ORDINANCE WITH SECRETARY OF STATE; PUBLICATION.



   The City of Sterling Heights Corridor Improvement Authority Ordinance
and any amendments and exhibits shall be filed with the Secretary of State
promptly after adoption and shall be published at least once in a newspaper
of general circulation within the city.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.8.  APPROVAL OF BUDGET.



   The Board shall prepare annually a budget, in the same manner and
containing the same information required of all other city departments, and
shall submit it to the Council for approval. The Board shall not adopt a
budget for any fiscal year until the Council has approved the budget. 
Unless authorized by the Council, funds of the city shall not be included in
the budget of the authority.  The city may assess a reasonable pro rata
share of the funds for the cost of handling and auditing the funds against
the funds of the authority, other than those committed, which shall be paid
annually by the Board pursuant to an appropriate item in its budget.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.9. DISSOLUTION.



   Upon completion of its purposes for which it was organized, the
authority shall be dissolved by ordinance of the Council. The property and
assets of the authority remaining after the satisfaction of the obligations
of the authority shall revert to the city.



(Ord. No. 385, § 1, 8-15-06)



2-150.9A.  DETERMINATION AND FINDINGS. 



   Having provided notice of and conducted a public hearing in accordance
with the requirements of Section 22 of the Act; and, having provided through
this hearing the fullest opportunity for expression of opinion, for argument
on the merits, and for consideration of documentary evidence pertinent to a
proposed First Amended and Restated Development Plan and Tax Increment
Financing Plan as recommended by the authority; and, having considered all
the information presented in the course of the public hearing; the Council
has determined that the First Amended and Restated Development Plan and Tax
Increment Financing Plan constitute a public purpose; and, the Council
further finds that:



   (A)   The methods of financing the proposed improvements within the
development area are feasible and the authority has the ability to arrange
the financing;



   (B)   The proposed improvements within the development area are
reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act;



   (C)   The land included within the development area to be acquired,
if any, is reasonably necessary to carry out the public purposes of the First
Amended and Restated Development Plan and the Act in an efficient and
economically satisfactory manner;



   (D)   The First Amended and Restated Development Plan is in
reasonable accord with the master land use plan of the city;



   (E)   Public services, such as fire and police protection and public
utilities are and will be adequate to service the development area; and,



   (F)   Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections, and
utilities are reasonably necessary for the city and the development area
situated therein.



(Ord. No. 387 § 1, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 5-20-14)



2-150.9B. APPROVAL OF DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN.



   A First Amended and Restated Development Plan and Tax Increment
Financing Plan for the authority is approved and incorporated by reference
into the ordinances of the city as if fully set forth here.  A copy shall be
maintained at the office of the City Clerk for inspection by members of the
public.



(Ord. No. 387 § 1, 12-19-06; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 5-20-14)



DIVISION 9.  BOARD OF REVIEW



2-150.10.  BOARD OF REVIEW.



   (A)   Created; composition. A Board of Review is created, composed
of six members who shall be registered electors of the city, who may have the
qualifications for holding office in the city as set forth in the City
Charter and are owners of property assessed for taxation in the city.



   (B)   Appointment of members.  The members of the Board of Review
shall be appointed by the Council.



   (C)   Terms of members. Those four members under this section whose
terms expire after June 30, 2002 may continue to serve until their respective
terms expire. They may be reappointed under the terms of this division. The
Council shall appoint two members for a term expiring on June 30, 2005;
thereafter two members shall be appointed by the Council in the month of May
of each year for a term of three years, commencing on the following July 1.
Any vacancies may be filled for the unexpired term by the Council.



   (D)   Organization, meetings and quorum generally.  The Board
shall, annually on the first day of the meeting, select one of its members
Chairperson and one of its members clerk for the ensuing year; the Assessor
shall attend all meetings of the Board of Review, shall be entitled to be
heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question
before the Board. The membership of the Board of Review shall be divided into
Board of Review Committees consisting of three members each for the purpose
of hearing and deciding issues protested under Public Act 206 of 1893, § 30,
as amended. Two of the three members of a Board of Review Committee shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of the business of the Committee. All
meetings of the members of the Board of Review and committees shall be held
during the same hours of the same day and at the same location.



   (E)   Compensation. The members of the Board of Review shall be paid
such compensation as the Council may determine on a per diem basis.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.10; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 272-A, §§ 1,
2, 3-16-93; Ord. No. 362, §§ 1,2, 6-4-02)



2-150.11.  DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARD OF REVIEW AND COMMITTEE.



   For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of
Review and Committees shall have the same powers and perform like duties in
all respects as are by law conferred upon and required of boards of review in
townships, except as otherwise provided in the Charter and this division. At
the time and in the manner provided in the following section, it shall hear
the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessment.
If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed
or omitted from the roll, the Board or Committee shall correct the roll in
such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person
other than the Board of Review and committees shall authorize any change
upon, or addition to, or correction to the assessment roll. The Clerk of the
Board of Review shall keep a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board
and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. The record
shall be filed with the City Clerk on or before April 15 following the
meeting of the Board of Review.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.11; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 3-7-89)



2-150.12.  MEETINGS; QUORUM.



   (A)   The Board of Review shall convene on the third Monday in March
in each year or on such date as may subsequently be required by law for the
meeting of boards of review in cities at such places as shall be designated
by the Council at its first regular meetings in February and shall sit for no
less than three calendar days; provided however, that if the Council does not
so designate a place for the meeting of the Board of Review, it shall meet in
the Council chambers. A majority of the members of the Board of Review shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of its business.



   (B)   The Board of Review may examine on oath any person appearing
before it respecting assessment property or properties on the assessment
roll. Any member of the Board may administer such oath.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.12; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 3-7-89)



2-150.13.  NOTICE OF MEETING.



   Notice of the time and place of the meetings of the Board of Review
shall be published by the City Clerk in the official newspaper of the city
not less than ten days prior to the first meeting thereof.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.13; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 3-7-89)



2-150.14.  ENDORSEMENT OF ROLL.



   After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment
roll, its members then shall immediately endorse thereon and sign a statement
to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year
in which it has been prepared. The omission of such endorsement shall not
affect the validity of such roll.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.14; Ord. No. 272, § 1, 3-7-89)



2-150.15-2-150.20.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 10.  SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT COMMISSION



2-150.21.  ESTABLISHMENT.



   A solid waste management commission is established which shall serve in
an advisory capacity to the City Council and shall be known as the Solid
Waste Management Commission.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.21; Ord. No. 273, § 1, 3-7-89)



2-150.22.  COMPOSITION; COMPENSATION; APPOINTMENT, TERMS AND QUALIFICATIONS
OF MEMBERS; FILLING A VACANCY.



   The Solid Waste Management Commission shall consist of five members who
shall be appointed by the Council. The term of office shall be for three
years, except that in the first instance two members shall hold office for a
term expiring June 30, 1992, two members shall hold office for a term
expiring June 30, 1991 and one member shall hold office for a term expiring
June 30, 1990. Vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by appointment as
set forth above for the unexpired term of office. One representative of each
solid waste hauler licensed under § 15-16 of this Code shall serve without
vote as an ex officio member of the Commission. Additional ex officio members
of the Commission may be appointed to serve at the pleasure of the Council
for renewable terms ending on June 30 following appointment. Members of the
Commission shall serve without compensation.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.22; Ord. No. 273, § 2, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 273-A, § 1,
8-8-90)



Cross reference:



   Garbage and refuse, see Ch. 23



   Private refuse collector’s licenses, see § 23-11



2-150.23.  ELECTION OF OFFICERS, ADOPTION OF BY-LAWS, MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Commission shall, immediately after appointment, meet and
organize by the election of one of its members as Chairperson and by the
election of such other officers as it deems necessary. The Commission will
adopt by-laws for the orderly conduct of its meetings and for the proper
process of its function.



   (B)   The business which the Commission may perform shall be
conducted at public meetings held in compliance with Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.23; Ord. No. 273, § 3, 3-7-89)



2-150.24.  DUTIES; OBJECTIVES; PURPOSE.



   The Solid Waste Management Commission shall have the following duties,
objectives and purposes:



   (1)   To promote public education regarding solid waste disposal
issues and review solid waste refuse pickup contract responsibilities as well
as potentially hazardous materials and safe disposal processes;



   (2)   To recommend goals and objectives regarding landfill usage,
solid waste recycling, composting programs and waste to energy facilities as
well as to work with the solid waste contractor(s) and solid waste
consultant(s) as may be selected by the City Council; to promote effective
recycling and composting programs and to advise the City Council on such
programs;



   (3)   To continually review and update the city’s position
regarding solid waste disposal activities in conjunction with the County
Solid Waste Planning Committee and the State Department of Natural Resources;



   (4)   To recommend, plan, promote and assist in the coordination of
the city’s involvement with alternative refuse disposal methods;



   (5)   To promote environmental maintenance programs and promote
public interest in the general improvement of systems for the disposal of
solid waste.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.24; Ord. No. 273, § 4, 3-7-89)



2-150.25-2-150.29.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 11.  BOARD OF ORDINANCE APPEALS



2-150.30.  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   A Board of Ordinance Appeals is established to perform the functions of
the appeal board under the International Property Maintenance Code, the
functions of the hearing body under Chapter 33: Nuisances of this Code, and
to consider any other petitions, appeals,  requests for variance from
requirements of an ordinance or code, and modification of ordinances or
codes, as authorized in this Code. Effective March 1, 2011, a second Board is
established and may be empaneled in accordance with this division.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.30; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 367, § 1,
12-17-02; Ord. No. 411, § 10, 2-1-11)



2-150.31.  TERMS OF OFFICE; FILLING OF VACANCIES; ALTERNATE MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall consist of five members
who shall be appointed by the City Council for staggered three year terms, or
until a successor has been appointed.  The staggered terms shall continue to
be structured so that the term of one member expires each year.  The members
should have varying backgrounds, and one or more of the members should have
experience or training related to construction or property and building
maintenance.  Vacancies on the Board shall be filled by appointment as set
forth above for the unexpired term of office.



   (B)   The City Council may appoint nor more than two alternate
members to the Board of Ordinance Appeals who may be called by the
chairperson to participate in hearings, appeals, and variance hearings of the
Board during the absence or disqualification of a member.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.31; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 367, § 2,
12-17-02)



2-150.32.  ELECTION OF OFFICERS, ADOPTION OF BYLAWS, MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board shall immediately after appointment meet and
organize by the election of one of its members as Chairperson and by the
election of such other officers as the Board deems necessary. The Board may
adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of business at its meetings.



   (B)   All meetings of the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall be
conducted in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as amended.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.32; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89)



2-150.33.  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall be compensated as
determined by City Council resolution.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.33; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89)



Cross reference:



   Compensation of Board of Ordinance Appeals members, see § 2-95(b)(7)



2-150.34.  DUTIES; STANDARDS OF REVIEW.



   The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall hold hearings on nuisance
abatement, consider appeals,  review requests for variance, and hold hearing
on animal control matters as authorized by this Code.  The applicable
standard for making a decision relating to a hearing, appeal, review and/or
variance shall be set forth in the chapter of this Code relating to the
matter being considered. The City Manger shall implement administrative
procedures to guide City officials regarding the process for assignment of
hearings.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.34; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 367, § 3,
12-17-02; Ord. No. 411, § 11, 2-1-11)



2-150.35.  APPEAL PROCEDURE GENERALLY.



   (A)   Notice of the hearing at which the matter, appeal, or request
for variance will be considered shall be given as set forth in the chapter of
this Code relating to the matter to be considered.  At a minimum, the notice
shall be delivered personally or by first class mail and shall state the
date, time, and location of the hearing, and that the property owner or any
interested person, or his or her representative, shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and present evidence.



   (B)   The decision of the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall be based
on findings of fact as set forth in the record and shall be supported by
competent and material evidence.



   (C)   The decision of the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall be final
when written notice of the decision of the Board is provided or mailed to the
person whose matter is before the Board or when the minutes of the meeting at
which the decision was made are approved, whichever occurs first, unless a
different time is specified in the chapter of this Code relating to the
matter being considered.



(1978 Code, § 2-150.35; Ord. No. 279, § 1, 10-3-89; Ord. No. § 4, 12-17-02)



2-150.36-2-150.39.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 12.  BOARD OF CODE APPEALS



2-150.40.  CREATION; PURPOSE.



   A Board of Code Appeals is established to handle the functions of the
appeal board under the current Michigan Building Code, the Michigan
Residential Code, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Electrical Code, Michigan
Mechanical Code and the International Fire Prevention Code, and any other
functions delegated by the City Council.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 367, § 5, 12-17-02)



2-150.41.  TERMS OF OFFICE; FILLING OF VACANCIES.



   (A)   The Board of Code Appeals shall consist of five members
appointed by the City Council for staggered five year terms, or until a
successor has been appointed.  The staggered terms shall continue to be
structured so that the term of one member expires each year.  The members
should have varying backgrounds, and one or more of the members should have
experience or training related to construction, property maintenance, fire
prevention, and other technical code issues as prescribed in the Michigan
Construction Code, Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended.



   (B)   The City Council may appoint not more than two alternate
members to the Board of Code Appeals who may be called by the chairperson to
hear appeals before the Board during the absence or disqualification of a
member.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 367, § 6, 12-17-02)



2-150.42.  ELECTION OF OFFICERS, ADOPTION OF BYLAWS, MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Board shall immediately after appointment meet and
organize by the election of one of its members as Chairperson and by the
election of such other officers as the Board deems necessary. The Board may
adopt bylaws for the orderly conduct of business at its meetings.



   (B)   All meetings of the Board of Code Appeals shall be conducted
in accordance with the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976, being
M.C.L.A. §§ 15.261 through 15.275, as amended.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96)



2-150.43.  COMPENSATION.



   Members of the Board of Code Appeals shall be compensated as determined
by City Council resolution.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96)



2-150.44.  DUTIES; STANDARDS OF REVIEW.



   The Board of Code Appeals shall consider appeals and other matters as
authorized by the City Council. The criteria for appeal, review and/or
variance of a particular requirement shall be as set forth in the applicable
chapter of this Code.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 367, § 7, 12-17-02)



2-150.45.  APPEAL PROCEDURE GENERALLY.



   (A)   Notice of the hearing at which the appeal or request for
variance shall be heard shall be given as set forth in the chapter relating
to the requirements which are being appealed or from which a variance is
sought.  At a minimum, the notice shall be delivered personally or by first
class mail and shall state the date, time, and location of the hearing, and
that the property owner or any interested person, or his or her
representative, shall be given an opportunity to be heard and present
evidence.



   (B)   The decision of the Board of Code Appeals shall be based upon
findings of fact as set forth in the record and shall be supported by
competent and material evidence.



   (C)   The decision of the Board of Code Appeals shall be final when
written notice of the decision of the Board is provided or mailed to the
person whose matter is before the Board or when the minutes of the meeting at
which the decision was made are approved, whichever occurs first, unless a
different time is specified in the chapter of this Code relating to the
matter being considered.



(Ord. No. 279-A, § 1, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 367, § 8, 12-17-02)



ARTICLE IV.  CODE OF ETHICS FOR PUBLIC OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES



2-151.  TITLE.



   This article may be known as the “Code of Ethics for Public Officials
and Employees of the City of Sterling Heights.”



(1978 Code, § 2-151)



2-152.  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have
the meanings respectively described to them in this section.



   BUSINESS ENTITY. A business entity includes a corporation, general or
limited partnership, sole proprietorship, joint venture, unincorporated
association, real estate investment trust or other business trust.



   INTEREST. Any interest, either personal, financial, legal or equitable,
whether or not subject to an encumbrance or a condition, which is owned or
held, in whole or in part, jointly or severally, directly or indirectly, at
any time during the calendar year. INTEREST shall also include any stock or
similar security, investment contract, voting trust certificate, limited or
general partnership or joint venture, business trust or certificate of
interest or participation in a profit sharing agreement or in oil, gas or
other mineral royalty or lease or any other equity interest, however
evidenced, which entitled the owner or holder thereof, directly or
indirectly, to receive or direct any part of the profit fund or to exercise
any part of the control over a business entity as well as any interest which,
conditionally or unconditionally, with or without consideration, is
convertible thereto and interest in a note, bond, debenture or any other
evidence of a creditor interest.



   OFFICIAL or EMPLOYEE. Any person elected or appointed to, or employed
by, any public office or public body of the city.



   PUBLIC BODY. An agency, board, body, commission, committee, department
or office of the city.



(1978 Code, § 2-152)



2-153.  FAIR AND EQUAL TREATMENT.



   No official or employee of the city shall request, use or permit the
use of any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which is
the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. All
officials or employees of the city shall treat all citizens of the city with
courtesy, impartiality, fairness and equality under the law.



(1978 Code, § 2-153)



2-154.  USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No official or employee of the city shall request, use or permit the
use of any publicly owned or publicly supported property, vehicle, equipment,
material, labor or service for the personal convenience or the private
advantage of himself or herself or of any other person. This rule shall not
be deemed to prevent any official or employee from requesting, using or
permitting the use of such publicly owned or publicly supplied property,
vehicle, equipment, material, labor or service which is made available by
general practice, to the public at large or which is provided, as a matter of
stated public policy, for the use of officials and employees in the conduct
of official business.



(1978 Code, § 2-154)



2-155.  CONFLICT OF INTEREST; CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   The following regulations are established to avoid both actual and
potential conflict between the private self-interest and the public interest
of officials and employees of the city.



   (1)   Financial or personal interest. No official or employee of the
city, either on his or her own behalf or on behalf of any other person, shall
have any financial or personal interest in any business transaction with any
public body of the city, unless he or she shall first make full public
disclosure of the nature and extent of such interest.



   (2)   Disclosure and disqualification. Whenever the performance of
his or her official duties shall require any official or employee of the city
to deliberate and vote on any matter involving his or her financial or
personal interest, he or she shall publicly disclose the nature and extent of
such interest and disqualify himself or herself from participating in the
deliberations as well as in the voting.



   (3)   Incompatible employment. No official or employee of the city
shall engage in private employment with, or render service for, any private
person who has business transactions with any public body of the city without
first making a full public disclosure of the nature and extent of such
employment or services.



   (4)   Representation of private persons. No official or employee of
the city shall use or attempt to use his or her official position to secure
special privileges or exemptions for himself, herself or others, except as
may be otherwise provided by law.



   (5)   Confidential information. No official or employee shall,
without prior formal authorization of the public body having jurisdiction,
disclose any confidential information concerning any other official or
employee of the city or any other person or any property or governmental
affairs of the city. Whether or not it shall involve disclosure, no official
or employee shall use or permit the use of any such confidential information
to advance a financial or personal interest of himself, herself or any other
person.



(1978 Code, § 2-155)



2-156.  CONTENTS OF FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   Whenever a disclosure is required by this article, the following
information shall be included in each financial disclosure statement: the
identity of all persons involved in the outside interest and the source and
amount of income derived from the outside interest that may be considered as
resulting from employment, investment or gift.



(1978 Code, § 2-156)



2-157.  VERIFICATION OF FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.



   Any person required to file a financial disclosure statement in
accordance with the provisions of this article must verify, in writing, under
penalty of perjury, that the information in the statement is true and
complete as far as he or she knows.



(1978 Code, § 2-157)



2-158.  DUTIES OF CITY CLERK UNDER ARTICLE.



   The City Clerk shall develop the forms necessary for the implementation
of this article in conjunction and with the advice of the City Attorney. The
City Clerk shall furnish written instructions explaining the duties of
persons required to file under this article. The City Clerk shall examine all
financial statements filed pursuant to this article and report irregularities
immediately to the person filing the statement and to the City Attorney.
Acceptance of the statement by the City Clerk shall not constitute approval
of the statement. The City Clerk shall maintain a current list of all
financial statements required to be available for public disclosure on file
in his or her office. The City Clerk shall preserve all financial statements
for at least three years after the date on which they are filed. The City
Clerk shall make the statement required to be publicly available for
inspection during regular business hours. The City Clerk shall supply
appropriate forms to anyone required under this article to file a financial
disclosure statement.



(1978 Code, § 2-158)



2-159.  VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction, be punished as prescribed in § 1-9 of this Code. The penalty or
penalties imposed are not exclusive remedies under this article and any and
all statutory and Charter penalties or forfeitures may also be enforced. Any
person convicted under the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty
of misconduct.



(1978 Code, § 2-159)



2-160-2-169.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  PERSONNEL POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR EMPLOYEES OF 41-A DISTRICT
COURT



2-170.  INTENT AND PURPOSE.



   Public Act 388 of 1996 provides that a district funding unit is the
employer of the locally-funded employees of the District Court within that
district. The City of Sterling Heights is the district funding unit of the
41-A District Court, Sterling Heights Division. Pursuant to Public Act 388 of
1996, the City of Sterling Heights, in concurrence with the Chief Judge of
the District Court, has the following authority:



   (A)   To establish personnel policies and procedures, including but
not limited to policies and procedures relating to compensation, fringe
benefits, pensions, holidays, leave, work schedules, discipline, grievances,
personnel records, probation and hiring and termination practices;



   (B)   To make and enter into collective bargaining agreements with
representatives of the locally-funded employees of the District.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-171.  DEFINITIONS.



   The terms, words and phrases listed in this section, whenever used in
this article, shall have the following meanings.



   ACT 388. Public Act 388 of 1996, as amended.



   CHIEF JUDGE. The Chief Judge of the 41-A District Court of the 41-A
District Court.



   LOCALLY-FUNDED EMPLOYEES. Persons employed in the 41-A District Court
who receive any compensation as a direct result of an annual budgeted
appropriation approved by the City Council of the City of Sterling Heights
but does not include a judge of the 41-A District Court.



   EMPLOYEES. Those locally funded employees assigned to the 41-A District
Court who are not members of a collective bargaining unit.



   JUDGE. Those judges elected to the 41-A District Court who regularly
hold court in the City of Sterling Heights.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-172.  WORK WEEK DEFINED.



   The normal work week shall be seven hours per day, 35 hours per week.
The normal work week shall be five days, Monday through Friday, with normal
work hours of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-173.  HOLIDAYS.



   Paid holidays for the employees and judges of the 41-A District Court
are designated as follows.



   New Year’s Day       Martin Luther King, Jr. Day
             President's Day



   Good Friday          Memorial
Day                     Fourth of July



   Labor Day             Veteran’s Day
                     Columbus Day



   Thanksgiving Day       Friday following Thanksgiving Day
      December 24



   Christmas Day          Presidential Election Day
            December 31            Employee’s
Birthday



   (A)   The employee’s birthday must be taken within 20 calendar
days, before or after the employee’s birth date, unless the court and
employee agree to extend the period of time in which that holiday may be
taken.  If the employee does not take the birthday holiday within that
designated period of time, the employee shall forfeit that holiday.



   (B)   The employee must work or be on paid leave the day before a
holiday and the succeeding work day after a holiday in order to receive the
holiday pay.



   (C)   Employees working on an approved holiday will be paid for
hours worked at the rate of two times the normal pay rate plus holiday pay.



   (D)   Should a full paid holiday fall on Saturday, then the Friday
preceding that day will be taken as the paid holiday; if the full paid
holiday falls on a Sunday, then the Monday following shall be taken as a paid
holiday.  When Christmas Eve or New Year’s Eve (December 31) falls on a
Friday, the preceding Thursday shall be taken as the paid holiday.  When
Christmas Eve or New Year’s Eve falls on Saturday or Sunday, the preceding
Friday shall be taken as the paid holiday.



   (E)   Holidays, as listed above, that fall within an employee’s
vacation period will not be considered as part of a vacation and shall be
taken by extending the vacation period one day for each such holiday or
crediting an additional day at the discretion of the Chief Judge.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 373, § 1, 10-19-04; Ord. No. 416, §
1, 7-05-11; Ord. No. 459, § 1, 9-18-18)



2-174.  LEAVE.



   (A)   All full-time employees hired prior to July 1, 2008 shall be
entitled to paid vacation leave under the following schedule:



      (1)   Employees who have completed one year of service shall
be granted ten work days vacation without loss of pay;



      (2)   Employees who have completed five years of service shall
be granted 19 work days vacation without loss of pay;



      (3)   Employees who have completed ten years of service shall
be granted 20 work days vacation without loss of pay;



      (4)   Employees who have completed 20 years of service shall
be granted 22 work days vacation without loss of pay.



   (B)   All full-time employees hired after July 1, 2008 shall be
entitled to paid vacation leave under the following schedule:



      (1)   Employees who have completed one to nine years of
service shall be granted ten work days vacation without loss of pay;



      (2)   Employees who have completed ten or more years of
service shall be granted an additional work day for each year of completed
service up to a maximum of 20 work days vacation without loss of pay.



   (C)   Employees who lose time due to on-the-job disability under
worker’s compensation up to a maximum of one year shall receive their
vacation as though the time was worked;



   (D)   Vacation days can only be accumulated in the amount not exceed
30 days, except that employees will have the following year to use the
vacation credited for the year just earned;



   (E)   In case of retirement, resignation in good standing or death
of an employee, the employee or their estate will be paid for all vacation
days which have accumulated to their credit;



   (F)   Vacation selection shall be year around and can be taken on a
per day basis if approved by the court. In case of illness, employees can use
their vacation time, if needed, after all sick time and benefits are
exhausted;



   (G)   Employees absent for more than one month, for other than
worker’s compensation disability, will not earn vacation pay.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 370-A, § 1, 1-06-09)



2-175.  SICK LEAVE.



   Sick leave will be available to employees subject to the following
terms.



   All employees will accrue sick leave at the rate of one day for each
full month paid status of employment. Maximum sick leave earned per year
shall be 12 days. Sick leave days shall be accumulated to a maximum of 19
days at the end of the fiscal year.



   At the end of the fiscal year, employees may convert up to three sick
days from their sick leave bank to be used as personal days during the next
fiscal year. Converted days not used within that year will be lost.



   As of June 30 of each year, all employees in excess of seven days in
their sick bank will have an option of receiving compensation computed on the
basis of 50% of the regular hourly rate as of that date for all sick leave in
excess of seven days or may receive the equivalent in "personal time" with
pay during the next subsequent fiscal year.



   The use of "personal time" is subject to approval in advance, but may
be requested for use for any reason by the employee. Personal time shall be
available for use by the employee in units of one hour or more.



   Should an employee fail to use the "personal time" during the next
fiscal year, said "personal time" would be lost to the employee.



   The steps outlined above will continue each year with payment for
choice of "personal time" to be calculated and paid after the first pay
period that ends in June.



   Accumulated sick leave may be used because of the following:



   (A)   Acute personal illness or incapacity over which the employee
has no reasonable control;



   (B)   Absence from work because of exposure to a contagious disease
which, according to public health standards, would constitute a danger to the
health of others by the employee’s attendance at work;



   (C)   Sick leave shall be available for use by employees in units of
one hour or more, except when an employee gets sick while on the job or has a
doctor or dental appointment requested in advance then they may utilize sick
time in one-quarter hour units;



   The employee will be required to provide verification from the doctor
or dentist upon request of the court.



   Employees using sick leave during a period that includes a scheduled
holiday will be paid for the holiday. The employee cannot be paid for both on
the same day, nor will the employee be charged for a day of sick leave.



   An employee absent for more than one month, with the exception of paid
vacation and paid leave of absence, will earn a sick leave day for the first
month only.



   Employees off on sick leave shall be required to bring in a doctor’s
slip if the court requests it. The court may require an examination of the
employee following an illness or injury by a doctor of the court’s choice
on court time and at court expense.



   The printed application for leave form must be filled out completely
and properly signed and submitted by the employee for sick leave absences.



   Upon the employee’s death, retirement or resignation in good
standing, the court will pay 50% of the accumulated unused sick leave.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-176.  PERSONAL LEAVE.



   Employees shall be entitled to two personal business days for each
fiscal year. Personal business days may not be accumulated from one fiscal
year to another. The use of personal time is subject to approval by the
court, but may be requested for use for any reason by the employee. Personal
time shall be available for use by the employee in units of 15 minutes or
more.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-177.  BEREAVEMENT LEAVE.



   Bereavement leave shall be available to employees on the following
terms:



   (A)   Employees will be paid up to five days absence in the case of
a death in his or her immediate family. Immediate family is defined as
father, mother, brother, sister, child, wife or husband, mother-in-law,
father-in-law, stepmother, stepfather or stepchild, grandparents or
grandchildren. Employees, in order to be paid, must attend the services.



   (B)   Employees will be paid up to three days absence in the case of
death of a sister-in-law, brother-in-law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law.
Employees, in order to be paid, must attend the services. If the funeral for
the above is to be held more than 250 miles from the Metropolitan Detroit
area, funeral leave must be extended from three days to five days.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-178.  OTHER LEAVE.



   Any employee that is required to serve on jury duty will suffer no loss
of pay but rather will be paid the difference between the jury pay, subpoena
pay and their regular pay.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-179.  COMPENSATORY TIME.



   There shall be compensatory time for the employees to be computed at
one and one-half times the hours worked in excess of 35 hours in any
particular week.



   For the magistrate/court administrator position, only, compensatory
time may be accumulated to a maximum of 235 hours with a buy-back maximum of
130 hours and time off maximum of 105 hours.



   For the Clerk of the Court position, only, compensatory time may be
accumulated to a maximum of 210 hours with a buy-back maximum of 105 hours
and time off maximum of 105 hours.



   For all other employees, compensatory time may be accumulated to a
maximum of 149 hours with a buy-back maximum of 44 hours and time off maximum
of 105 hours.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 423, § 1, 1-2-13; Ord. No. 459, § 2,
9-18-18)



2-180.  INJURY OR ILLNESS ARISING OUT OF AND IN THE COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   For loss of time on account of injury or illness arising out
of and in the course of employment, an employee shall receive full pay for up
to one full week, five work days, without drawing on his or her sick leave
accumulation for any one injury or illness, but shall not be allowed on
reoccurrence of same injury or illness. An employee who continues on
worker’s compensation may be paid the difference between his or her regular
wages and payment under the provisions of the Worker’s Compensation Act. At
the employee’s option, the difference between the regular wages and
worker’s compensation will be offset by a reduction of accumulated sick
leave on a relative ratio of the regular base weekly wage as it is to the
worker’s compensation weekly rate. In no case shall an employee be
compensated by a combination of worker’s compensation and pro-rated sick
leave which will exceed the standard weekly income. If sick leave
accumulation is not available for the supplement to the worker’s
compensation, other available leave may be approved for utilization in the
sole discretion of the court.



   (B)   During the first 12 months of a duty-connected disability, the
employer will continue to provide hospitalization insurance, life insurance
and dental insurance at no cost to the employee. Sick leave will be earned
only during the first month per § 2-175.



   If an employee is unable to return to work after 12 months from the
date of the duty-connected disability, the employer shall cease to provide
the individual the benefits outlined in the paragraph above. If there is
leave time remaining, the leave time shall be paid to the employee calculated
on the employee’s appropriate hourly pay rate. The remaining unused sick
leave will be computed at 50%. Accrued vacation and, if appropriate, personal
time will be compensated at 100%.



   If the employee’s worker’s compensation claim is contested, the
benefits of subsection (A) will not be operative until the claim is settled
and is found to be in favor of the employee.  However, during this period,
the non-duty disability insurance would be available based upon the terms and
conditions of the policy.



   (C)   An employee who loses time on account of injury or illness
arising out of and in the course of employment with the 41-A District Court
shall continue as a seniority employee for a period of two years from the
date of the disability. An employee who is unable to return to work at the
end of the two year period shall cease to be a seniority employee.



   (D)   Employees, if requested, will be required to provide a report
from a doctor to support the employee’s request for sick leave and an
authorization from the doctor of his or her ability to return to work.



   (E)   Employees who lose time due to on-the-job disability under
worker’s compensation up to a maximum of one year shall receive their
vacation as though the time was worked.



   (F)   No loss of wages for follow-up doctor visits related to on-the
job injuries when the appointments are required by a medical doctor or a
doctor of osteopathic medicine; when these visits can be only scheduled
during working hours, a maximum of 12 hours will be allowed for follow-up
visits.



   (G)   An injured employee sent to a medical facility by the employer
during their scheduled work shift, who must await such medical treatment
beyond their scheduled work shift, shall be paid straight time up to a
maximum of two hours for that time seeking medical treatment.



   (H)   Where the injury or occupational disease for which
compensation is payable under the provision of the contract was caused under
circumstances creating a legal liability in some person other than a natural
person in the same employ of the employer to pay damages in respect thereof,
the acceptance of benefits or the taking of proceedings to enforce payment
shall not act as an election of remedies, but the injured employee or his or
her dependents or their personal representative may also proceed to enforce
the liability of the third party for damages in accordance with the
provisions of this section. If the injured employee or his or her dependents
or personal representative does not commence such action within one year
after the occurrence of the personal injury or occupational disease, then the
employer or its worker’s compensation insurance carrier or other insurance
carrier may, within the period of time for the commencement of actions
prescribed by statute, enforce the liability of such other person in the name
of that person. Not less than 30 days before the commencement of suit by any
party under this section, the party shall notify, by registered mail at their
last known address, the injured employee or, in the event of his or her
death, his or her known dependents or personal representative or his or her
known next of kin and his or her employer. Any party in interest shall have a
right to join in said suit.



   (I)   Prior to the entry of judgment, either the employer or its
insurance carrier or the employee or his or her personal representative may
settle their claims as their interest shall appear and may execute releases
therefor. The settlement and release by the employee shall not be a bar to
action by the employer or its compensation insurance carrier to proceed
against the third party for any interest or claim it might have.



   (J)   In the event the injured or his or her dependents or personal
representative shall settle their claim for injury or death or commence
proceeding thereon against the third party before the payment of benefits,
the recovery or commencement of proceedings shall not act as an election of
remedies and any monies so recovered shall be applied as herein provided.



   (K)   In an action to enforce the liability of a third party, the
plaintiff may recover any amount which the employee or his or her dependents
or personal representative would be entitled to recover in an action in tort.
Any recovery against the third party for damages resulting from personal
injuries or death only, after deducting expenses of recovery, shall first
reimburse the employer or its insurance carrier for any amounts paid or
payable under the provisions of this section to the date of recovery and the
balance shall be forthwith paid to the employee or his or her dependents or
his or her personal representative and shall be treated as an advance payment
by the employer on account of any future payment of benefits.



   (L)   Expenses of recovery shall be the reasonable expenditures,
including attorney fees, incurred in effecting the recovery. Attorney fees,
unless otherwise agreed upon, shall be divided among the attorneys for the
plaintiff as directed by the court. The expenses of recovery above mentioned
shall be apportioned by the court between the parties as their interests
appear at the time of said recovery.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-181.  INJURY OR ILLNESS OUTSIDE THE SCOPE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   (A)   At no cost to the full-time regular employee, the employer
shall provide non-duty disability insurance coverage as follows:



   Short Term Disability Insurance



   Short Term Disability Income Benefit   60%



   Elimination (Waiting) Period         7 days accident



   Maximum Duration            26 weeks



   Long Term Disability Income Benefit



   Long Term Disability Income Benefit   60%



   Elimination (Waiting) Period         180 days



   Maximum Duration            Sickness to 65, Accident to 65



   Employees who lose time from work on account of non-duty injury or
illness may utilize their available sick leave bank during the short-term
disability waiting period of seven days. (Vacation time may be approved for
utilization upon exhausting available sick time based upon the sole
discretion of the court.)



   During the first four months of a non-duty connected disability, the
employer will continue to provide hospitalization insurance, life insurance
and dental insurance. Sick leave and vacation leave will be earned only
during the first month of non-duty connected disability.



   (B)   The 41-A District Court will continue a non-duty disabled
employee’s health coverage, when they have filed a disputed worker’s
compensation claim, for 12 months or until the disputed claim is decided.
Should the injury be determined to be not work related, then arrangements
will be made for the employee to pay the cost for those excess months of
coverage back to the 41-A District Court.



   (C)   If an employee is unable to return to work after four months
from the date of the non-duty connected disability, the employer shall cease
payment for the fringe benefits outlined in the paragraph above. Thereafter,
employees will be afforded their rights under (C.O.B.R.A) the Consolidated
Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act.



   (D)   If an employee is unable to return to work after six months
from the date of the non-duty connected disability, all remaining leave time
shall be paid to the employee based upon the appropriate hourly rate. The
remaining unused sick leave will be computed at 50%. Accrued vacation and if
appropriate, personal time will be compensated at 100%.



   (E)   An employee who is unable to return to work after 12 months
from the date of the non-duty connected disability shall cease to be a
seniority employee. He or she shall be given consideration for future
employment.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-182.  LIFE INSURANCE.



   For employees hired prior to July 1, 2008,life insurance shall be
carried for employees at no cost to the employee in an amount equal to one
and one-half times the employee’s base salary. Retirees will also be
provided with term life insurance in the amount of $20,000, until age 70. For
employees hired after July 1, 2008, life insurance shall be carried for
employees at no cost to the employee in an amount equal to one and one-half
times the employee’s base salary to a maximum of $100,000. Retirees will
also be provided with term life insurance in the amount of $10,000, until age
70.  Only employees meeting the definition of "retiree" in § 2-187 of this
article are eligible for retiree term life insurance.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 370, § 1, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 370-A, §
2, 1-06-09; Ord. No. 459, § 3, 9-18-18)



2-183.  MEDICAL AND HOSPITALIZATION BENEFITS.



   (A)   The basic medical and hospitalization coverage plan for all
members as of January 1, 2019 shall be Simply Blue 2000 High Deductible Plan,
with a prescription drug benefit plan, and annual health savings account
(HSA) contributions by the City of $2,400 (two-person or family) and $1,200
(single person).  Employees will pay the following percentages of the health
insurance premium using the BCBS illustrative rate for medical and
prescription drugs (not adjusted by the City) and the City's Health Savings
Account contributions. 



   January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019 – 0%



   January 1, 2020 to December 31, 2020 – 0%



   January 1, 2021 to December 31, 2021 – 5%



   After January 1, 2022 -                              10%



   Any deductions for premium sharing made by employees shall be on a
pre-tax basis in accordance with Internal Revenue regulations.



   The maximum city cost for the provision of the basic medical and
hospitalization coverage plan, prescription drug benefit, and Health Savings
account employer funding is the Hard Cap from Public Act 152 of 2011.
Employees are financially responsible for any costs in excess of the Hard Cap
from Public Act 152.



   (B)   The employer has a program to coordinate and to eliminate
overlapping health care coverage. Each full-time employee or retiree who
chooses not to enroll in the city-sponsored health care plan and whose spouse
or parent provides coverage shall be paid $3,000 each calendar year that the
spouse or parent has coverage. The annual allowance amount will be prorated
and paid monthly for every month that the employee is eligible. Payments to
retirees will be made annually, in December, to each retiree who has not been
enrolled in any city-sponsored health care plan, except that payments will be
prorated monthly to meet the dates in this plan.



   Employees or retirees shall be required to show proof that a spouse or
parent has health care coverage that includes the employee and retiree and
their dependents before said employee will be declared eligible to receive
the annual allowance amount.



   (C)   The city reserves the privilege to offer enrollment in
alternative medical and hospitalization coverages to employees on a voluntary
basis.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 370, § 2, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 370-A, §
3, 1-06-09; Ord. No. 423, § 2, 1-2-13; Ord. No. 459, § 4, 9-18-18)



2-184.  DENTAL INSURANCE.



   The court shall provide at no cost to the employee the Blue Cross/Blue
Shield DENTAL Program as outlined as follows:



   Blue Cross/Blue Shield Dental Plan



   Coverage Description and Limits:



   Class I:    Diagnostic services, preventive service and palliative
treatment are covered at 75% of reasonable charges.



   Class II:    Restorative endodontic periodontic services, oral
surgery, repairs, adjustments and relining of dentures and bridges and
adjunctive general services are covered at 75% of reasonable charges.



   Class III:    Construction and replacement of dentures and bridges
are covered at 75% of reasonable charges.



   Class IV:    Orthodontic services are covered at 50% of reasonable
charges.



   Each member is entitled to maximum benefits of $1,000 every contract
year.



   Each member, up to age 19, has a lifetime maximum benefit of $1,000
available for orthodontic services.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-185.  OPTICAL INSURANCE.



   The City will provide a maximum reimbursement of $150 to each employee
(not spouse or dependents) for eye examinations and prescription eyewear each
fiscal year. Receipts must be provided to the employer for processing the
reimbursement.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 370-A, § 4, 1-06-09; Ord. No. 459, §
5, 9-18-18)



2-186.  RETIREMENT PROGRAM.



   A retirement program for the employees of the 41-A Judicial District
Court, which has as its District Control Unit, the City of Sterling Heights,
Michigan, was created and established on July 1, 1969.



   This retirement system was enacted to attract and retain competent
employees to the 41-A District Court through a deferred benefit plan which
permits the employees to participate in the plan by entering into an
agreement with the employer, the City of Sterling Heights, whereby a portion
of the employee's salary will be deferred for the purpose of providing other
retirement benefits or death benefits in the event of death prior to
retirement.



   The pension program for employees hired before July 1, 1996 shall
remain as provided in the City Charter and Code of Ordinances, except as
modified below:



   For service earned prior to July 1, 2013, the factor used to determine
an employee's pension shall be 2.3% multiplied by the number of years of
service, in turn, multiplied by the final average compensation. The factor
shall be 2% times the number of years of service earned on and after July 1,
2013 times the final average compensation. Final average compensation shall
be based on the best three years of the last ten years.



   All taxable income earned shall be used in computing the employee
contribution and final average compensation and shall include income paid
into any deferred compensation plan. Pension shall be fully vested after five
years service.



   Employees shall be allowed the option of retiring after completion of
years of service plus age totaling 75 or more or after completion of 30 years
at any age. The employee's contribution to the retirement system shall be 8%
of their annual compensation.



   A full-time employee who is eligible for a deferred retirement as
defined by § 41-29 of Chapter 41 of the City Code may continue full-time
employment while receiving deferred retirement benefits.



   Effective July 1, 1996, all new court employees shall receive
retirement benefits through a defined contribution pension plan established
by the City of Sterling Heights.  The city contribution to a new court
employees defined contribution pension plan account shall be 4% of base
salary. The new court employees will not be entitled to the retirement
benefits provided pursuant to Chapter 41 of the Sterling Heights Code of
Ordinances.



   The defined contribution plan benefits will be in lieu of all Sterling
Heights Charter and/or ordinance pension entitlements.  While the defined
contribution plan benefits are mandatory for new hires, there may also be an
option for existing employees who may choose such benefits in lieu of those
provided by the Sterling Heights Charter or in the Code of Ordinances.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 327A, § 1, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 370, §
3, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 416, § 4, 7-5-11; Ord. No. 423, § 3, 1-2-13; Ord. No.
428, § 1, 6-18-13)



2-187.  MEDICAL COVERAGE FOR RETIREES.



   Employees hired after July 1, 2012 shall not receive medical,
hospitalization, and prescription coverage (collectively "retiree medical
coverage") upon retirement.   



   Employees hired by the city prior to July 1, 2012 and qualifying as a
retiree shall receive retiree medical coverage under the following terms and
conditions:



   Employer will provide the retired employee/spouse medical,
hospitalization, and prescription coverage. 



   The retiree medical coverage for an eligible employee retiring after
July 1, 2018 will be the Simply Blue 2000 High Deductible Medical and
Prescription Drug Plan, and annual health savings account (HSA) contributions
by the City of $2,400 (two-person or family) and $1,200 (single person). 
The combined Medical, Prescription Drug, and Health Savings Account costs are
subject to a 10% premium share; however, the retiree medical coverage
benefits will be subject to changes as determined by amendments to the
medical and hospitalization benefits provided to current employees. Changes
in the retiree medical coverage benefits shall be limited to two amendments
in retirement. In the event that either of the two post-retirement amendments
results in no medical, hospitalization, and prescription coverages for
current employees, the retiree's retiree medical coverage benefits will
continue with the benefits applicable at the time the change to no medical
benefits for current employees takes effect.



   Employees hired between July 1, 2008 and June 30, 2012 shall be
required to pay 50% of the premium for retiree medical coverage upon
retirement.  If an employee is responsible to pay a percentage of the
premium for retiree medical coverage based upon his or her city hire date at
the time of promoting to a position covered by the provisions of Article V,
the financial obligation shall continue for the employee upon retirement. 
The 50% premium share is inclusive of the 10% premium share applicable to all
employees upon retirement.  Payments in satisfaction of the employee's
percentage share of the retiree medical coverage in retirement will be
invoiced by the City on a monthly basis for the proceeding month.  If
payment is not made by the 15th of the month coverage shall be canceled
effective the 1st of the following month.



   The spouse of a deceased retiree shall continue to receive retiree
medical coverage as long as he or she does not remarry and: (a) continues to
receive a pension from the city; or, (b) is the surviving spouse of a
District Court Judge who qualified for retiree medical coverage as a retiree
in accordance with this section. The spouse of a deceased retiree that
received defined contribution pension benefits shall continue to receive
retiree medical coverage so long as the surviving spouse does not remarry.



   Upon reaching Medicare eligibility due to age or disability, the
retiree and/or spouse must apply for Medicare coverage. When a retiree ages
into Medicare, the city will provide a plan that is comparable to the retiree
medical coverage in force prior to Medicare.  Retirees are responsible for
paying any costs associated with Medicare coverages.



   In the event a retired employee or their spouse obtains employment and
the subsequent employer provides hospitalization and medical insurance, they
shall not be eligible for retiree medical coverage for the duration of the
employment.



   For the purposes of qualifying for retiree medical coverage under this
section, the term RETIREE is defined as:



   (a)   Any employee who retires by virtue of fulfilling both the age
and service requirement for full retirement (for example, years of service
plus age totaling 75 or more, 30 years of service at any age);



   (b)   Any of the preceding employees who retires as the result of a
duty-connected disability;



   (c)   A District Court Judge who retires and is eligible for a full
state judicial pension; or



   (d)   A District Court Judge elected prior to July 1, 2012 who has
served 15 or more continuous years.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 327-A, § 1, 12-7-99; Ord. No. 370, §
4, 1-20-04; Ord. No. 370-A, § 5, 1-06-09; Ord. No. 423, § 4, 1-2-13; Ord.
No. 459, § 6, 9-18-18)



2-188.  MILITARY SERVICE CREDIT.



   An employee participating in the defined benefit pension program shall
be given service credit for not more than four years of active military
service to the United States Government who is employed subsequent to this
military service upon payment to the retirement system of 5% of their full
time or equated full time compensation for the fiscal year in which payment
is made, multiplied by the years of service that the member elects to
purchase up to the maximum. Service shall not be creditable if it is or would
be creditable under any other federal, state or locally publicly supported
retirement system. Purchase for this time may be accomplished in increments
of not less than one year at a time (or fraction of a year, if there is less
than a year to purchase left).



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97)



2-189.  LONGEVITY PAYMENTS.



   (A)   District Court Judges.



      (1)   Effective July 1, 2018, District Court Judges will
receive longevity payments on the following basis:



         (a)   4% of base pay after 12 years of continuous
service;



         (b)   6% of base pay after 18 years of continuous
service;



         (c)   8% of base pay after 15 years of continuous
service;



         (d)   10% of base pay after 20 or more years of
continuous service.



   (B)   Other employees. Effective July 1, 2018, all other employees
will receive longevity payments on the following basis:



      (1)   .67% of base pay after two years of continuous service;



      (2)   1.33% of base pay after five years of continuous service;



      (3)   2.67% of base pay after ten years of continuous service;



      (4)   4% of base pay after 15 years of continuous service;



      (5)   5.34% of base pay after 20 years of continuous service;



      (6)   6.67% of base pay after 25 years of continuous service.



   Longevity pay shall be based upon the total number of continuous,
completed full years as of the employee's anniversary date and shall be paid
in July of each year following the anniversary date. Upon the death or
retirement of an employee, the employee or the estate will be paid at a
prorated amount of longevity.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97 1-20-04; Ord. No. 416, § 5, 7-5-11; Ord. No.
423, § 5, 1-2-13; Ord. No. 459, § 7, 9-18-18)



2-190.  WAGES FOR REHIRES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding City Code § 41-30 or any other provision of
the City Code, an employee who retires and is a participant in the General
Employee Retirement System may be re-employed, after separation from
employment for a minimum of 30 calendar days, in the same position with the
41A District Court on the following terms:



      (1)   The salary paid to a retiree rehired pursuant to this
section will be the equivalent of 60% of the base annual salary previously
being earned at the time of retirement; provided, that the calculation of
salary will be adjusted to match that provided to retired non-police and fire
members of the MAPE Executive Group upon re-employment.



      (2)   The retiree rehired pursuant to this section shall, at a
minimum, work the court calendar and normal hours of work established for the
41-A District Court. On the date of rehire, and annually on this date
thereafter, a re-employed retiree will be credited with vacation days in a
number equivalent to the number of days the retiree would have been allocated
for the retiree's next continuous year of service had the retiree not
retired. Unused vacation days do not accrue and are lost if not utilized by
the re-employed retiree's re-hire anniversary date annually. There is no
payout of unused vacation time upon any separation from employment.  Other
than salary and vacation time, a retiree rehired pursuant to this section
shall not receive any other wages or benefits provided to current employees
pursuant to this chapter.  The pension and retirement benefits of a retiree
rehired pursuant to this section shall not be suspended during the term of
re-employment.



      (3)   The term of re-employment of a retiree is limited to two
years unless extended in the discretion of the Chief Judge.



(Ord. No. 423, § 7, 1-2-13; Ord. No. 428, § 2, 6-18-13)



2-191.  JUDGES.



   This article shall not be applicable to the judges, except for §
2-180, injury or illness arising out of and in the course of employment, §
2-181, injury or illness outside the scope of employment, § 2-182, life
insurance, § 2-183, medical and hospitalization benefits, § 2-184, dental
insurance, § 2-185, optical insurance, § 2-186, retirement program (as
eligible), § 2-187, medical coverage for retirees and § 2-189, longevity
payments.



(Ord. No. 327, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 423, § 6, 1-2-13)



2-192-2-202.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  PURCHASING



2-203.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Purchasing
Ordinance of the City of Sterling Heights."



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-204.  INTENT. 



   It is the intent of this article to maximize the purchasing power and
value of public funds through purchase procedures and policies that maintain
a system of quality and integrity and promote efficiency, effectiveness, and
fairness in public purchasing.  It is the goal of this article to
acknowledge the obligation to city taxpayers to maximize the purchasing power
of public funds to gain the best value for its residents and businesses.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-205.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meanings given in this section.



   APPROPRIATION.  An authorization by the City Council to expend a
specified amount of public funds for a specific purpose.



   CHANGE ORDER.  A mutually agreeable alteration of an original business
or construction contract relating to goods and services. It often details a
new plan, including changes in services, materials, and designs that the city
and contractor or vendor have mutually agreed upon.



   CONTRACTUAL SERVICES.  The rental, repair or maintenance of equipment,
machinery, and other city-owned or leased property. The term shall not
include professional, insurance and personal services or other contractual
services which are in their nature unique and not subject to competition.



   COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.  An agreement to purchase supplies or services
with the State of Michigan or another public entity, including but not
limited to a city, county, village, school district, or an association,
group, or trade network of public entities.



   CONTRACT.  Any agreement entered into by the city with an individual
or firm for the purchase of supplies, materials, equipment, contractual
services or construction, including a purchase order, but not including a
collective bargaining agreement.



   COMPETITIVE BIDS.  A method of acquiring supplies, services, or
construction for public use where the award is made to the lowest responsive
and responsible bidder whose bid meets the bid specifications established by
the city for the goods, services, or construction sought that does not
include discussions or negotiations with bidders. Except for competitive bids
electronically submitted, competitive bids must be sealed. 



   ELECTRONIC.  Electrical, digital, magnetic, wireless, optical,
electromagnetic, or similar technology.



   EMERGENCY PURCHASE.  A purchase of supplies or services during or in
response to an emergency which is authorized by the City Manager or his or
her designee, or Purchasing Manager under the City Code.



   INVITATION TO BID.  A solicitation to prospective bidders to submit a
competitive bid with respect to the purchase of supplies, services, or
construction items which are sought to be purchased by the city by means of
the competitive bid process.



   PETTY EXPENDITURE FUND.  A revolving fund established in the City
Treasury from which incidental purchases not exceeding $50.00 established by
the Purchasing Manager may be made by authorized employees.



   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.  Types of personal services rendered to the
public by members of a recognized profession which involve extended analysis,
exercise of discretion, and independent judgment in their performance and an
advanced, specialized type of knowledge, expertise or training customarily
acquired either by a prolonged course of study or equivalent experience in
the field, making such services unique and not subject to price competition
in the ordinary sense.  Professional services include, but are not limited
to, those that require as a condition precedent to the rendering of the
services the obtaining of a license or other legal authorization.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.  All city public works, including street,
sidewalk, sewer, water, drain, park, recreation and building projects.



   PURCHASING CARDS.  A method by which authorized users may make small
purchases or acquire services not exceeding specified dollar limitations
established by the Purchasing Manager through use of a commercial credit card
or other card issued by a participating store or vendor.



   REQUEST FOR INFORMATION.  A written request issued by the Purchasing
Manager or other requesting department to obtain information necessary to
prepare specifications that may be included in a future invitation to bid or
request for proposals, or a written request from a prospective contractor,
vendor or professional to clarify a bid document or request for proposal
document.



   REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS.  A written solicitation to prospective
contractors, vendors, or professionals issued by the Purchasing Manager or
other requesting department where other factors besides price will be
considered in the selection of contractor, vendor, or professional, or where
negotiations with one or more contractors, vendors, or professionals are
anticipated or required to reach a final contract with the contractor,
vendor, or professional. While a request for proposals is a method of
soliciting competitive prices for supplies, services, or construction items
intended to achieve the same objective as competitive bids, a request for
proposals may not be used where competitive sealed bids are required by law.



   REQUEST FOR QUOTATIONS.  A request made by the Purchasing Manager to
prospective contractors or vendors by telephone, facsimile, or electronic
mail to obtain prices for contracts estimated to be not more than $10,000.00
for specifically described supplies or services sought to be purchased for
public use where the described supplies or services are readily available on
the open market and where price is the primary factor in selecting a
contractor or vendor. 



   RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.  A prospective contractor, vendor, or professional
which has the capacity in all respects to fully perform the contract
requirements, and the experience, integrity, perseverance, reliability,
capacity, facilities, equipment, and financial resources and credit which
will maximize the likelihood of satisfactory performance.



   RESPONSIVE BIDDER.  A prospective contractor, vendor, or professional
which has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the
requirements set forth in the invitation for bids issued by the city.



   SUPPLIES.  All supplies, materials and equipment.



   TIE BIDS.  Responsive bids from responsible and responsive bidders
that are identical in price, terms, and conditions.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-206.  PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS TO BE MADE THROUGH OFFICE OF PURCHASING.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article or other
provisions of the City Code, the purchase of any supplies or contractual
services within the purview of this article shall be made through the office
of purchasing, and any agreement to purchase supplies or contractual services
contrary to the provisions of this article shall not be approved by the city
officials and shall not be binding upon the city.



   (B)   All contracts for construction of public improvements shall be
administered through the office of engineering, unless otherwise directed by
the City Manager or City Council.



   (C)   All purchases of supplies, services or construction items on
behalf of the city or its departments shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of this article, including the purchase of supplies, services or
construction utilizing funds donated to the city.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-207.  PURCHASE REQUISITIONS AND ESTIMATES.



   (A)   All departments purchasing supplies or contractual services,
either by or with the authorization of its supervisor, manager or director,
shall file with the Purchasing Manager detailed purchase requisitions or
estimates of their requirements in supplies and contractual services in such
manner at such times and for such future periods as the Purchasing Manager
shall establish. A department shall not be prevented from filing in the same
manner with the Purchasing Manager, at any time, a purchase requisition or
estimate for any supplies and contractual services, the need for which was
not foreseen when the detailed estimates were filed.



   (B)   The Purchasing Manager shall examine each purchase requisition
or estimate and shall have the authority to revise it as to quantity, quality
or estimated cost, but revisions as to quality shall be in accordance with
the standards, rules and regulations established pursuant to this article.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-208.  REQUIREMENT FOR APPROPRIATION; REQUIREMENT FOR ISSUANCE OF PURCHASE
ORDER.



   (A)   No contract for the purchase of supplies, contractual
services, construction items or professional services, with the exception of
emergency services under Section 15-10 of the City Code, shall be entered
into unless there has been a determination by the Finance and Budget Director
that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the allotment or
appropriation against which the charge for the purchase has been made.



   (B)   A purchase order or contract shall be issued for every
purchase of supplies or contractual services prior to any supplies or
contractual services being furnished.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-209.  METHODS OF PURCHASING SUPPLIES AND SERVICES.



   The following methods of purchasing shall be used to acquire supplies
and services for the city in the ordinary course of business except as
otherwise provided in this article:



   (A)   Competitive bids.



   (B)   Request for proposals.



   (C)   Request for quotation.



   (D)   Purchasing cards.



   (E)   Petty expenditure fund.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-210. COMPETITIVE BIDS.



   (A)   All purchases of and contracts for supplies and contractual
services, and contracts for construction of public improvements when the
estimated cost exceeds $10,000 shall be purchased by written contract from
the lowest responsible, responsive bidder following the competitive bid
process set forth in this article wherever possible, except as otherwise
specifically provided in this article.



   (B)   The department seeking to purchase supplies or contractual
services shall furnish the Purchasing Manager with itemized details or
specifications of the supplies or contractual services which shall be
incorporated into an invitation to bid and bid specifications.



   (C)   The Purchasing Manager shall give notice of any invitation to
bid with respect to purchasing supplies, contractual services, or contracts
for construction of public improvements as required by law.  The Purchasing
Manager may give additional notice, such as public postings, cable television
postings or broadcasts, mailed or electronic notice to prospective
contractors or vendors on the city's bidders' list or their trade
associations, postings on electronic bidding networks or bulletin boards,
advertisings in a print or electronic version of a newspaper generally
available within the city, or by any other means likely to reach prospective
contractors or vendors. 



   (D)   An invitation for bids, a request for proposals, or other
solicitation may be cancelled when such action is for good cause and in the
best interest of the city.  The reasons shall be made part of the contract
file and shall be available for inspection.  Notice of cancellation shall be
sent to all businesses from which bids or requests for proposals were
solicited if cancellation occurs prior to the date designated for responses
to be opened.  If cancellation occurs on or after the designated opening
date, only those businesses that responded to the solicitation shall be
notified of the cancellation.



   (E)   The Purchasing Manager shall issue addenda to the bid
specifications when there is a change to the bid specifications, and shall
notify prospective bidders of the addenda as required by law.  Notification
of the addenda may be given electronically, including but not limited to
posting on an electronic bid network, if such network was used to give notice
of the original invitation to bid.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-211.  COMPETITIVE BIDS - COMMUNICATION WITH BIDDERS.



   During the competitive bid process, there shall be no communication
between prospective bidders and city officers or employees relating to the
competitive bids except through the Purchasing Manager, unless it takes place
at a public pre-bid meeting or conference.  The Purchasing Manager may issue
written responses to any questions or requests for clarification to all
businesses from which bids or requests for proposal were solicited, which
were on the city's bidder list for the supply or service sought, or which
have been requested to be notified.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-212.  COMPETITIVE BIDS - WITHDRAWAL AND CORRECTION OF BIDS.



   (A)   A bidder may withdraw its bid at any time prior to the public
opening of the bids if the request for withdrawal is received electronically
or in writing at the location designated in the invitation for bids for
receipt of bids before the public bid opening.



   (B)   A bidder may correct its bid and resubmit it if it takes such
action prior to the public bid opening.  A bidder may not correct its bid
after the bids are opened.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-213. COMPETITIVE BIDS - BID DEPOSITS.



   Where determined to be appropriate by the Purchasing Manager or where
required by law, the Purchasing Manager may require a bid deposit or bid bond
in the amount specified in the specifications to be furnished with submission
of the competitive bid to ensure that the successful bidder executes a
written contract and complies with the insurance and other legal requirements
of the bid specifications within the prescribed time period. A bidder who
fails to execute a written contract or comply with the legal requirements to
begin work shall be subject to forfeiture of its bid deposit or bid bond.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-214. COMPETITIVE BIDS - BID SUBMISSION, OPENING AND TABULATION, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS TO CITY MANAGER AND CITY COUNCIL.



   (A)   Bids shall be submitted sealed to the City Clerk and shall be
identified as bids with the name of the bidding project clearly identified on
the envelope, or may be submitted by other means if authorized by law,
including electronic submissions. The City Clerk shall time-stamp all bid
envelopes when received. The Purchasing Manager shall retain a record of the
time that all electronic bids are received.  The city may require that all
bids be submitted electronically if permitted by law and specified in the
invitation for bids and bid specifications.



   (B)   Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in
the public notices, and the person opening the bids shall, at a minimum,
announce the names of the bidders.  Electronic bid opening and posting of
the required information shall satisfy this public opening requirement. 



   (C)   A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for
public inspection or be posted within a reasonable time period after
execution of a contract by the successful bidder.



   (D)   After opening and tabulating all bids received, the Purchasing
Manager shall submit his or her recommendation concerning the award of
contract to the City Manager, who shall review the bid and recommendation by
the Purchasing Manager and then forward the recommendation to the City
Council.  The Purchasing Manager shall not recommend award of a contract to
a contractor or vendor which is in default with respect to any obligations to
the city, including but not limited to breaches of contract and non-payment
of taxes, utility charges, fees, or other charges owed the city.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-215.  LATE BIDS.



   Late bids shall not be considered for award of a contract.  A bid is
late if it is received at the location designated in the invitation for bid
for receipt of bids after the time and date set for bid opening. An
electronically submitted bid is late if it is received electronically after
the bid submission deadline.  Bidders submitting bids that are late shall be
notified as soon as practicable.  The Purchasing Manager shall retain
documentation concerning late bids. 



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-216.  AWARD OF CONTRACT; DETERMINATION OF LOWEST RESPONSIBLE AND
RESPONSIVE BIDDER; AWARD OF CONTRACT; TIE BID.



   (A)   The Purchasing Manager or City Manager shall have the
authority to award contracts within the purview of this article when
competitive bids are not required and the amount of the contract does not
exceed $10,000.00. When competitive bids are required, or when the amount
exceeds the dollar amounts authorized to be awarded by the Purchasing
Manager, the City Council shall have the authority to award contracts within
the purview of this article.



   (B)   In determining the lowest responsible and responsive bidder,
in addition to price, the Purchasing Manager, City Manager, and City Council
shall consider:



      (1)   The ability, capacity and skill of the bidder to perform
the contract or provide the service required, and the bidder's prior
performance of previous contracts or services and compliance with applicable
laws and ordinances relating to similar contracts or services;



      (2)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide
the services promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or
interference;



      (3)   Whether the bid complies in all material respects with
the bid specifications;



      (4)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment,
experience and efficiency of the bidder;



      (5)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability
of the bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;



      (6)   The quality, availability and adaptability of the
supplies or contractual services to the particular use required;



      (7)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance
and service for the use of the supplies or services which are the subject of
the contract; and



      (8)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.



   (C)   The City Council shall award the contract to the lowest
responsible and responsive bidder unless it determines that it is in the best
interest of the city to award the contract to another bidder. 



   (D)   When the award is not given to the lowest responsible and
responsive bidder, a full and complete statement of the reasons for awarding
the contract elsewhere shall be prepared by the Purchasing Manager and filed
with the other documents relating to the bid.



   (E)   If all bids received are for the same total amount or unit
price, quality and service being equal, the contract shall be awarded to a
bidder whose business is based in Sterling Heights, or if there is no
Sterling Heights-based bidder, then to a Michigan-based bidder; otherwise, in
the case of tie bids, the Purchasing Manager shall award the contract to one
of the tie bidders by a drawing conducted in public in the presence of at
least one witness.



   (F)   The City Council may award multiple contracts or divide the
contract award if deemed in the best interest of the city and if the
specifications authorize multiple awards.



   (G)   The City Council shall have the authority to reject all bids,
parts of all bids or all bids for any one or more items that are part of the
supplies or contractual services included in the proposed contract, and waive
any and all defects or irregularities in the bids when the public interest
will be served by such an action, provided that no such waiver shall be made
of a defect that would affect the relative standing of the bidders.



   (H)   After the City Council has awarded the contract, the
Purchasing Manager shall notify the successful bidder, which shall sign the
contract (if required) and take all other actions necessary to the formation
of a contract in accordance with the invitation for bids, including the
posting of performance security, submission of proof of insurance, and
execution and delivery of any affidavits or other documents.



   (I)   The city reserves the right to purchase additional goods or
services after the award of the contract if the purchase is substantially
identical to those previously purchased, and if the Purchasing Manager makes
diligent inquiry as to the current market price and is reliably informed that
the price has not declined since the prior purchase.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-217.  EXEMPTIONS FROM COMPETITIVE BIDS.



   (A)   Competitive bids shall not be required with respect to the
following purchases unless otherwise required by law:



      (1)   Purchases of supplies, services, or construction items
with an estimated cost not more than $10,000.00.



      (2)   Equipment maintenance agreements and billings, utility
services and billings, contracted services invoices, insurance payments, or
similar services.



      (3)   Professional and consultant services (including legal,
accounting, architectural, engineering, surveying, construction management,
insurance, investment, advertising, marketing, fundraising, lobbying,
insurance and health care administration, and information technology and
energy efficiency consulting).



      (4)   Services to be provided to members of the public, such
as recreation or community education services where the entire cost is to be
reimbursed to the city by the members of the public who receive the services
or instruction (no payment to be made until contract amount has been received
from members of public.



      (5)   Sole source supplies and services.



      (6)   Contractual services, supplies, materials, and equipment
where the overriding consideration in purchasing is compatibility with
existing contractual services, supplies, materials or equipment.



      (7)   Intergovernmental contracts and cooperative purchases.



      (8)   Services to be performed by city personnel as authorized
by the Charter and City Code.



      (9)   Purchases where a 5/7 majority of the City Council has
determined that one of the following situation exists and that competitive
bids should be waived and is in the best interest of the city, applying the
standards of Section 2-216(B)(1) - (8):



         (a)   Time constraints do not allow for the normal bid
procedures;



         (b)   Past experience indicates that, for the subject of
the acquisition or sale, cost variances are negligible, and, therefore, the
bid procedure is not economically merited; or



         (c)   The subject of the acquisition is unique and can
only be obtained from a single vendor and the price is reasonable.  The
requirements of Section 2-223 shall apply to such sole source purchases.



   (B)   The Purchasing Manager may choose to use an alternate method
of obtaining competitive prices other than competitive bids (such as a
request for proposals) if deemed to be in the best interest of the city
unless competitive bids are required by law.



   (C)   The City Manager and City Council may use another competitive
solicitation process, such as a request for proposals, to obtain competitive
prices for supplies or services even though such supplies or services are
exempt from the competitive bid requirements of this article.  Exemption
from the requirements of competitive bids shall not preclude the Purchasing
Manager, City Manager or City Council from using the competitive bid
procedure to purchase exempt supplies, services, or construction items.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-218.  CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS.



   (A)   All construction contracts for services with an estimated cost
exceeding $10,000.00 shall be awarded using the competitive bid process.



   (B)   The office of engineering shall prepare bid specifications and
an invitation for bids for the proposed project.



   (C)   Notice of the invitation to bid shall be given as required by
law and as set forth in the competitive bid section of this article.



   The procedures of competitive bids as set forth in this article shall
be followed with respect to awards of construction contracts, except the
administrative functions performed by the Purchasing Manager with respect to
other types of competitively bid contracts shall be performed by the city
engineer for construction contracts.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-219.  PERFORMANCE BONDS AND PAYMENT BONDS FOR CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS.



   (A)   When a construction contract is awarded in an amount equal to
or more than the amount specified by law, the following bonds shall be
delivered to the city at or before the signing of the contract by the city
officials:



      (1)   A performance bond, satisfactory to the city and
executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the State, or
otherwise secured in a manner satisfactory to the city, in an amount equal to
100% of the price specified in the contract;



      (2)   A payment bond, satisfactory to the city and executed by
a surety authorized to do business in the State, or otherwise secured in a
manner satisfactory to the city, for the protection of all persons supplying
labor and materials to the contractor or its subcontractors for the
performance of the work provided for in the contract. The bond shall be in an
amount equal to 100 percent of the price specified in the contract.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to limit the authority of
the city engineer to require a performance bond, payment bond or other
security, in addition to the bonds required in subsection (A) in
circumstances other than those specified in subsection (A).



   (C)   The bid specifications or request for proposals may provide
for alternate or additional performance guarantees, or for the waiver of such
requirements where deemed in the best interest of the city.



   (D)   A change order may be executed without further competitive
bids and without City Council approval if there are available unencumbered
funds in the project budget to cover the cost of the change order, and if the
amount of the change order does not exceed 10% of the original contract
awarded to such bidder. Change orders not meeting the requirements of this
subsection or which exceed $10,000.00 shall require City Council approval.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-220.  REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS AND REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS.



   When the Purchasing Manager or City Manager determines that competitive
bids are not practical or advantageous to the city with respect to a purchase
estimated to cost no more than $10,000.00, the Purchasing Manager or the City
Manager  may award a contract by use of a request for qualifications or
request for proposals.  With respect to a purchase where the estimated cost
exceeds $10,000.00, the City Council may award a contract by use of a request
for qualifications or request for proposals.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-221.  EMERGENCY PURCHASES.



   (A)   In case of an apparent emergency which requires immediate
purchase of supplies or contractual services, the City Manager shall be
empowered to authorize the Purchasing Manager to secure by the request for
quotations method as set forth in this article  any supplies or contractual
services, regardless of the amount of the expenditure at the lowest
obtainable price.



   (B)   A full report of the circumstances of an emergency purchase
shall be filed by the Purchasing Manager with the City Council and shall be
entered in the minutes of the Council and shall be open to public inspection.



   (C)   The Purchasing Manager may prescribe, by rules and
regulations, the procedure under which emergency purchases by directors,
managers, and supervisors of departments may be made, which promptly shall be
filed with the City Clerk.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-222.  PETTY EXPENDITURES REVOLVING FUND.



   There is established in the City Treasury a Petty Expenditures Fund,
from which incidental purchases not exceeding $50.00 may be made by the head
of a department needing such supplies or services. The Purchasing Manager may
promulgate rules and regulations for the use of the Petty Expenditures
Revolving Fund, which promptly shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-223.  SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES.



   (A)   A contract for supplies, services or construction items where
the estimated cost is expected to be not more than $10,000.00 may be awarded
by the Purchasing Manager or the City Manager without competitive bids when
the Purchasing Manager or City Manager determines, after conducting a good
faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for
supplying the requested supply, service or construction item and that the
price is reasonable. With respect to purchases of supplies, services or
construction items where the estimated cost is expected to be more than
$10,000.00, the City Council may award a contract after determining by a
5/7th majority that there is only one contractor or vendor for the requested
purchase and that the price is reasonable. Documentation shall be furnished
that supports the sole source determination. The written documentation shall
be available for public inspection in the office of purchasing. The
Purchasing Manager, along with a representative from the requesting
department, shall conduct negotiations as appropriate.



   (B)   A sole source purchase shall be made at the lowest obtainable
price. With respect to purchases of supplies, services or construction items
with an estimated cost of more than $10,000.00, the Purchasing Manager shall
submit a report prior to approval of the City Council identifying the basis
for the determinations that the proposed successful contractor or vendor is
the sole source for the supplies, services or construction item sought to be
purchased and that the price is reasonable.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-224.  REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION.



   (A)   The Purchasing Manager or department seeking to make a
purchase of supplies or services of a nature that requires the preparation of
detailed, complex specifications in order to obtain the best supplies or
services to serve the long-term needs of the city may issue a request for
information requesting individuals or firms with experience and expertise in
the area which is the subject of the purchase to assist in providing
information that will enable the city to prepare specifications for the
purchase of such supplies and services. 



   (B)   A prospective contractor or vendor may submit a written
request for information seeking clarification of a bid document, request for
proposal or request for quotation.  The Purchasing Manager shall respond in
writing to a request for information submitted by a prospective contractor or
vendor requesting clarification of the bid specifications or request for
proposal by notifying all known prospective contractors or vendors which have
expressed interest in submitting a bid or proposal.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-225.  PURCHASING CARDS.



   (A)   The Purchasing Manager, with the approval of the City Manager,
may establish or participate in a purchasing card program established by a
vendor or approved financial institution offering such services to enable
city employees authorized by the Purchasing Manager to make small purchases
of supplies or services needed for official city business in amounts not
exceeding limits established by City Council resolution without utilizing the
petty expenditure fund or obtaining a purchase order.



   (B)   The purchasing card program shall require the vendor or
financial institution offering the program to provide to the city on a
monthly basis a written, itemized statement including the date of each
purchase, the amount of each purchase, a description of the item or service
purchased and the person making the purchase.



   (C)   The City Manager shall determine which city employees shall be
issued purchasing cards and the restrictions which should be imposed on the
amount and types and categories of items or services upon the employee
authorized to use the purchasing card to ensure that purchases are made only
for items or services within the scope of the employee's duties. The City
Manager or his or her designee shall be responsible for the general oversight
of the purchasing card policy.



   (D)   The Purchasing Manager, with the concurrence of the City
Manager, shall develop and implement policies and procedures to ensure that
the authorized employees recognize their responsibilities with respect to
use, care, custody and surrender of purchasing cards and may require
employees using the cards to sign agreements acknowledging their
responsibilities for the proper use and custody of the cards.



   (E)   The Purchasing Manager shall require the employee using the
card to submit documentation within a designated time period prior to
approval of payment of the bill specifying the official city business for
which the purchase of supplies or services was made.



   (F)   The purchasing card of an authorized employee shall be subject
to the purchase limitations established by the Purchasing Manager which have
been approved by the City Manager.  An employee shall not divide a purchase
into parts in order to circumvent the spending limitation imposed upon the
employee's card.



   (G)   The purchasing card shall not be used for personal use or for
unauthorized city business.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-226.  COOPERATIVE PURCHASING.



   The City Council shall have the authority to join with other units of
government in cooperative purchasing plans when it is in the best interests
of the city. The cooperative purchasing may include but is not limited to
joint or multiparty contracts between public purchasing units and open-ended
state or federal public purchasing unit contracts which are made available to
the city, notwithstanding any other provisions of this article. The city may
also utilize cooperative purchasing organizations, including those using
electronic bidding, to purchase supplies and services when deemed by the
Purchasing Manager, City Manager, or City Council to be in the best interest
of the city.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-227.  OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES NOT TO HAVE INTEREST IN PURCHASE ORDERS OR
CONTRACTS; ACCEPTANCE OF REBATES, GIFTS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   Any purchase order or contract within the purview of this
article in which the Purchasing Manager or any officer or employee of the
city is financially interested, directly or indirectly, shall be void, unless
the City Council determines by a 5/7 majority vote before the execution of a
purchase order or contract that  such action is in the best interest of the
city, subject to Chapter 2, Article IV of this Code.



   (B)   The Purchasing Manager and every officer and employee of the
city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from
any person to whom any purchase order or contract is or might be awarded any
rebate, gift, money or anything of value whatsoever, except as permitted by
the administrative orders or policies relating to same, or where given for
the use and benefit of the city.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-228.  PROHIBITION AGAINST AWARD OF CONTRACT TO PERSON IN DEFAULT WITH 
RESPECT TO OBLIGATIONS TO THE CITY.



   No contract shall be made with any individual or firm which is in
default with respect to its obligations to the city, including but not
limited to breaches of contract and non-payment of taxes, utility charges,
fees, or other charges owed the city. 



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-229.  PROHIBITION AGAINST SUBDIVISION.



   No contract or purchase of supplies or services shall be subdivided to
avoid the requirements of this article, or any dollar limitation established
by resolution or ordinance adopted by the City Council.



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-230.  SALE OR DISPOSITION OF OBSOLETE OR SURPLUS CITY PERSONAL PROPERTY.



   The Purchasing Manager is authorized to sell supplies or equipment
which have become unsuitable for use by the city or its departments due to
obsolescence, or any other reason, or may exchange such property for, or
trade in such property on, new supplies or equipment.  Surplus supplies or
equipment shall be sold by the competitive bid method or at a competitive
auction to the highest responsible, responsive bidder if the estimated value
exceeds $5,000.00, or in a manner approved by the City Manager if the
estimated value is $5,000.00 or less.  If the Purchasing Manager and
department believe in good faith that the property has no market value based
upon an appraisal by a reliable individual or firm, or upon the inability to
sell it at a public auction, the city may dispose of such property as it sees
fit, including donating it to a charitable organization. 



(Ord. No. 404, § 1, 6-16-09)



2-231-2-249.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VII. AUTHORITY TO ISSUE MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATIONS,
CITATIONS AND APPEARANCE TICKETS



2-250.  AUTHORITY TO ISSUE MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION NOTICES AND CITATIONS.



   The City Manager, City Engineer, Building Official, Code Enforcement
Official, police officers and such other officers, employees and other public
servants designated by the City Manager are authorized to issue and serve
municipal civil infraction notices and citations as authorized by Public Act
236 of 1961, as amended.



(Ord. No. 328, § 8, 11-5-97)



2-251.  AUTHORITY TO ISSUE APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   The City Manager, City Engineer, Building Official, Code Enforcement
Official, police officers and such other officers, employees and other public
servants designated by the City Manager are authorized to issue and serve
appearance tickets as provided by Pubic Act 175 of 1927, Ch. IV, being
M.C.L.A. §§ >764.1 et seq., as amended.



(1978 Code, § 2-250; Ord. No. 201-C, § 3, 12-16-86; Ord. No. 201-I, § 1,
6-7-94; Ord. No. 328, § 8, 11-5-97)



CHAPTER 3:  ADVERTISING



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



3-1-3-15.  Reserved.



ARTICLE II.  POSTING



3-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "Posting Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 3-16)



3-17.  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Police Department to enforce the
provisions of this article, with full power, authority and duty to accomplish
this purpose.



(1978 Code, § 3-17)



3-18.  UNLAWFUL POSTING.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hang, post, place,
paste, attach, print, paint, staple or stamp any handbill, bill, notice,
advertisement, sign, placard, card or circular or any other advertising
device or matter of any description whatsoever, except such as may be
expressly authorized by law, on any street or sidewalk, upon any election
booth or other public place or upon any place or object, with the exception
of billboards, in the city, or upon any fence, building or property belonging
to the city, or upon any telephone pole, telegraph pole, electric light pole
or tower now erected or which shall be erected hereafter, except signs by any
government authority.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, except a public officer
or employee in the performance of a public duty, or a private person in
getting a legal notice, to paste, post, paint, print, nail, glue, attach or
otherwise fasten any sign, poster, advertisement or notice of any kind upon
any property, public or private, or cause or authorize the same to be done,
without the consent, authorization or ratification of the owner, holder,
occupant, lessee, agent or trustee thereof; provided, however, that this
provision shall not apply to the distribution of handbills, advertisements or
other printed matter that are not securely affixed to the premises.



(Comp. Ords. 1973, § 5-202) Penalty, see § 1-9



Cross reference:



   Advertising in parks, see § 38-27;



   Attachment of advertising matter to taxicabs, see § 52-21;



   Posting advertising matter in parks, see § 38-27;



   Posting signs or other articles on trees located in public ways, see §
51-11;



   Sign regulations of zoning ordinances, see zoning ordinance § 28.13



3-19-3-28.  Reserved.



ARTICLE III.  HANDBILLS



3-29.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Handbill
Distribution Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 3-29)



3-30.  PURPOSE.



   To protect the people against the nuisance of and incident to the
promiscuous distribution of handbills and circulars, particularly commercial
handbills, as defined in this article, with the resulting detriment and
danger to public health and safety, the public interest, convenience and
necessity require the regulation thereof and to that end the purposes of this
article are specifically declared to be as follows:



   (1)   To protect local residents against trespassing by solicitors,
canvassers or handbill distributors upon the private property of such
residents, if they have been given reasonable notice that such residents do
not wish to be solicited by such persons or do not desire to receive
handbills or advertising matter;



   (2)   To protect the people against the health and safety menace and
the expense incidental to the littering of the streets and public places by
the promiscuous and uncontrolled distribution of advertising matter and
commercial handbills;



   (3)   To preserve to the people their constitutional right to
receive and disseminate information not restricted under the ordinary rules
of decency and good morals and public order by distinguishing between the
nuisance created by the promiscuous distribution of advertising and
commercial handbills and the right to deliver noncommercial handbills to all
who are willing to receive the same.



(1978 Code, § 3-30)



3-31.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meanings hereinafter ascribed to them, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:



   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter and sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other
printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or
literature:



      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product,
commodity or thing;



      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or
commercial establishment or other activity for the purpose of, either
directly or indirectly, promoting the interests thereof by sales; or



      (3)   Which, while containing reading matter other than
advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is
distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit
and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.



   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by general
law, any newspaper duly entered with the postal service of the United States
in accordance with federal statute or regulation and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer, as provided by general law. In addition
thereto, such term shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine
regularly published, with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the
public.



   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of
any matter or literature not included in the aforesaid definition of a
commercial handbill or a newspaper, with the exception of political and
religious literature.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to the dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, boulevards, avenues, lanes, alleys
or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, plazas, grounds
and buildings.



(1978 Code, § 3-31)



3-32.  EXEMPTIONS FROM ARTICLE.



   The provisions of this article shall not be deemed to apply to the
distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers, as defined in
this article.



(1978 Code, § 3-32)



3-33.  REQUIRED IDENTIFICATION.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, scatter,
hand out or circulate any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any place
under any circumstances which does not have printed on the cover, front or
back thereof the name and address of the following:



   (1)   The person who printed, wrote, compiled or manufactured the
same; and



   (2)   The person who caused the same to be distributed.



   In the case of a fictitious person or club, in addition to such
fictitious name, the true names and addresses of the owners, managers or
agents of the person sponsoring the handbill shall also appear thereon.



(1978 Code, § 3-33) Penalty, see § 1-9



3-34.  DEPOSIT OR DISTRIBUTION IN OR ON PUBLIC PLACES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place, throw, scatter
or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any public place
within the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to hand out,
distribute or sell any commercial or noncommercial handbill in any public
place to any person not willing to accept such handbill.



(1978 Code, § 3-34) Penalty, see § 1-9



Cross reference:



   Anti-litter ordinance, see §§ 23-31 et seq.



3-35.  DEPOSIT IN OR ON VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon
any automobile or other vehicle within the city. The provisions of this
section shall not be deemed to prohibit the handling, transmitting or
distributing of any commercial or noncommercial handbill to the driver or
other occupant of any automobile or other vehicle who is willing to accept
the same.



(1978 Code, § 3-35) Penalty, see § 1-9



3-36.  DISTRIBUTION OR DEPOSIT ON PRIVATE PREMISES GENERALLY.



   No person shall distribute, deposit, place, throw, scatter or cast any
commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which
are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly
to the owner, occupant or any other person then present in or upon such
private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private
premises which are not posted as provided in this article, the person may
place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private
premises, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or elsewhere, except that
mailboxes may not be used when so prohibited by federal postal laws or
regulations.



(1978 Code, § 3-36) Penalty, see § 1-9



3-37.  DEPOSIT IN OR ON VACANT PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon
any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or
vacant.



(1978 Code, § 3-37) Penalty, see § 1-9



3-38.  DISTRIBUTION OR DEPOSIT ON POSTED PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute, deposit, place,
throw, scatter or cast any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any
premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed
on the premises, in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign
bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers or Agents," "No
Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the
occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested, to have their right
of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon the premises;
provided, however, that it shall be the duty of the owner, landlord or person
in control of any premises remaining vacant for a period of more than five
days to post, in a conspicuous position on the premises, the sign as is
indicated by this section. The term vacant, as used herein, shall not be
deemed to include temporary absences from the premises by its regular
occupants.



(1978 Code, § 3-38) Penalty, see § 1-9



3-39.  OFFENSIVE HANDBILLS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to post, hand out, distribute or
transmit in any manner any commercial or noncommercial handbill:



   (1)   Which may reasonably tend to incite riot or other public
disorder, which advocates disloyalty to or the overthrow of the government of
the United States or this state by means of any artifice, scheme or violence,
which urges any unlawful conduct or which encourages or tends to encourage a
breach of the public peace or good order of the community; or



   (2)   Which is offensive to public morals or decency or which
contains defamatory, blasphemous, obscene, libelous or scurrilous language.



(1978 Code, § 3-39) Penalty, see § 1-9



Cross reference:



   Obscenity, see Ch. 34;



   Public offenses, see §§ 35-14 et seq.



CHAPTER 4:  AIR POLLUTION CONTROL



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



4-1-4-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  COMMERCIAL INCINERATORS



4-21.  PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.



   The purpose of this article is to preserve the public health, safety
and welfare of the city by the prevention of nuisances and hazards resulting
from the creation of hazardous or noxious conditions or the emission of
pollutants into the atmosphere.



(1978 Code, § 4-21)



4-22.  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the Office of Building Services to
enforce the provisions of this article with all power, authority and duty to
accomplish the purpose set forth in § 4-21.



(1978 Code, § 4-22)



4-23.  DEFINITION.



   The term COMMERCIAL INCINERATOR, as used in this article, is defined as
any equipment, device or contrivance used for the destruction of garbage,
rubbish or other waste by burning and all appurtenances thereto, operated by
any commercial, industrial or business establishment and by any apartment,
condominium or cooperative residence complex.



(1978 Code, § 4-23)



4-24.  PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or
operate any commercial incinerator within the city.



   (B)   Any commercial incinerator completed and in operation, with
all necessary approvals and permits, by June 1, 1972, shall be specifically
entitled to continue operation; provided, however, that any such existing
incinerator shall not be enlarged or expanded after June 1, 1972; and
provided further, that all applicable city, county, state and federal
regulations regarding the operation of commercial incinerators are observed.



(1978 Code, § 4-24) Penalty, see § 1-9



CHAPTER 5:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



5-1.  PERSONS UNDER 21, UNLAWFUL PURPOSE, CONSUMPTION OR POSSESSION OR ANY
BODILY ALCOHOL CONTENT; FIRST OFFENDER DISCHARGE AND DISMISSAL; FRAUDULENT
IDENTIFICATION; ARREST BASED UPON REASONABLE CAUSE OR UPON RESULTS OF
PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS; PARENTAL NOTIFICATION; PARTICIPATION IN
UNDERCOVER PROGRAMS.



   (A)   A minor shall not purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic
liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, possess or attempt to
possess alcoholic liquor, or have any bodily alcohol content, except as
provided in this section.  A minor who violates this subsection is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction or guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by the following fines and sanctions:



      (1)   For the first violation, the minor is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction and shall be fined not more than $100.  The court
may order the minor to participate in substance use disorder services as
defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978,
being M.C.L. § 333.6230, and designated by the administrator of the office
of substance abuse services, and may order the minor to perform community
service and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her
own expense as described in subsection (E).  A minor may be found
responsible or admit responsibility only once under this subdivision.



      (2)   If a violation of this subdivision occurs after one
prior judgment, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor.  A misdemeanor under
this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days if
the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation, failed to
successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community service ordered
by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction or juvenile
adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $200, or both.  A court may
order a minor under this subdivision to participate in substance use disorder
services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368
of 1978, being M.C.L.A. § 333.6230, and designated by the state
administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community service, and
to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense
as described in subsection (E).



      (3)   If a violation of this subdivision occurs after two or
more prior judgments, the minor is guilty of a misdemeanor.  A misdemeanor
under this subdivision is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 60
days, if the court finds that the minor violated an order of probation,
failed to successfully complete any treatment, screening, or community
service ordered by the court, or failed to pay any fine for that conviction
or juvenile adjudication, or by a fine of not more than $500, or both, as
applicable.  A court may order a minor under this subdivision to participate
in substance use disorder services as defined in Section 6230 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. § 333.6230, and designated
by the state administrator of substance abuse services, to perform community
service, and to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or
her own expense as described in subsection (E).



   (B)   An individual who furnishes fraudulent identification to a
minor, or notwithstanding subsection (A), a minor who uses fraudulent
identification to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $100, or both.



   (C)   If an individual pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
subsection (A)(2) or offers a plea of admission in a juvenile delinquency
proceeding for a misdemeanor violation of subsection (A)(2), the court,
without entering a judgment of guilt in a criminal proceeding or a
determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the juvenile has
committed the offense and with the consent of the accused, may defer further
proceedings and place the individual on probation.  The terms and conditions
of that probation include, but are not limited to, the sanctions set forth in
subsection (A)(3), payment of the costs including minimum state costs as
provided for in section 18m of chapter XIIA of the probate code of 1939, 1939
PA 288, M.C.L. § 712A.18m, and section 1j of chapter IX of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, M.C.L. § 769.1j, and the costs of probation
as prescribed in section 3 of chapter XI of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1927 PA 175, M.C.L. § 771.3.  If a court finds that an individual violated
a term or condition of probation or that the individual is utilizing this
subsection in another court, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt, or
a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has
committed an offense, and proceed as otherwise provided by law.  If an
individual fulfills the terms and conditions of probation, the court shall
discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings.  A discharge and
dismissal under this subsection is without adjudication of guilt and without
a determination in a juvenile delinquency proceeding that the individual has
committed the offense and is not a conviction for purposes of
disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law on conviction of a crime. 
An individual may obtain only one discharge and dismissal under this
subsection.  The court shall maintain a nonpublic record of the matter while
proceedings are deferred and the individual is on probation and if there is a
discharge and dismissal under this subsection.



   (D)   A misdemeanor violation of subsection (A) successfully
deferred, discharged, and dismissed under subsection (C) is considered a
prior judgment for the purposes of subsection (A)(3).



   (E)   A court may order an individual found responsible for or
convicted of violating subsection (A) to undergo screening and assessment by
a person or agency as designated by the state-designated community mental
health entity as defined in Section 100a of the Mental Health Code, Public
Act 258 of 1974, being M.C.L. § 330.1100a, to determine whether the
individual is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including
alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.  A court
may order an individual subject to a misdemeanor conviction or juvenile
adjudication of, or placed on probation regarding, a violation of subsection
(A) to submit to a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis. 
The parent, guardian, or custodian of a minor who is less than 18 years of
age and not emancipated under 1968 PA 293, M.C.L. §§ 722.1 to 722.6, may
request a random or regular preliminary chemical breath analysis as part of
the probation.



   (F)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the operator's or
chauffeur's license of an individual convicted of a second or subsequent
violation of subsection (A) or of violating subsection (B) as provided in
Section 319 of the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being
M.C.L. § 257.319.



   (G)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe a minor
has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may request
that individual to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.  If a
minor does not consent to a preliminary chemical breath analysis, the
analysis shall not be administered without a court order, but a police
officer may seek to obtain a court order.  The results of a preliminary
chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are
admissible in a municipal civil infraction proceeding or criminal prosecution
to determine if the minor has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had
any bodily alcohol content. 



   (H)   The Police Department, on determining that an individual who
is less than 18 years of age and not emancipated under Public Act 293 of
1968, M.C.L. §§ 722.1 through 722.6, allegedly consumed, possessed,
purchased alcoholic liquor, attempted to consume, possess, or purchase
alcoholic liquor, or had any bodily alcohol content in violation of
subsection (A) shall notify the parent or parents, custodian, or guardian of
the individual as to the nature of the violation if the name of a parent,
guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the Police
Department.  The Police Department shall notify the parent, guardian, or
custodian not later than 48 hours after the Police Department determines that
the individual who allegedly violated subsection (A) is less than 18 years of
age and not emancipated under Public Act 293 of 1968, M.C.L. §§ 722.1
through 722.6.  The Police Department may notify the parent, guardian, or
custodian by any means reasonably calculated to give prompt actual notice,
including but not limited to notice in person, by telephone, or by
first-class mail.  If an individual less than 17 years of age is
incarcerated for violating subsection (A), his or her parents or legal
guardian shall be notified immediately as provided in this subsection.



   (I)   This section does not prohibit a minor from possessing
alcoholic liquor during regular working hours and in the course of his or her
employment if employed by a person licensed by the Liquor Control Code, by
the Liquor Control Commission, or by an agent of the Liquor Control
Commission, if the alcoholic liquor is not possessed for his or her personal
consumption.



   (J)   The following individuals are not considered to be in
violation of subsection (A):



      (1)   A minor who has consumed alcoholic liquor and who
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation including, but not limited to, medical
examination and treatment for any condition arising from a violation of
sections 520b through 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, Public Act 328 of
1931, M.C.L. §§ 750.520b through 750.520g, committed against a minor.



      (2)   A minor who accompanies an individual who meets both of
the following criteria:



         (a)   Has consumed alcoholic liquor.



         (b)   Voluntarily presents himself or herself to a
health facility or agency for treatment or for observation including, but not
limited to, medical examination and treatment for any condition arising from
a violation of sections 520b through 520g of the Michigan Penal Code, Public
Act 328 of 1931, M.C.L. §§ 750.520b through 750.520g, committed against a
minor.



         (c)   A minor who initiates contact with a police
officer or emergency medical services personnel for the purpose of obtaining
medical assistance for a legitimate health care concern.



   (K)   If a minor who is less than 18 years of age and who is not
emancipated under Public Act 293 of 1968, M.C.L. §§ 722.1 through 722.6,
voluntarily presents himself or herself to a health facility or agency for
treatment or for observation as provided under subsection (J), the health
facility or agency shall notify the parent or parents, guardian, or custodian
of the individual as to the nature of the treatment or observation if the
name of a parent, guardian, or custodian is reasonably ascertainable by the
health facility or agency.



   (L)   This section does not limit the civil or criminal liability of
a vendor or the vendor's clerk, servant, agent, or employee for a violation
of this chapter.



   (M)   The consumption of alcoholic liquor by a minor who is enrolled
in a course offered by an accredited post-secondary educational institution
in an academic building of the institution under the supervision of a faculty
member is not prohibited by this chapter if the purpose of the consumption is
solely educational and is a requirement of the course.



   (N)   The consumption by a minor of sacramental wine in connection
with religious services at a church, synagogue, or temple is not prohibited
by this chapter.



   (O)   Subsection (A) does not apply to a minor who participates in
either or both of the following:



      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and
with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's or city attorney's office
as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action;



      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the State Police, the Liquor
Control Commission, or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action
unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor
by the minor was not under the direction of the State Police, the Liquor
Control Commission, or the local police agency and was not part of the
undercover operation.



   (P)   The State Police, the Liquor Control Commission, or a local
police agency shall not recruit or attempt to recruit a minor for
participation in an undercover operation at the scene of a violation of
subsection (A), Section 701(1) of the Liquor Control Code, or Section 801(2)
of the Liquor Control Code.



   (Q)   In a prosecution for the violation of subsection (A)
concerning a minor having any bodily alcohol content, it is an affirmative
defense that the minor consumed the alcoholic liquor in a venue or location
where that consumption is legal.



   (R)   As used in this section:



      (1)   "Any bodily alcohol content" means either of the
following:



         (a)   An alcohol content of 0.02 grams or more per 100
milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of
urine.



         (b)   Any presence of alcohol within a person's body
resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of
alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or
ceremony.



      (2)   "Emergency medical services personnel" means that term
as defined in Section 20904 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of
1978, M.C.L. § 333.20904.



      (3)   "Health facility or agency" means that term as defined
in Section 20106 of the Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L. §
333.20106.



      (4)   "Prior judgment" means a conviction, juvenile
adjudication, finding of responsibility, or admission of responsibility for
any of the following, whether under a law of the State of Michigan, a local
ordinance substantially corresponding to a law of the State of Michigan, a
law of the United States substantially corresponding to a law of the State of
Michigan, or a law of another state substantially corresponding to a law of
the State of Michigan:



         (a)   This section or Section 701 or 707 of the Michigan
Liquor Control Code, Public Act 58 of 1998, M.C.L. § 436.701 or § 436.707
(commonly known as selling or furnishing alcohol to a minor).



         (b)   Section 624a, 624b, or 625 of the Michigan Vehicle
Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, M.C.L. § 257.624a, § 257.624b, and § 257.625
(commonly known as Open Intox, Transport by a Minor, and Operating While
Intoxicated, respectively).



         (c)   Section 80176, 81134, or 82127 of the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, M.C.L. §
324.80176, § 324.81134, and § 324.82127 (commonly known as Operating a
Motorboat, ORV, or Snowmobile While Under the Influence, respectively).



         (d)   Section 167a or 237 of the Michigan Penal Code,
Public Act 328 of 1939, M.C.L. § 750.167a and § 750.237 (commonly known as
Hunting While Intoxicated and Possess/Use Firearm While Under the Influence,
respectively).



(1978 Code, § 5-1; Ord. No. 179-B, § 1, 1-2-79; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 7-2-79;
Ord. No. 209-B, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 179-K and 209-D, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord.
No. 350, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 372, § 1, passed 10-19-04; Ord. No. 407,
§ 1, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 209-F, § 1, 12-5-17)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 436.1703



5-2.  SALES TO MINORS PROHIBITED; PENALTIES; DETENTION BY OFFICERS.



   (A)   Alcoholic liquor shall not be sold or furnished to a minor. A
person who knowingly sells or furnishes alcoholic liquor to a minor, or who
fails to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor, is guilty
of a misdemeanor. A person who is not a retail licensee or a retail
licensee’s clerk, agent or employee and who violates this subsection shall
be fined $500 and may be sentenced to imprisonment for up to 60 days for a
first offense, shall be fined $500 and shall be sentenced to imprisonment for
up to 90 days for a second or subsequent offense and may be ordered to
perform community service. A suitable sign describing the content of this
section and the penalties for its violation shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in each room where alcoholic liquor is sold. The signs shall be
approved and furnished by the Liquor Control Commission.



   (B)   In an action for the violation of this section, proof that the
defendant or the defendant’s agent or employee demanded and was shown,
before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator’s
or chauffeur’s license, a military identification card , or other bona fide
documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a
defense to an action brought under this section.



   (C)   As used in this section, DILIGENT INQUIRY means a diligent
good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least
an examination of an official Michigan operator’s or chauffeur’s license,
an official Michigan personal identification card, a military identification
card,  or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the
identity and age of the person.



   (D)   A police officer who witnesses a violation of § 5-1 may stop
and detain a person and obtain satisfactory identification, seize illegally
possessed alcoholic liquor and issue an appearance ticket as prescribed in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, Chapter IV, § 9b, Public Act 175 of 1927,
being M.C.L.A. §§ 764.1 et seq., M.C.L. § 764.9b.



(1978 Code, § 5-2; Ord. No. 179, § 5.02, 2-24-76; Ord. No. 179-B, § 1,
1-2-79; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 7-29-79; Ord. No. 209-A, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No.
179-K and 209-D, § 2, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 350, § 2, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 407,
§§ 2, 3, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 436.1701 and M.C.L. § 436.1705



5-3.  BRINGING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES INTO ESTABLISHMENT LICENSED TO SELL SAME.



   No person shall bring any alcoholic beverage into any establishment
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.



(1978 Code, § 5-3; Ord. No. 179-B, § 1, 1-29-79; Ord. No. 209, § 1, 7-2-79)



5-4.  SELLING, SERVING, OR FURNISHING ALCOHOL; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, serve, or furnish any alcoholic liquor
to any person in an intoxicated condition.



   (B)   A licensee shall not allow a person who is in an intoxicated
condition to consume alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises.



   (C)   A licensee, or clerk, servant, agent, or employee of the
licensee, shall not be in an intoxicated condition on the licensed premises.



   (D)   A licensee shall not allow an intoxicated person to frequent
or loiter on the licensed premises except where the intoxicated person has
been refused service of further alcoholic liquor and continues to remain on
the premises for the purpose of eating food, seeking medical attention,
arranging transportation that does not involve driving himself or herself, or
any other circumstances where requiring the person to vacate the premises
immediately would be considered dangerous to that person or to the public.



   (E)   A licensee shall not allow a minor to consume alcoholic liquor
or to possess alcoholic liquor for personal consumption on the licensed
premises.



   (F)   A licensee shall not allow any person less than 18 years of
age to sell or serve alcoholic liquor.



   (G)   A licensee shall not allow any person less than 18 years of
age to work or entertain on a paid or voluntary basis on the licensed
premises unless the person is employed in compliance with the youth
employment standards act, 1978 PA 90, MCL 409.101 to 409.124.  This
subsection does not apply to an entertainer under the direct supervision and
control of his or her parent or legal guardian.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, the term “licensee” means
any person, entity, or business that is licensed by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission for purposes of manufacturing for sale, selling, or
warehousing alcoholic liquor in accordance with state law.



   (I)   For purposes of this section, the term “intoxicated
condition” means that the person is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor to the degree that the person may endanger himself, herself, or other
persons or property, or annoy persons in the vicinity.



(Ord. No. 407, § 4, 7-21-09)



5-5-5-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  LIQUOR CONTROL



5-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "Liquor Control Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 5-16)



Statutory reference:



   Michigan Liquor Control Act, see M.S.A. §§ 18.971 et seq.; M.C.L.
§§ 436.1 et seq.



5-17.  TRAFFIC IN LIQUOR TO COMPLY WITH STATE LAW.



   All alcoholic liquor traffic, including, among other things, the
manufacture, sale, offer for sale, storage for sale, possession and/or
transportation thereof within city shall comply with the provisions of the
Michigan Liquor Control Act, being Public Act 8 of 1933 (Extra Session),
being M.C.L.A. §§ 436.1 et seq., as amended, of the State of Michigan.



(1978 Code, § 5-17)



5-18.  ENFORCEMENT OF STATE LAW.



   It shall be the responsibility of the City Police Department to enforce
the provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Act within the city with full
power, authority and duty to accomplish this purpose.



(1978 Code, § 5-18)



5-19.  INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS OF COMPLAINTS.



   (A)   The City Police Department shall cause all liquor licensees to
be inspected and investigate all complaints received by it concerning
violations of the Michigan Liquor Control Act and to investigate improper
operations and practices concerning liquor traffic within the city.



   (B)   Any police officer of the city shall have the right to inspect
any place in the city where alcoholic liquor is manufactured, sold, offered
for sale, kept for sale, possessed or transported or where the police officer
suspects the same is being thus manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept
for sale, possessed or transported.



(1978 Code, § 5-19)



5-20.  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Any person, other than persons required to be licensed under
the Michigan Liquor Control Act, who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in §
1-9 of this Code.



   (B)   Any licensee who shall violate any of the provisions of the
Michigan Liquor Control Act or any rule or regulation of the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission promulgated thereunder or who shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, and any person who shall prohibit or interfere
with the authorized inspection of a member of the City Police Department,
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in § 1-9 of this
Code.



(1978 Code, § 5-20)



5-21-5-29.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  LIQUOR LICENSING



5-30.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sterling Heights
Liquor License Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 5-30; Ord. No. 243, § 1, 12-20-83)



5-31.  PURPOSE.



   This article is established to cause the greatest benefit to the City
of Sterling Heights in its use of its powers with regard to the issuance,
transfer, renewal or revocation of liquor licenses, entertainment permits and
other alcohol-related permits within its jurisdiction. This article is
established in order to provide an orderly and nondiscriminatory procedure
for the review and approval by the City of Sterling Heights of any and all
requests for liquor licenses, entertainment permits, other permits issued by
the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or any matter relating thereto and for
the sale or dispensation of alcoholic beverages within the City of Sterling
Heights. Each person, firm or corporation who desires such license or permit,
or approval or renewal of the same, shall comply with the provisions of this
article.



(1978 Code, § 5-31; Ord. No. 243, § 2, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-C, § 1,
1-19-99)



5-32.  APPLICABILITY.



   This article shall apply only to applications for licenses to sell
beer, wine or spirits for on-premises consumption, including but not limited
to Class B licenses, Class C licenses, resort licenses, tavern licenses and
hotel licenses, and it shall also apply to applications for entertainment
permits and other permits issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission.
This article shall not, in any event, apply to applications for SDM and SDD
licenses, club licenses, special licenses granted by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission or one day permits as allowed by statute, with the
exception that an applicant for such licenses shall be required to submit a
nonrefundable fee to the City Clerk, in an amount determined by the City
Council, to cover the cost of investigation, review and inspection by the
City of Sterling Heights.



(1978 Code, § 5-31; Ord. No. 243, § 2, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-C, § 2,
1-19-99)



5-33.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor,
liquids and compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented and by
whatever name called, containing 1/2% or more of alcohol by volume which are
fit for use for beverage purposes.



   OTHER PERMIT. Any on-premises permit that may be issued by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission, with the exception of entertainment permits,
including but not limited to food permits, dance permits, additional bar
permits, dance-entertainment permits and other specialized permits.



   PERSON, FIRM or CORPORATION. These terms, as used in this article,
include any person or legal entity of whatsoever kind or nature, either
charitable or profitable, that desires to have or is already possessed of any
license or permit issued by the State of Michigan relating to the sale and
dispensation of alcoholic beverages or the offering of entertainment at a
licensed establishment, pursuant to a liquor license or permit of any variety
within the City of Sterling Heights.



(1978 Code, § 5-33; Ord. No. 243, § 3, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-C, § 3,
1-19-99)



5-34.  APPLICATIONS FOR NEW LICENSE OR PERMIT.



   (A)   Procedure. The applicant must submit an application for liquor
license approval to the city for consideration by the city as set forth in
this chapter. Upon reaching a decision regarding the request for approval,
the city shall notify the Michigan Liquor Control Commission of the
application and the city’s recommendation. Liquor license holders that
desire to apply for an entertainment or other permit must submit an
application to the Michigan Liquor Control Commission before submitting an
application for permit approval to the city. No application for an
entertainment or other permit will be considered by the city until the city
has been notified by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission that it has
received such an application.



   (B)   Submission to City Clerk. The applicant shall submit a current
and fully completed "City of Sterling Heights Liquor License Application,"
"City of Sterling Heights Entertainment Permit Application" or the
appropriate application for any other permit, as prepared and furnished by
the City Clerk, to:



City Clerk



City of Sterling Heights



40555 Utica Road



Sterling Heights, Michigan 48078



   (C)   Required information and applicable fee. The city application
shall include at least the following information:



      (1)   Name and address of applicant. If a partnership or
corporation, all persons with an ownership interest shall be listed;



      (2)   Type of license or permit desired;



      (3)   Address and legal description of the property where the
license is to be located;



      (4)   A preliminary site plan showing the relationship of the
proposed structure to the surrounding property and uses and photographs or
drawings of each of the sides of the structure in which the license,
entertainment permit or other permit shall be operated. This requirement
shall be waived for applicants whose site plan remains on file with the city
due to a prior application which was approved by the city and granted by the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission;



      (5)   A written statement as to the applicant’s character,
experience and financial ability to meet the obligations and business
undertakings for which the license or permit is to be issued;



      (6)   Any other information pertinent to the applicant and
operation of the proposed facility as may be required by the City Council by
prior notice to the applicant;



      (7)   The application shall be accompanied by a deposit of a
nonrefundable fee, in an amount determined by the City Council, to cover the
cost of investigation, review and inspection by the City of Sterling Heights
of the application.



   (D)   Recommendations from city departments. Following the receipt
of the fully completed application, fees and such other information as may be
requested by the city, the City Clerk shall forward the application to such
departments as required by the City Manager, which departments shall make
their recommendations prior to consideration by the City Council. In making
its review, the city may request from the applicant other pertinent
information.



   (E)   Placement upon City Council agenda. Upon receipt by the City
Clerk’s office of the recommendations of the departments as required, the
Clerk shall cause the application to be placed upon the agenda of the City
Council within a reasonable time after the receipt of the recommendation by
the City Clerk.



   (F)   Initial action by City Council. At the initial meeting before
the City Council to consider the application for a liquor license,
entertainment permit or other permit, the City Council shall generally take
one of the following steps:



      (1)   Ask the applicant to proceed with the submitted plans so
that a more detailed and complete proposal may be heard by the Council at a
later date; provided, however, that this action by the Council shall not be
interpreted to mean approval of the application or the general details of the
proposal;



      (2)   Postpone action on the application for a period not to
exceed 60 days. The 60 day limitation for postponement of action may be
waived by the applicant if the postponement is for the purpose of supplying
the City Council with additional information requested of the applicant by
the City Council, when the applicant is unable to supply the requested
information within that stated time period; or



      (3)   Reject the application stating the reasons for this
denial.



   (G)   Criteria for decision on application. The City Council, in
making its decision regarding a liquor license application, shall consider
the following criteria:



      (1)   The applicant’s management experience in the
alcohol/liquor business;



      (2)   The applicant’s general business management experience;



      (3)   The applicant’s general business reputation;



      (4)   The applicant’s moral character;



      (5)   The applicant’s financial status and its ability to
build and/or operate the proposed facility on which the proposed liquor
license is to be located;



      (6)   Past criminal convictions of the applicant for crimes
involving moral turpitude, violence or alcoholic liquors;



      (7)   The applicant’s excessive use of alcoholic beverages;



      (8)   The effect that the issuance of a license would have
upon the economic development of the surrounding area;



      (9)   The effects that the issuance of a license would have on
the health, welfare and safety of the general public;



      (10)   The recommendations of the local law enforcement
agency, Building Department, Zoning Department and Fire Department with
regard to the proposed facility;



      (11)   Whether the applicant has demonstrated the public need
or convenience for the issuance of the liquor license for the business
facility at the location proposed;



      (12)   The uniqueness of the proposed facility when contrasted
against other existing or proposed facilities;



      (13)   The number of liquor licenses issued and the number of
liquor licenses available for issuance in the city;



      (14)   Whether the facility to which the proposed liquor
license is to be issued complies, or will comply, with the applicable
building, plumbing, electrical and fire prevention codes and zoning statutes
and ordinances applicable in the city;



      (15)   The effects of the business facility to which the
proposed license is to be issued will have upon vehicular and pedestrian
traffic in the area;



      (16)   The proximity of the proposed business facility to
other similarly situated licensed liquor facilities;



      (17)   The effects that the business facility to which the
proposed license is to be issued would have upon the surrounding neighborhood
and/or business establishments;



      (18)   The permanence of the establishment in the community as
evidenced by the proposed or actual commitments made by the applicant;



      (19)   Such other considerations as the Council may deem
proper, provided such considerations are reasonable under all of the
circumstances.



   (H)   Criteria for decision on entertainment permit or other permit
application. The City Council, in making its decision regarding an
application for an entertainment permit or other permit, shall consider the
following criteria:



      (1)   Each of the applicable criteria listed in subsection (G)
of this section;



      (2)   Each of the criteria listed in the resolution adopted
pursuant to this article. Copies of the resolution may be obtained from the
City Clerk’s office;



      (3)   The number of years preceding the application during
which the applicant was in the business of the sale of alcoholic beverages in
the same location in the city;



      (4)   The applicant’s prior citations and convictions for
violations of any fire, building, health, or liquor statute, ordinance or
regulation;



      (5)   Whether 50% or more of the total gross receipts for an
accounting year of the establishment come from the sale, at retail, of food,
goods and services;



      (6)   Whether the location has ample parking, as determined by
the city administration, and whether the entertainment permit will contribute
to or create any traffic problem;



      (7)   The elevation plans regarding the size and seating
capacity of the business, the size of the dressing rooms (if any) and
locations of the stage (if any);



      (8)   The reports generated by the heads of the Building,
Fire, Zoning and Police Department regarding recent inspections or
reinspection of the establishment. Where a previous inspection report has
been generated for another purpose, such as on an application for a motel
license, the City Council may waive reinspection and request a sworn
affidavit by the applicant stating that no changes have been made to the
business establishment since the issuance of the previous permit or license;



      (9)   No permit shall be issued to an establishment located
within 500 feet of: (1) a church, (2) a public or private elementary or
secondary school or (3) a public park. The distance shall be measured along
the center line of the street or streets of address between two fixed points
on the center line determined by projecting straight lines, at right angles
to the center line, from the part of the church, school or park nearest to
the contemplated location and from the part of the contemplated location
nearest to the church, school or park;



      (10)   No permit shall be issued where the proposed use will
injure or adversely affect the adjacent area or property values. In making a
determination of injury or adverse effect, the City Council must find that
the proposed use will not cause a significant hazard, annoyance or
inconvenience to the owners or occupants of nearby property or significantly
change the character of the neighborhood or reduce the value of nearby
property;



      (11)   No permit shall be issued where the proposed use will
impose a significant cost burden upon the city or will create a significant
obstacle to the implementation of the zoning ordinance or the master plan of
the city;



      (12)   No permit shall be issued where the applicant fails to
file a sworn affidavit concerning the type, kind, character and quality of
entertainment proposed and to be presented;



      (13)   No permit shall be issued where the applicant fails to
execute a contract with the city, in the form drafted by the city, to assure
compliance with any and all regulations, codes or conditions that apply to
the applicant or the establishment or which may be imposed upon the applicant
or the establishment by City Council in exchange for approval of the permit
request;



      (14)   No permit shall be issued where the applicant is not
the owner of the establishment to be offering the proposed entertainment;



      (15)   No permit shall be issued where the applicant has
failed to secure an amusement device license pursuant to Chapter 7 of the
code of ordinances, if applicable, before evaluation of the application for
an entertainment permit.



   (I)   Restrictions on licenses and permits. No license,
entertainment permit or other permit shall be issued to or for, nor shall any
transfer of a license or permit be approved to or for:



      (1)   An applicant whose liquor license and/or entertainment
or other permit has been revoked or not renewed for cause under this article,
under a comparable city or township ordinance or under state law, whether in
Michigan or otherwise;



      (2)   A copartnership or partnership, unless all the members
of such copartnership or partnership shall qualify to obtain such license or
permit;



      (3)   A corporation, if any officer, manager or director
thereof, or stockholder owning in the aggregate more than 10% of the stock of
the corporation would not be eligible to receive a license and/or permit
hereunder for any reason;



      (4)   A person who has been convicted of a crime punishable by
death or imprisonment in excess of one year under the law under which he or
she was convicted; a crime involving theft, dishonesty or false statement
(including tax evasion) regardless of punishment; or a crime or
administrative violation of a federal or state law concerning the
manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or controlled
substances;



      (5)   For premises where there exists a violation of the
applicable building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing or fire codes,
applicable zoning regulations, applicable public health regulations or any
other applicable city ordinance;



      (6)   An application by a person, firm or corporation for a
license at a particular site, location, or geographic area within the city
which has been denied by the City Council within the six month period
preceding the submission date of the most recent application. The City Clerk
shall forward a letter to the applicant advising that the application has
been denied pursuant to this chapter;



      (7)   The waiting period provision of this subsection may be
waived where the City Clerk finds that the applicant has demonstrated or
alleged in substantial detail a material change of circumstances, such that
the original reason(s) for denial of the application are no longer
applicable. In such instance, the City Clerk shall, after receiving the
appropriate fee from the applicant, forward the application for investigation
by the appropriate department(s) to confirm the change in circumstances. If
the investigating department(s) confirms the change in circumstances, the
City Clerk shall set the application for hearing by the City Council in the
usual manner, with the qualification that the application was denied within
the previous six months but has been re-submitted due to a material change of
circumstances;



      (8)   For purposes of this section, the phrase DENIED BY THE
CITY COUNCIL shall be construed to mean a vote or resolution of the City
Council passed or ratified at an official meeting of the City Council. The
term SUBMISSION DATE shall be construed as the date on which the City Clerk
received the new or renewed application. The term MATERIAL CHANGE IN
CIRCUMSTANCES shall be construed to mean new or different facts which tend to
eliminate or substantially mitigate the reason(s) for the prior denial of the
application;



      (9)   This subsection shall not be construed to create any
rights of appeal or re-application in any applicant or for any property
within the six month waiting period.



   (J)   Request for consideration of approval. Once an applicant who
has been asked to proceed by presenting a more detailed and complete proposal
has sufficiently completed its plans and obtained site plan, engineering,
zoning, planning and other necessary approvals by the city, the applicant may
then request consideration by the Council of approval. Upon the receipt of a
written notice by an applicant for consideration of approval, the City Clerk
shall cause the application to be placed on the agenda of the City Council
for the Council’s action within a reasonable time of the receipt of the
same by the Clerk. At that meeting, the applicant shall be prepared to
discuss the following:



      (1)   Cost estimates for the building, furnishing and fixtures
as part of the proposal;



      (2)   Site plan information, including landscaping and other
aesthetic features of the proposal;



      (3)   Estimate of the number of employees who would be
required for the operation;



      (4)   Information on the individual or individuals expected to
manage the operation, as well as information as to how the facility would
actually be managed;



      (5)   Information about any entertainment or dancing that
might be involved;



      (6)   Answers to any related questions about the proposed
improvements and/or general operation of the facility.



   (K)   Action by Council, contingencies of approval.  Following this
presentation by the applicant, the City Council may approve, above all
others, the application, postpone consideration for a reasonable period or
reject the application. Approval will be contingent upon the obtaining of
building permits and any other necessary permits, licenses or approval from
the city within six months from the date of the approval. Approval will also
be contingent upon fulfillment of all other conditions imposed by this
article.



   (L)   Changes in plans, drawings and the like. After receipt of
approval by the City Council, no floor plan, building elevation, site plan,
seating arrangement, kitchen lay-out or other pertinent facts, drawings or
documents submitted to the City Council may be changed without the applicant
first receiving necessary departmental approvals as well as approval from the
City Council.



   (M)   Recommendation for approval of liquor license, entertainment
permit or other permit. Upon completion of the building and in accordance
with the prior approval of the Council, the City Council shall then recommend
the applicant for issuance of the liquor license, entertainment permit or
other permit by the Liquor Control Commission of the State of Michigan.



   (N)   Reservation of authority. No applicant has a right to the
issuance of a license, entertainment permit or other permit to him, her or
it, and the City Council reserves the right to exercise reasonable discretion
to determine who, if anyone, shall be entitled to the issuance of such
licenses and permits.



(1978 Code, § 5-34; Ord. No. 243, § 4, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-A, §§ 2
through 5, 8-8-84; Ord. No. 243B, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 243-C, § 4,
1-19-99)



5-35.  TRANSFER OF EXISTING LICENSES AND PERMITS.



   The transfer of any existing liquor license, entertainment permit or
other permit covered hereunder shall be subject to each of the requirements,
criteria and procedures, including fees, set forth in this article for the
granting of a new liquor license or permit. In addition, the transferee
applicant shall furnish a copy of any and all files which may be in the
Michigan Liquor Control Commission’s possession regarding that
Commission’s investigation of the transferee as a present or previous
licensee or permit holder.



(1978 Code, § 5-35; Ord. No. 243, § 5, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-C, § 5,
1-19-99; Ord. No. 243-D, § 1, 8-17-99)



5-36.  OBJECTIONS TO RENEWAL AND REQUESTS FOR REVOCATION.



   (A)   Generally. The City Council may object to a renewal of a
liquor license, entertainment permit or other permit to the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission or request the revocation of a liquor license,
entertainment permit or other permit by the Michigan Liquor Control
Commission.



   (B)   Procedure. Before filing an objection to the renewal or
request for revocation of a license or permit with the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, the City Council shall serve the license holder or permit
holder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to the
hearing, a notice of such hearing, which notice shall contain the following
information:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed action;



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (3)   Date, time and place of the hearing;



      (4)   A statement that the licensee or permit holder may
present evidence and testimony and may confront witnesses and may be
represented by a licensed attorney.



   (C)   Hearing and final decision. The hearing may be conducted by
Council as a whole or by a hearing officer appointed by the Council for such
purposes. If a hearing officer is appointed, it shall be that officer’s
duty to undertake the hearing and hear and take evidence and testimony of the
licensee or permit holder, or witnesses on its behalf, in opposition to the
objection to renewal or request for revocation. After the hearing, the
hearing officer shall make a recommendation to the City Council for the
latter’s ultimate final review and decision. The City Council shall submit
to the license or permit holder and the Michigan Liquor Control Commission a
written statement of its ultimate findings and determination.



   (D)   Criteria for nonrenewal or revocation. At any time during the
year, the City Council may recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license or
permit upon a determination by it that, based upon a preponderance of the
evidence presented at the hearing, any of the following exist:



      (1)   A violation of any of the provisions regarding licenses
and permits set forth in this article;



      (2)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises;



      (3)   Any of the bases for objecting to renewal and/or for a
request to revoke a liquor license, entertainment permit and/or other permit,
as adopted by the City Council in the resolution adopted pursuant to this
ordinance. Copies of the resolution may be obtained from the City Clerk’s
office.



   (E)   Objection to application for club license. Although local
approval is not required for club licenses issued by the Michigan Liquor
Control Commission, the city may object, within 15 working days after
receiving notice from the Commission of the application for a new club
license, to the application based upon the Commission’s licensing
qualification rules or based upon violations of building codes, health codes
or zoning ordinances.



(1978 Code, § 5-36; Ord. No. 243, § 6, 12-20-83; Ord. No. 243-C, § 6,
1-19-99)



5-37-5-49.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  PRIVATE PARTIES



5-50.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. An alcoholic liquor as defined in Section 2 of the
Michigan Liquor Control Act, Public Act. 8 of 1933 (Extra Session), being
M.C.L.A. § 436.2.



   ALLOW. To give permission for, or approval of, possession or
consumption of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by any of the
following means:



      (a)   In writing;



      (b)   By one or more oral statements;



      (c)   By any form of conduct, including a failure to take
corrective action, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that
permission or approval has been given.



   CONTROL OVER ANY PREMISES, RESIDENCE OR OTHER REAL PROPERTY. The
authority to regulate, direct, restrain, superintend, control or govern the
conduct of other individuals on or within that premises, residence or other
real property and includes but is not limited to a possessory right.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. As that term is defined in § 7104 of the Public
Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq.,
M.C.L. § 333.7104.



   CORRECTIVE ACTION. Any of the following:



      (a)   Making a prompt demand that the minor or other
individual depart from the premises, residence or other real property or
refrain from the unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage
or controlled substance on or within that premises, residence or other real
property and taking additional action described in subparagraph (b) and (c)
if the minor other individual does not comply with the request;



      (b)   Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law
enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the violation;



      (c)   Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or
consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person
having a greater degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons
on or within the premises, residence or other real property.



   MINOR. An individual less than 21 years of age.



   PREMISES. A permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than a
residence, including but not limited to any of the following:



      (a)   A meeting hall, meeting room or conference room;



      (b)   A public or private park.



   RESIDENCE. A permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including but
not limited to any of the following:



      (a)   A house, apartment, condominium or mobile home;



      (b)   A cottage, cabin, trailer or tent;



      (c)   A motel unit, hotel unit or bed and breakfast unit.



   SOCIAL GATHERING. An assembly of two or more individuals for any
purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of
the same household or immediate family.



(Ord. No. 209-C, § 1, 9-20-94)



5-51.  SERVICE TO MINORS PROHIBITED.



   Except as otherwise provided in § 5-54, an owner, tenant or other
person having control over any premises, residence or other real property
shall not do either of the following:



   (A)   Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic
beverage at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence or other
real property; or



   (B)   Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a
controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises,
residence or other real property.



(Ord. No. 209-C, § 1, 9-20-94)



5-52.  PENALTY.



   A person who violates § 5-51 is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine of not more than $500, or
both. A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be imposed in
addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal offense
arising from the same conduct.



(Ord. No. 209-C, § 1, 9-20-94)



5-53.  EVIDENCE, PRESUMPTIONS.



   Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption
that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an alcoholic
beverage or a controlled substance on or within a premises, residence or
other real property, in violation of this section:



   (A)   The defendant had control over the premises, residence or
other real property;



   (B)   The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession
of an alcoholic beverage or knew that an individual was consuming or in
possession of a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that
premises, residence or other real property;



   (C)   The defendant failed to take corrective action.



(Ord. No. 209-C, 9-20-94)



5-54.  EXCEPTIONS.



   This article does not apply to the use, consumption or possession of a
controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription or to
the use, consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for
religious purposes. This article does not authorize selling or furnishing an
alcoholic beverage to a minor.



(Ord. No. 209-C, 9-20-94)



CHAPTER 6:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 7:  AMUSEMENT DEVICES



7-1.  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights Amusement
Device Ordinance" and may be cited as such.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-1; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-2.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this amusement device chapter is to provide for the
regulation of the distribution and installation of amusement devices within
the city; to provide for the licensing of amusement device locations; to
insure that licensees are of good moral character; to insure that the
locations of the devices are in conformance with the ordinances of the city;
to prohibit loitering in the establishments by minors and other patrons; to
reduce the potential for unlawful gambling, adverse neighborhood impacts, and
adverse impacts on the welfare of children in the city; and to establish fees
for the issuance of the licenses.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-2; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



Cross reference:



   Licenses generally, see Ch. 29



7-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE.  Any machine, device, or game, with or without a
video screen or display, that is constructed principally for entertainment or
amusement purposes, including but not limited to a pinball machine, air
hockey machine, foosball or table soccer machine, skee-ball machine,
shuffleboard, a miniature pool table, shooting gallery device, miniature or
modified bowling game, pool or similar game table, bubble hockey machine,
electronic game of skill, video game, self-operated or attendant-operated
merchandise redemption devices, or any similar machine, instrument, device,
game, or contrivance, which is made available for display or operation and
which may be operated or set in motion by the insertion of a coin or token,
paper currency, ticket, payment of a fee or other valuable consideration, or
use of a swipe card.  Each device, regardless of the number of stations,
shall be considered one device.  AMUSEMENT DEVICE does not include ping pong
tables, music playing devices, vending machines, or any rides where no
element of chance, bonus, or prize is involved, nor any video lottery games
or game terminals or equipment operated or provided directly by the Michigan
Lottery as a state agency.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE CENTER. Any of the following:



      (1)   An establishment, business, or location open for public
use and participation and which has as its principal use, or which is devoted
primarily to, the operation of amusement devices. 



      (2)   An establishment, business, or location with more than
15 amusement devices within a space of less than 45,000 square feet.



      (3)   An establishment, business, or location with more than
25 amusement devices.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE LICENSE.  A license to keep, maintain, and/or allow
the use of amusement devices.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE DISTRIBUTOR LICENSE.  A license to distribute one or
more amusement devices to any location within the city.



   DISTRIBUTOR.  Any person, society, club, firm or corporation which
places amusement devices in any place or establishment, excluding an owner as
herein defined, and who receives or is entitled to receive a share in the
profits or income derived from such devices or who receives any consideration
for furnishing such devices, with the exception of consideration for a bona
fide sale.



   GAMBLING GAME.  Any game played with cards, dice, equipment, or a
machine, including any mechanical, electromechanical, or electronic device
which shall include computers and cashless wagering systems for money,
credit, or any representation of value, including but not limited to faro,
monte, roulette, keno, bingo, fan tan, twenty one, blackjack, seven and a
half, klondike, craps, poker, chuck a luck, Chinese chuck a luck (dai shu),
wheel of fortune, chemin de fer, baccarat, pai gow, beat the banker,
panguingui, slot machine, or any banking or percentage game, but does not
include games played with cards in private homes or residences in which no
person makes money for operating the game, except as a player, and does not
include any mechanical amusement device, crane game, or slot machine that is
not prohibited under state law as a gambling game or gaming table.



   GAMING.  To deal, operate, carry on, conduct, maintain or expose or
offer for play any gambling game or gambling operation.



   OWNER.  Any person, society, club, firm or corporation which owns,
operates or conducts any establishment in which any amusement device may be
operated.



   REDEMPTION GAME.  A single player or multi-player mechanical,
electronic or manual amusement device involving a game, the object of which
is throwing, rolling, bowling, shooting, placing, propelling or stopping a
ball or other object into, upon or against a hole or other target. 
REDEMPTION GAME does not include either of the following:



      (1)   Games such as roulette, beano, cards, dice, wheels of
fortune, video poker, slot machines or other games in which winning depends
primarily upon fortuitous or accidental circumstances beyond the control of
the player;



      (2)   A game that includes a mechanical or physical device
which directly or indirectly impairs or thwarts the skill of the player.



   WHOLESALE VALUE.  The price paid for goods in quantities intended for
resale or use by a retailer as evidenced by an invoice, bill of lading or
similar document which contains the supplier's name, date of purchase, item
description and wholesale price per item or stated quantity.  If the items
are purchased at a package price, the total price and number of items in the
package may be substituted for the price per item if accompanied by a
statement that the wholesale value for any individual item in the package is
not more than that which is permitted by this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-3; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 234A, § 1,
3-7-89; Ord. No. 234-C, § 1, 9-19-00; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-4.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place or cause to be placed any
functional amusement device within the city without a valid amusement device
distributor license.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to maintain any functional amusement
device within the city without an amusement device license.



   (C)   The issuance of a license to a distributor to distribute an
amusement device does not permit the maintenance or operation of such a
device without first obtaining an amusement device license.



   (D)   For a first or second violation, any person who violates §
7-4(A) or (B) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a
fine of $500.00, except that the court shall instead assess a fine in
accordance with the schedule set forth in § 1-26(A) upon receipt of
certification by the City Clerk, in the form of a license or similar
documentation, that a license has been obtained or that all amusement devices
have been removed from the establishment in which they were placed or
maintained.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-4; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



Cross reference:



   Business registration, see Ch. 12



7-5.  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Application for a license shall be filed with the City Clerk
in the form and manner as required by this chapter. The application shall
include all information necessary to determine compliance with this chapter,
including but not limited to:



      (1)   The full names, dates of birth, proof of identification,
business addresses, and residential addresses of all owners, proprietors,
officers, and managers of the applicant and the names and addresses of each
officer if the applicant is a corporation;



      (2)   The number of amusement devices to be placed or
maintained at the establishment;



      (3)   The type of device, including its manufacturer and
serial number, as soon as such information is available but no later than the
date the applicant opens for business;



      (4)   The zoning of the property upon which the devices are to
be located;



      (5)   The nature and primary use of the premises upon which
the devices are to be located;



      (6)   A list of all assumed, trade, or firm names under which
the applicant intends to do business;



      (7)   All contact information for the establishment where the
devices will be placed or maintained, including but not limited to telephone
numbers and e-mail addresses for principals or responsible individuals and
any websites utilized by the establishment;



      (8)   Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or
managing the applicant's business has been convicted of any crime or tendered
a plea to any moral turpitude or criminal sexual conduct crime and, if so,
the details of the crime;



      (9)   A scale diagram of the premises (or tenant space) where
the devices will be located, indicating the placement of devices, aisleways,
entrances, and exits in order to determine that the provisions of all
applicable codes and ordinances are satisfied.



   (B)   Each and every application for a license shall be in writing
and filed in the form and manner required by the City Clerk.



   (C)   In the event of a change in any of the information required by
this section, a licensee shall provide the updated information to the City
Clerk within 5 business days of the change.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-5; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 234A, §§ 2
through 4, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-6.  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the
Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Development Director, and City Planner. 



      (1)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the qualifications
and background of the applicant and required attendants, if any, and furnish
a written report to the City Clerk accompanied by a recommendation as to
whether the license and/or an attendant should be approved.  The
recommendation of the Chief of Police shall be supported, at least in part,
on whether or not the applicant or attendant has been convicted of any crime,
or tendered a plea to any crime, either directly or indirectly as a result of
a plea agreement involving moral turpitude, gambling, narcotics, criminal
sexual conduct, or actions detrimental to minors within the preceding 10
years, or has previously violated any of the provisions of this chapter.



      (2)   The Fire Chief shall investigate whether the
establishment has, or has had, any fire safety violations, and shall
recommend issuance or denial of the license based on whether the
establishment's violation history demonstrates an ability and proclivity to
operate the establishment in compliance with all applicable fire codes and
regulations.



      (3)   The City Development Director shall investigate whether
the establishment has, or has had, any code violations, and shall recommend
issuance or denial of the license based on whether the establishment's code
violation history demonstrates an ability and proclivity to operate the
establishment in compliance with all applicable codes and in a safe manner
for all employees and visitors.



      (4)   The City Planner shall investigate whether the
establishment is complying with all applicable zoning provisions and
approvals, and shall recommend issuance or denial of the license based on
whether placement or maintenance of amusement devices will be consistent with
such zoning provisions and approvals. 



   (B)   The City Clerk shall suspend processing of an amusement device
license application until the Chief of Police, Fire Chief, City Development
Director, and City Planner are satisfied that any remediable violations or
noncompliance have or will be remedied.  If an applicant fails to achieve
the required remediation or compliance within 90 days after written notice
has been transmitted to the applicant of the processing suspension, the City
Clerk shall deny the license, except that a denial shall be held in abeyance
at the applicant's request if an applicant is contesting the validity of a
violation or seeking variances that would eliminate a violation through court
action or the action of another quasi-judicial board or commission with
authority over the applicant's request.  In such a case, the abeyance shall
be for a period of 30 days beyond the date a final decision is rendered in
such action, after which time the City Clerk shall notify the applicant in
writing of the license denial.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-6; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



Cross reference:



   Building Code, §§ 11-21 et seq.;



   Fire Code, see §§ 20-21 et seq.;



   Zoning, see App. A



7-7.  FEES.



    When an application is made for a license required under the terms of
this chapter, a fee shall be paid in an amount established by the annual
appropriations ordinance.  In the event that an application for a license is
denied, the license fee shall be refunded after deduction of a 10%
administrative processing fee.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-7; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 388, § 2,
1-3-07; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-8.  DURATION AND RENEWAL OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Duration of license.  Licenses issued under the terms of this
chapter shall be valid for two years from the date of issue.



   (B)   Renewal of license; fees; conditions.  Licenses issued
pursuant to this chapter are renewable.  The City Clerk shall grant a
license renewal application when the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The Police Chief, Fire Chief, City Development Director,
and City Planner have determined that no violations have occurred, or remain
outstanding, the existence of which would have warranted denial under the
investigation process set forth for any new license application. 



      (2)   The licensee submits a properly completed renewal form
provided by the City Clerk and pays any applicable license renewal fees
established in the annual appropriations ordinance.



      (3)   Provided a request for renewal of a license is filed
with the City Clerk at least 15 days prior to expiration of the license, the
expired license shall continue in effect until a decision regarding approval
or denial of the renewal is made.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-8; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 234A, § 5,
3-7-89; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-9.  NONTRANSFERABILITY OF LICENSES.



   Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter are not transferable.



(1978 Code, § 5.59; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-10.  DEVICE IDENTIFICATION; POSTING OF LICENSE; LABELS.



   (A)   Each amusement device licensed under this chapter shall have
permanently affixed thereto suitable identification containing the business
name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address or website of the
distributor of the device if the device is owned other than by the
establishment, and the serial number of the device. 



   (B)   Any establishment with an amusement device license shall
conspicuously post such license within the establishment and within 10 feet
of one or more of the establishment's amusement devices. 



   (C)   The City Clerk shall provide an identification label for each
amusement device at the licensed establishment, which shall be affixed to the
device at all times.  The identification labels are not transferable, and it
shall be unlawful to remove an identification label from a device once
affixed thereto unless the device is removed from the city and no longer kept
or used within the city. 



   (D)   Whenever a new device is added or substituted in place of a
previous device, the applicant shall obtain a new identification label for
such device and pay the fee established in the annual appropriations
ordinance.  At the time a new device is added or substituted, the licensee
shall furnish the City Clerk, no later than the time that the device is
placed in operation, with information indicating the type of device,
including its manufacturer and serial number, and its proposed location.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-10; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 234A, § 6,
3-7-89; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-11.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The City Clerk may issue a notice of intent to revoke a
license issued under this chapter upon submission of a written report by any
city department or official advising of violations of the terms of this
chapter or the violation of any rules, regulations, ordinances, or laws. 



   (B)   Revocation of a license shall be effective 15 days from the
date of issuance of the City Clerk's notice of intent to revoke unless a
hearing is requested by the licensee within five days following issuance of
the notice.  A person who timely requests a hearing following receipt of a
notice of intent to revoke a license is entitled to a hearing with the City
Clerk, City Manager's designee, and the department head or city official who
determined the existence of the violation underlying the notice of intent to
revoke at a time and place to be set by the City Clerk.  Written notice of
the time and place of the hearing shall be provided to the licensee by first
class mail and e-mail (if an e-mail address was provided with the license
application) at least 10 days prior to the hearing.  Written notice of the
determination with respect to revocation shall be provided to the licensee
within five days of the hearing.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-11; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 453, § 1,
5-3-17)



7-12.  GENERAL OPERATION.



   (A)   All amusement device licensees, including any servant, agent,
or employee, shall comply with the following:



      (1)   No person or persons shall be allowed to loiter within
or immediately outside of the licensed premises;



      (2)   No person or persons shall be allowed to violate any of
the public offenses set forth in Ch. 35, Art. II of the city code of
ordinances, as amended;



      (3)   No person or persons shall be allowed to engage in
unlawful gaming or to use, possess, or keep gambling paraphernalia on the
premises or to award any cash, money, or tokens, betting slips, or
merchandise redeemable for cash or money as the result of the operation of an
amusement device. 



         a.   Subsection (3) does not prohibit a mechanical
amusement device which may, through the application of an element of skill,
reward the player with the right to replay the mechanical amusement device at
no additional cost if the mechanical amusement device is not allowed to
accumulate more than 15 replays at one time; the mechanical amusement device
is designed so that accumulated free replays may only be discharged by
reactivating the device for one additional play for each accumulated free
replay; and the mechanical amusement device makes no permanent record,
directly or indirectly, of the free replays awarded.



         b.   Subsection (3) does not prohibit a slot machine if
the slot machine is 25 years old or older and is not used for gambling
purposes.  As used in this section, SLOT MACHINE means a mechanical device,
an essential part of which is a drum or reel which bears an insignia and
which when operated may deliver, as a result of the application of an element
of chance, a token or money or property, or by operation of which a person
may become entitled to receive, as a result of the application of an element
of chance, a token or money or property.



         c.   Subsection (3) does not prohibit a crane game.  As
used in this section, CRANE GAME means an amusement machine activated by the
insertion of a coin by which the player uses one or more buttons, joysticks
or similar means of control, or a combination of those means of control, to
position a mechanical or electromechanical claw or other retrieval device
over a prize, toy, novelty or an edible item having a wholesale value of not
more than $3.75 and thereby attempts to retrieve the prize, toy, novelty or
edible item.  Every prize, toy or edible item must be retrievable by the
claw.  A slot machine is not considered a crane game.



         d.   Subsection (3) does not prohibit a redemption game
if all of the following conditions are met:



            1.   The outcome of the game is determined through
the application of an element of skill by the player;



            2.   The award of the prize is based upon the
player's achieving the object of the game or otherwise upon the player's
score;



            3.   Only noncash prizes, toys, novelties or
coupons or other representations of value redeemable for noncash prizes, toys
or novelties are awarded;



            4.   The wholesale value of a prize, toy or
novelty awarded for the successful single play of a game is not more than
$3.75;



            5.   The redemption value of coupons or other
representations of value awarded for the successful single play of a game
does not exceed 15 times the amount charged for a single play of the game or
$3.75, whichever is less.  However, players may accumulate coupons or other
representations of value for redemption for noncash prizes, toys or novelties
of a greater value up to, but not exceeding $250 wholesale value.



      (4)   Intoxicated persons shall not be allowed in the area
designated for the operation of devices;



      (5)   Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed on the
premises, nor shall the premises be accessible to any place where alcoholic
beverages are kept, sold, distributed, or given away, except in an
establishment licensed for on-premises alcohol consumption by the Michigan
Liquor Control Commission;



      (6)   The possession or use of a controlled substance as
defined in Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L.A. §§ 333.1101 et seq. shall
not be allowed;



      (7)   Entertainment in the form of monologues, dialogues,
motion pictures, still slides, closed circuit television, contests, or other
performances for public viewing shall not be offered or permitted without an
entertainment permit issued by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission, and
noise or music shall not be permitted or caused to emerge from the licensed
premises which is disturbing to persons in the surrounding area;



      (8)   The premises shall not be allowed to become a nuisance;



      (9)   A person under the age of 17 years shall not be allowed
in the establishment before 3:00 p.m. on any day when any school in the city
is open for regularly scheduled school attendance (excluding summer school
and year-round schools) unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
school official;



      (10)   A person under the age of 17 years shall not be allowed
in the establishment between 11:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. unless accompanied by a
parent, legal guardian, or supervising adult over the age of 25 designated by
the parent or guardian to accompany the minor, unless the minor is an on-duty
employee of the licensee;



      (11)   A person under the age of 14 years shall not be allowed
in the establishment at any time unless accompanied by his or her parent,
legal guardian, or a supervising adult over the age of 25.



   Exceptions:



         a.   This section shall not apply to an amusement device
center lawfully located in an enclosed shopping center containing a gross
floor area of not less than 400,000 square feet, if the parent, legal
guardian, or supervising adult provides identification and written consent
for the person under age 14 to be in the amusement device center without the
supervision required by this subsection.



         b.   This section shall not apply to a movie theater if
the person under age 14 is accompanied by a sibling over the age of 16 and is
not at the movie theater after 11:00 p.m.



      (12)   No person shall allow the placement of any amusement
device which displays, exposes, produces, or emits any motion picture,
printed matter, advertisement, writing, song, recitation, speech, music, or
any other matter which depicts or describes nudity, which shall be defined as
less than completely or opaquely covered human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks, human female breasts below a point above the top of the areola, or
covered human male genitals in a visibly turgid state.  A female breast is
considered uncovered if the nipple only or the nipple and areola only are
covered.  In addition, no such device shall depict or describe any of the
following:



         a.   Sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus,
masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, flagellation, or any other act by a person
involving the touching or contacting of the genitals, or any sexual acts
which are prohibited by law;



         b.   The touching, caressing, or fondling of the
breasts, buttocks, pubic region, or genitals or the stimulation thereof by
any device, tool, implement or object;



         c.   The actual or simulated displaying or exposure or
simulations of the pubic hair, pubic region, anus, vulva, or genitals of
humans, brutes, beasts, or animals;



         d.   The suggestion or intimation of any criminal sexual
conduct, prostitution, or illegal drug use;



         e.   Artificial devices or inanimate objects employed to
depict any of the prohibited activities described above.



      (13)   A row, kiosk, or cluster of devices shall not be
allowed any closer than six feet to any other row, cluster, or kiosk of
devices.  This six foot aisle between rows, clusters, or kiosks of devices
does not prohibit the back-to-back or side-to-side placement of amusement
devices in rows, or otherwise, as long as a six-foot aisle separates such
groupings.  The six-foot aisle between rows, clusters, or kiosks of devices
shall be maintained at all times to facilitate emergency evacuation of the
premises.



      (14)   If the licensee is an amusement device center, provide
attendants as required by the Planning Commission pursuant to the special
approval land use process set forth in the City's zoning ordinance or, if no
special approval was required or no number was established, two attendants
shall be provided for the first 75 devices on the premises or fraction
thereof and one attendant shall be provided for each 50 devices or fraction
thereof beyond the first 75 devices.  The licensee must furnish the City
Clerk with the following information with respect to each attendant in order
to receive a license to operate such an establishment:



         a.   The attendant's name, date of birth, residential
address, photograph, and a copy of his or her driver's license or
state-issued identification card; and



         b.   Whether the attendant has ever tendered a plea to,
or been convicted of, a crime involving, either directly or indirectly as a
result of a plea agreement, moral turpitude, a controlled substance offense,
violence, criminal sexual misconduct, child abuse, or involving conduct
detrimental to minors.



      (15)   Dispose of all waste materials deposited by patrons on
the premises and provide sufficient waste receptacles for the deposit of
same.  A licensee shall keep such materials from being strewn or littered
about the premises or blowing on to adjacent property;



      (16)   Keep every amusement device visible through a window
from the exterior of the location, visible from the main public entryway of
the location, or visible from a location accessible to any member of the
public.  No amusement device shall be located behind a doorway, in a back
room or side room, or in any other location that is not visible as required
by this subsection.



   (B)   No minor under the age of 17 years shall:



      (1)   Be in the establishment before 3:00 p.m. on those days
when any public school in the city is open for regularly scheduled school
attendance (excluding summer school and year round school) unless accompanied
by a parent, legal guardian, or a school official;



      (2)   Be in the establishment between 11:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or a supervising adult who is
authorized by a parent or guardian and who is over the age of 25.



   (C)   Hours of Operation.



      (1)   If the establishment does not have a liquor license for
on-premises consumption, the establishment shall not be open after 12:00
a.m., nor shall anyone other than on-duty employees be permitted within the
establishment after 12:15 a.m., and no amusement device shall be operated
after 12:00 a.m. 



      Exception:  retail stores in excess of 45,000 square feet are
not subject to this provision.



      (2)   If the establishment has a liquor license for
on-premises consumption, the establishment shall not be open after 2:00 a.m.,
nor shall anyone other than employees be permitted within the establishment
after 2:15 a.m., and no amusement device shall be operated after 2:00 a.m. 



      Exceptions:  movie theaters with an amusement device license may
allow patrons to remain in the establishment for 15 minutes after the end of
the final movie being shown, and bowling alleys may allow patrons to remain
in the establishment until 15 minutes after all lane rentals purchased prior
to 1:30 a.m. have ended.



   (D)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as
permitting the licensing or use or maintenance of any gambling device,
including slot machines.



   (E)   The licensee shall make the premises available for inspection
at reasonable times by any authorized person of the city to determine that
the applicant and the premises comply with all applicable codes, statutes,
and regulations.



   (F)   No amusement device center shall contain more than 125
amusement devices.



   (G)   This chapter shall not apply to amusement devices that are
maintained at, and under the supervision of, any public or parochial school,
any religious institution, any duly recognized nonprofit civic organization,
or any public body.



(1978 Code, § 5.5-12; Ord. No. 234, § 1, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 234A, §§ 7
through 14, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 234B, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 234-C, § 2,
9-19-00; Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-13.  PENALTIES.



   (A)   A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  Any and all
entities, owners, managers, and operators may be issued a citation if deemed
to be solely or jointly responsible for the same violation. 



   (B)   Any second violation of the same provision of this chapter,
and/or any third violation of any provision of this chapter, within any
consecutive 12-month period shall cause the City Clerk to revoke the
license. 



   (C)   To appeal a revocation, the licensee may submit a written
request to the Board of Ordinance Appeals, which must be sent to the City
Clerk within five days of written transmittal of the revocation
determination.  All revocation appeals shall be heard by the Board of
Ordinance Appeals at its next regular meeting scheduled at least three
calendar days after submission of the appeal. 



      (1)   Upon submission of the appeal request, the licensee may
continue to operate under the license until the decision of the Board is
rendered unless the basis for the suspension or revocation is an immediate
risk or hazard to public safety or constitutes a continuing disturbance of
public tranquility.



      (2)   The Board may uphold the revocation, reverse the
revocation, or modify the revocation to a suspension with reinstatement
conditioned upon any terms and conditions the Board determines to be
reasonably necessary to ensure future compliance with the requirements of
this chapter.



   (D)   If a revocation is not appealed or is upheld on appeal to the
Board, the establishment shall remove the amusement device(s) from the
premises.  The City Clerk shall transmit notice of the revocation to the
Chief of Police to inspect the premises within one business day of the
finality of the revocation to ensure that the devices have been removed. 
Any device(s) still on the premises shall be subject to confiscation and
impoundment by the police and shall thereafter be returned to their properly
licensed distributor upon request or returned to their lawful owner upon
execution of a release agreement or pursuant to a claim and delivery order. 
Upon impoundment, the police department shall issue written notice to the
distributor or owner that the devices will be destroyed or sold if not
properly claimed within three months.  If no request is made and no court
order is obtained within three months, the police department may destroy the
devices or sell them at public auction.



   (E)   A new amusement device license application submitted by the
same or substantially similar establishment, owner(s), or operator(s) will
not be accepted for a period of one year from the date a revocation becomes
final after exhaustion or abandonment of all appeal options. 



   (F)   Ongoing violations of this division may also subject the
licensee and/or property owner to the remedial and enforcement provisions set
forth in Section 11-141 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



7-14.  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter would involve practical difficulties or cause
unnecessary hardships, the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the power to
modify the provisions of this chapter in unique circumstances with such
conditions and safeguards as it may reasonably determine to be in harmony
with the spirit of this chapter while still securing the public safety and
welfare and ensuring that substantial justice is done. 



   (B)   No variance of the provisions of this chapter shall be granted
unless it appears to the Board of Ordinance Appeals by a preponderance of the
evidence that all of the following facts and conditions exist:



      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the establishment that do not apply generally to
other establishments in the city, or a change in this chapter has imposed an
unreasonable hardship on the establishment's existing operations;



      (2)   The granting of such variance or modification will not
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to
the property or improvements in the vicinity of the establishment; and



      (3)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect
the purposes or objectives of any master plan of the city.



   (C)   The provisions of Division 11 of Chapter 2 of the City Code
shall govern all variance requests if not in conflict with the provisions of
this section. 



   (D)   A request for reconsideration by the Board may be filed in
writing with the Board, to the attention of the City Clerk, within 10 working
days after the date that the decision is rendered if the applicant has new
information not presented at the hearing. 



   (E)   A person may not file a new variance application based upon
the same facts until the expiration of one year after the Board's decision is
rendered.



   (F)   If a variance is approved, the applicant shall file a notice
of variance with the County Register of Deeds relating to the property.



   (G)   The fee to appear before the Board of Ordinance Appeals with a
request for a variance or reconsideration shall be established in the annual
appropriations ordinance.



(Ord. No. 453, § 1, 5-3-17)



CHAPTER 8:  ANIMALS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



8-1.  TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known and referred to as the "Animal Regulatory
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 6-1; Ord. No. 215A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-2.  PURPOSE AND APPLICATION.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent animals from running at large
and to prohibit and regulate the keeping of certain animals within
residential areas to promote the health, safety, and welfare of the people.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONMENT .  Leaving an animal unattended for more than 24 hours,
releasing the animal upon public highways or public or private lands, or
failure to provide proper or adequate food, water, exercise, shelter, or
medical care.



   ADEQUATE CARE .  The provision of sufficient food, water, shelter,
sanitary conditions, exercise, and veterinary medical attention in order to
maintain an animal in a state of good health.



   ANIMAL .  Any living organism typically capable of moving about, but
not of making its own food by photosynthesis, including any mammal, bird,
fish, reptile, ferret, snake, turtle, mollusk, crustacean, or any other
vertebrate other than a human being.



   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER . Any person designated by the State of Michigan
or other unit of government as a law enforcement officer who is qualified to
perform animal control duties under the laws of this state.  The minimum
employment standards relative to the recruitment, selection, and appointment
of animal control officers in this city shall at least equal the minimum
standards set forth in M.C.L. § 287.289c.



   ANIMAL SHELTER . Any facility operated by a humane society,
governmental agency or its authorized agents for the purpose of impounding or
caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law.



   AT LARGE .  Except when lawfully hunting, an animal which is not on
the premises of the owner and not under the control of a person by leash or
lead of suitable strength, or an animal which is not confined within a motor
vehicle.



   CAT .  Any member of the species "Felis Catus."



   DANGEROUS ANIMAL .



      A dog or other animal:



         (1)   That bites or attacks a person, or a dog that
bites or attacks and causes serious injury or death to another dog while the
other dog is on the property or under the control of its owner;



         (2)   Having a propensity, tendency, or disposition to
attack, cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of persons or domestic
animals;



         (3)   Which behaves or behaved in such a manner that the
owner knows or should have known that the animal had tendencies to bite or
attack persons or other domestic animals;



         (4)   Which has been bitten by any animal known to have
been afflicted with rabies; or



         (5)   Which has bitten any person.



      DANGEROUS ANIMAL and VICIOUS ANIMAL shall have the same meaning
for purposes of this chapter.



      DANGEROUS ANIMAL does not include the following:



         (1)   An animal that bites or attacks a person who is
knowingly trespassing on the property of the animal's owner;



         (2)   An animal that bites or attacks a person who
provokes or torments an animal;



         (3)   An animal that is responding in a manner that an
ordinary and reasonable person would conclude was designed to protect a
person if that person is engaged in lawful activity or is the subject of an
assault or battery, or to protect itself or another animal; or



         (4)   An exotic animal, as defined in § 8-23.



   DOG .  Any member of the species "Canis Familiaries."



   DOMESTIC ANIMAL . An animal that has traditionally, through a long
association with humans, lived in a state of dependence upon humans or under
the dominion and control of humans and has been kept as a tame household pet,
including but not limited to: dogs, cats, hamsters, gerbils, ferrets, mice,
rabbits, cockatiels, cockatoos, canaries, finches, parakeets, parrots, and
tropical fish.



   FERRET .  An animal of any age of the species "Mustela Furo."



   HARBORING or KEEPING .  The act of any person allowing an animal to
remain and be lodged within his or her house, store, building, enclosure, or
premises.



   KENNEL .  An establishment on which three or more dogs are kept, for
sale, boarding, breeding, or training purposes, for remuneration.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER or POLICE OFFICER .  Includes animal control
officers duly authorized by the city or other governmental agency.



   LEASH or LEAD .  A thong, cord, rope, chain, or similar tether which
holds an animal in restraint and which is not more than six feet in length.



   LIVESTOCK .  Those species of animals used for human food and fiber or
those species used for service to humans.  LIVESTOCK includes, but is not
limited to cattle, sheep, new world camelids, goats, bison, privately owned
cervids, ratites, swine, equine, poultry, aquaculture, and rabbits. LIVESTOCK
does not include dogs and cats.



   NEGLECT .  To fail to sufficiently and properly care for an animal to
the extent that the animal's health is jeopardized.



   OWNER .  Every person having a right of property in an animal; an
authorized agent of the person having a right of property in an animal; every
person who keeps or harbors an animal or has it in his or her care, custody
or control; every person who permits an animal to remain on or about the
premises occupied by him or her; every person who has the apparent authority
to have a right of property in an animal; any person having control or
purporting to have control over an animal; the person named in the licensing
records of any animal as the owner; the occupant of the premises where the
animal is usually kept if such premises are other than the premises of the
owner as shown on the licensing records; any person who feeds, shelters, or
otherwise entices any animal to the owner's premises, where such animal is
otherwise wild or a stray; or any person in possession of, harboring, or
allowing any animal to remain about their premises for a period of three
consecutive days or more. The parent or guardian of an owner under 18 years
of age shall be deemed the owner as defined in this section. If an animal has
more than one owner, all such persons are jointly and severally liable for
the acts or omissions of an owner, even if the animal was in the possession
of or under the control of a keeper at the time of the offense.  OWNER shall
include every person who resides at the same address or permits an animal to
remain on the premises in which that person resides, if such person is of
legal age and capacity and has knowledge that the animal is a dangerous
animal.



   PERSON .  An individual, partnership, corporation, cooperative
association, joint venture, or other legal or business entity, including but
not limited to, contractual relationships.



   PREMISES .  An area of private property, including grounds, buildings,
and appurtenances.



   PROVOKE .  To perform an act or omission that an ordinary and
reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate the bite or attack
by an animal, including, but not limited to, threatening, teasing, or
striking an animal, or threatening or striking the animal's owner, either on
or off the animal owner's property.



   SANITARY CONDITIONS .  Space free from health hazards including
excessive animal waste, overcrowding of animals, or other conditions that
endanger the animal's health.



   SHELTER .  Adequate protection from the elements and weather
conditions suitable for the ages, species, and physical conditions of the
animal so as to maintain the animal in a state of good health. SHELTER for a
dog shall include one or more of the following:



      (1)   The residence of a dog's owner or other individual.



      (2)   A doghouse that is an enclosed structure with a roof and
of appropriate dimensions for the breed and size of the dog, with an
elevation of no less than four inches. The doghouse shall have dry bedding
when the outdoor temperature is or is predicted to drop below freezing. The
doghouse shall have an entrance which is either covered by a loose covering
designed to insulate the interior from harmful weather conditions, or which
is designed in such a way so as to otherwise shield the interior from harmful
weather conditions.



      (3)   A structure, including, but not limited to, a garage,
barn, or shed that is sufficiently insulated and ventilated to protect the
dog from exposure to extreme temperatures or, if not sufficiently insulated
and ventilated, contains a doghouse as provided under (2) above that is
accessible to the dog.



   TETHERING .  The restraint and confinement of a dog by the use of a
chain, rope, or similar device.



   TORMENT .  An act or omission, including abandonment or neglect, that
causes unjustifiable pain, suffering, or distress to an animal, including
mental or emotional distress as evidenced by the animal's altered behavior,
for a purpose such as sadistic pleasure, coercion, or punishment that an
ordinary and reasonable person would conclude is likely to precipitate a bite
or attack.



   WATER .  Potable water that is suitable for the age and species of
animal, made regularly available unless otherwise directed by a veterinarian
licensed to practice veterinary medicine.



   WILD ANIMAL .  Any nondomesticated animal, any cross of a
nondomesticated animal, and any animal that has never been harbored, kept, or
otherwise possessed by a person.



(1978 Code, § 6-2; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Animal Industry Act; definitions, see M.C.L. §§ 287.705, 287.706



   Animals running at large; definitions, see M.C.L. § 433.11



   Charge or custody of animal; definitions, see M.C.L. § 750.50(1)



   Dangerous animals, see M.C.L. § 287.321



   Kennels, see M.C.L. § 287.270



   Municipal animal control officer; employment standards, see M.C.L. §
287.289c



8-4.  ABUSE PROHIBITED.



   An owner, possessor, or person having the charge or custody of an
animal shall not do any of the following:



   (A)   Fail to provide an animal with adequate care;



   (B)   Cruelly drive, work, or beat an animal, or cause an animal to
be cruelly driven, worked, or beaten;



   (C)   Carry or cause to be carried in or upon a vehicle or otherwise
any live animal having the feet or legs tied together, other than an animal
being transported for medical care, or a horse whose feet are hobbled to
protect the horse during transport or in any other cruel and inhumane manner;



   (D)   Carry or cause to be carried a live animal in or upon a
vehicle or otherwise without providing a secure space, rack, car, crate, or
cage, in which livestock may stand, and in which all other animals may stand,
turn around, and lie down during transportation, or while awaiting slaughter.
As used in this subdivision, for purposes of transportation of sled dogs,
STAND means sufficient vertical distance to allow the animal to stand without
its shoulders touching the top of the crate or transportation vehicle;



   (E)   Abandon an animal or cause an animal to be abandoned, in any
place, without making provisions for the animal's adequate care, unless
premises are temporarily vacated for the protection of human life during a
disaster. An animal that is lost by an owner or custodian while traveling,
walking, hiking or hunting shall not be regarded as abandoned under this
section when the owner or custodian has made a reasonable effort to locate
the animal;



   (F)   Willfully or negligently allow any animal, including one who
is aged, diseased, maimed, hopelessly sick, disabled, or nonambulatory to
suffer unnecessary neglect, torture, or pain;



   (G)   Tether a dog unless the tether is at least three times the
length of the dog as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its
tail and is attached to a harness or nonchoke collar designed for tethering.



   (H)   Leave an animal in a yard or outdoor enclosure without someone
at home who is monitoring and supervising the animal and who is capable of
controlling the animal.



(1978 Code, §§  6-8, 6-9; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, §
1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 411, § 8, 2-1-11)  Penalty, see § 8-5



Statutory reference:



   Abuse of animals, see M.C.L. § 750.50(2)



8-5.  CIVIL ACTIONS FILED BY CITY ATTORNEY; FORFEITURE; PENALTIES.



   (A)   If an animal is impounded and is being held by an animal
control shelter or its designee or an animal protection shelter or its
designee or a licensed veterinarian pending the outcome of a criminal action
charging a violation of § 8-4, before final disposition of the criminal
charge, the City Attorney may file a civil action in the court that has
jurisdiction of the criminal action, requesting that the court issue an order
forfeiting the animal to the animal control shelter or animal protection
shelter or to a licensed veterinarian before final disposition of the
criminal charge. The City Attorney shall serve a true copy of the summons and
complaint upon the defendant and upon a person with a known ownership
interest or known security interest in the animal or a person who has filed a
lien with the secretary of state in an animal involved in the pending action.
The forfeiture of an animal under this section encumbered by a security
interest is subject to the interest of the holder of the security interest
who did not have prior knowledge of, or consent to the commission of the
crime.



   (B)   Upon the filing of the civil action, the court shall set a
hearing on the complaint. The hearing shall be conducted within 14 days of
the filing of the civil action, or as soon as practicable. The hearing shall
be before a judge without a jury. At the hearing, the City Attorney has the
burden of establishing by a preponderance of the evidence that a violation of
§ 8-4 occurred. If the court finds that the City Attorney has met this
burden, the court shall order immediate forfeiture of the animal to the
animal control shelter or animal protection shelter or the licensed
veterinarian unless the defendant, within 72 hours of the hearing, submits to
the court clerk cash or other form of security in an amount to be determined
by the court to be sufficient to repay all reasonable costs incurred, and
anticipated to be incurred, by the animal control shelter or animal
protection shelter or the licensed veterinarian in caring for the animal from
the date of initial impoundment to the date of trial. If cash or other
security has been submitted, and the trial in the action is continued at a
later date, any order of continuance shall require the defendant to submit
additional cash or security in an amount determined by the court to be
sufficient to repay all additional reasonable costs anticipated to be
incurred by the animal control shelter or animal protection shelter or the
licensed veterinarian in caring for the animal until the new date of trial.
If the defendant submits cash or other security under this section the court
may enter an order authorizing the use of that money or other security before
final disposition of the criminal charges to pay the reasonable costs
incurred by the animal control shelter or animal protection shelter or the
licensed veterinarian in caring for the animal from the date of impoundment
to the date of final disposition of the criminal charges.



   (C)   The testimony of a person at a hearing held under this
subsection is not admissible against him or her in any criminal proceeding
except in a criminal prosecution for perjury. The testimony of a person at a
hearing held under this subsection does not waive the person's constitutional
right against self-incrimination.



   (D)   An animal seized under this section is not subject to any
other civil action pending the final judgment of the forfeiture action under
this section.



   (E)   A person who violates § 8-4 is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500 or community service for not more than 200 hours, or any
combination of these penalties and the cost of prosecution.



   (F)   If forfeiture is not ordered pursuant to this section, as a
part of the sentence for a violation of § 8-4, the court may order the
defendant to pay the costs of care, housing, and veterinary medical care for
the animal as applicable. If the court does not order a defendant to pay all
of the applicable costs listed in this section, or orders only partial
payment of these costs, the court shall state on the record the reason for
that action.



   (G)   As part of the sentence for a violation of § 8-4, the court
may, as a condition of probation, order the defendant not to own or possess
an animal for a period of time not to exceed the period of probation.



   (H)   A person who owns or possesses an animal in violation of an
order issued under this section is subject to revocation of probation. A
person who owns or possesses an animal in violation of an order issued under
this section is also subject to the civil and criminal contempt power of the
court, and if found guilty of criminal contempt, may be punished by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by a fine of not more than $500,
or both.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Charge or custody of animals; prohibited conduct, see M.C.L. § 750.50



8-6.  LAWFUL KILLING.



   The lawful killing or other use of an animal, including, but not
limited to the following, is not prohibited:



   (A)   Fishing;



   (B)   Hunting, trapping, or wildlife control regulated pursuant to
the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, being  M.C.L. §§
324.101 to 324.90106;



   (C)    Horse racing;



   (D)   The operation of a zoological park or aquarium;



   (E)   Pest or rodent control;



   (F)   Farming or a generally accepted animal husbandry or farming
practice involving livestock as permitted under the city's zoning ordinance;



   (G)   Activities authorized pursuant to rules promulgated under
section 9 of the Executive Organization Act of 1965, being M.C.L. § 16.109;



   (H)   Scientific research pursuant to Use of Dogs and Cats for
Research, being M.C.L. §§  287.381 to 287.395;



   (I)   Scientific research pursuant to sections 2226, 2671, 2676, and
7333 of the Public Health Code,  being M.C.L.  §§ 333.2226, 333.2671,
333.2676, and 333.7333.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Lawful killing of animals, see M.C.L. § 750.50(8)



8-7.  HUMANE TREATMENT REQUIRED.



   No owner shall fail to provide his or her animals with sufficient
wholesome food and water, proper shelter and protection from the weather,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, and with humane care and
treatment.



(1978 Code, § 6-7; Ord. No. 215A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-8.  DANGEROUS ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall own or harbor a vicious or dangerous animal,
an animal that has been bitten by any animal known to have been afflicted
with rabies, or an animal which has bitten any person.



   (B)   If an animal previously adjudicated to be a dangerous animal
attacks or bites a person and causes an injury that is not a serious injury,
the owner of the animal is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, a fine of not less than $250 nor more
than $500, or community service work for not less than 240 hours, or any
combination of these penalties. The court may order a person convicted under
this subsection to pay the costs of the prosecution.



   (C)   Upon a sworn complaint that an animal is dangerous and the
animal has caused serious injury or death to a person or has caused serious
injury or death to a domestic animal, a district court magistrate or district
court shall issue a summons to the owner ordering him or her to appear and
show cause why the animal should not be destroyed.



   (D)   Upon the filing of a sworn complaint as provided in subsection
(C), the court or magistrate shall comply with the requirements of  M.C.L.
§ 287.322.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous animals, see M.C.L. § 287.322



   Dangerous animals; penalty, see M.C.L. § 287.323(3)



8-9.  CONTROL OF ANIMALS; RUNNING AT LARGE; CLEANUP.



   (A)   All animals shall be kept under restraint. It shall be
unlawful for any person to cause or permit any animal owned, kept, possessed,
or harbored by such person, or under his or her control, to run at large or
unattended, upon the public streets, walks, alleys, parks, public places
within the city, or upon the premises of another, without express permission
of the owner or occupant of the private premises. All female dogs in heat
shall be kept inside a building or within a fence or other enclosure which
limits the dog to a particular confined area so that the dog cannot come into
contact with a male dog except for planned breeding. When allowed outdoors to
relieve itself, a dog in heat shall be under restraint and under the
observation of its owner.



   (B)   If an animal trained or used for fighting or an animal that is
the first or second generation offspring of a dog trained or used for
fighting goes beyond the property limits of its owner without being securely
restrained, or is not securely enclosed or restrained on the owner's
property, the owner is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 90 days or a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $500, or
both.



   (C)   Subsection (B) does not apply to the following:



      (1)   A dog trained or used for fighting, or the first or
second generation offspring of a dog trained or used for fighting, that is
used by a law enforcement agency of the state or county, city, village, or
township;



      (2)   A certified leader dog recognized and trained by a
national guide dog association for the blind or for persons with
disabilities; or



      (3)   A corporation licensed under the Private Security Guard
Act of 1968, being M.C.L. §§ 338.1051 to 338.1085, when a dog trained or
used for fighting, or the first or second generation offspring of a dog
trained or used for fighting, is used in accordance with the Private Security
Guard Act of 1968.



   (D)   An animal that is involved in a violation of subsection (B)
shall be confiscated as contraband by a law enforcement officer and shall not
be returned to the owner, trainer, or possessor of the animal. The animal
shall be taken to a local humane society or other animal welfare agency. If
an animal owner, trainer, or possessor is convicted under subsection (B), the
court shall award the animal involved in the violation to the local humane
society or other animal welfare agency at the expense of the animal's owner,
trainer, or possessor.



   (E)   This section does not apply to conduct that is permitted by
and is in compliance with any of the following:



      (1)   Part 401 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act being, M.C.L. §§ 324.40101 to 324.40119;



      (2)   Part 435 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, being M.C.L. §§ 324.43501 to 324.44106;



      (3)   Part 427 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, being M.C.L. §§ 324.42701 to 324.42714;



      (4)   Part 417 of the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act, being M.C.L. §§ 324.41701 to 324.4712.



      (5)   An agreement between the city and any other governmental
agency for the humane treatment and release of stray or feral cats to the
area in which they were taken into custody.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from being charged
with, convicted of, or punished for any other violation of law that is
committed by that person while violating this section.



   (G)   A person who sustains any loss of, or damage to, property by
an animal running at large may demand reasonable compensation from the owner
of the animal as reparation for the loss or damage as ordered by the court.
The demand for compensation shall be in writing and include:



      (1)   A statement of when, where, what, and how much damage
was done.



      (2)   The identity or description of the animal and, if known,
the identity of the owner of the animal.



      (3)   The demand for compensation shall be verified by the
claimant and submitted to the law enforcement agency which has the animal in
its custody or possession.



   (H)   If the owner of an animal that is previously adjudicated to be
a dangerous animal allows the animal to run at large, the owner is guilty of
a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, a fine
of not less than $250 nor more than $500, or community service work for not
less than 240 hours, or any combination of these penalties. The court may
order a person convicted under this subsection to pay the costs of the
prosecution.



   (I)   Any person who owns, keeps, possesses, or harbors an animal
shall be responsible to ensure that the animal does not defecate on property
other than that person's property, or, if the animal does so, to promptly
clean up any fecal matter deposited by the animal.



   (J)   Animals found trespassing on school grounds, whether under
restraint or otherwise, shall constitute a nuisance per se, punishable as
provided in this chapter.



   (K)   This section may be construed to permit the use of
technological restraints, which include, but are not limited to, invisible
fences which emit signals or sounds to discourage an animal from exiting the
property; provided, that such technological restraints must be properly
installed, set up, operational, and advertised by signage as required by this
chapter, and provided the technological restraint keeps the restrained
animals at least three feet away from any public ways or property lines. The
permission granted by this section to utilize technological restraints for a
particular animal shall be automatically revoked upon a second violation by
that animal of the restraint requirements of this chapter. In no event shall
the use of technological restraints immunize an owner from the criminal and
civil responsibilities set forth in this chapter for failure to keep an
animal under restraint.



(1978 Code, §§ 6-4, 6-24; Ord. No. 215-A, §§ 1, 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No.
368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 447, § 1, 6-21-16)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Animals running at large, see M.C.L. §§ 433,12, 433.13



   Animals used for baiting or fighting, see M.C.L. § 750.49



   Dangerous animals, see M.C.L. §§ 287.322, 287.323



8-10.  IMPOUNDMENT.



   (A)   A police or animal control officer may seize and take into
custody or possession any animal running at large in violation of this
chapter, or any animal which is suspected of having rabies or which has
bitten a human or harmed another domesticated animal. A person may seize and
take into custody or possession any animal found running at large or
trespassing upon the premises owned or occupied by that person. A person who
takes an animal into custody or possession pursuant to this section, or who
has been bitten by an animal, or who owns an animal and knows that a person
has been bitten by the animal, shall immediately notify the Police Department
or other law enforcement agency. The Police Department or law enforcement
agency shall promptly take custody or possession of the animal.



   (B)   If the Police Department takes custody or possession of an
animal under this section, and if the owner of the animal is known, the
Police Department shall return the animal to its owner, unless the owner
refuses to make reparation as provided in § 8-9(G). If the owner is not
known, the Police Department shall turn the animal over to the county for
disposition as appropriate.



   (C)   The owner of an animal in the custody or possession of the
Police Department pursuant to this chapter, at any time prior to the sale or
other disposition thereof, may claim and be entitled to the possession of the
animal. Upon payment of reasonable compensation to the entity or agency in
possession of the animal for care and keeping of the animal, upon
satisfactory proof of ownership of the animal, and upon making reparation as
provided in § 8-9(G), the animal shall be returned to its owner.



   (D)   In addition to, or in lieu of impounding an animal found at
large, a police or animal control officer or any person appointed by the
Council for that purpose may issue to the known owner of such animal a notice
of code violation. Such notice shall impose upon the owner a penalty in a
dollar amount to be assessed as determined by resolution of City Council,
which may, at the discretion of the animal owner, be paid within 72 hours in
full satisfaction of the assessed penalty.



   (E)   If such penalty is not paid within the time period prescribed,
a criminal warrant shall be initiated before a magistrate; and upon
conviction of a violation of this article, the owner shall be punished as
provided in § 1-9.



   (F)   The owner of any animal impounded under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable to the city for the expense of impoundment. Failure
to make payment in full to the City Treasurer within ten days of receipt of
an invoice shall constitute a civil infraction. The city may commence a civil
action against a person who is liable for the payment of impoundment expenses
to recover the expenses, statutory interest, court costs, and reasonable
attorney fees, where the person has failed to make payment in full within ten
days of receipt of an invoice from the City Treasurer.



   (G)   In the event that an owner desires to surrender an animal to
the city, whether for purposes of euthanizing the animal or otherwise, the
owner shall be required to compensate the city for costs incurred for
transport and proper disposal of the animal.



(1978 Code, §§ 6-12, 6-48, 6-49, 6-51, 6-52; Ord. No. 215-A, §§ 1, 4, 
12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 411, § 5, 2-1-11)  Penalty,
see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Animals running at large, see M.C.L. §§ 433.14 through 433.18



8-11.  SANITATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any animal owned
or harbored by him to deposit fecal matter in any place other than the
premises where the animal is harbored or kept, unless such fecal matter is
immediately collected and removed to the premises where the animal is
harbored or kept.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk any animal on any
property not owned by such person, whether public or private, unless such
person has an appropriate device for the collection of fecal matter in his
immediate possession and an appropriate depository for the transmission of
fecal matter to the premises where the animal is harbored or kept.



   (C)   Every person lawfully keeping or harboring any animal shall
keep or cause to be kept all manure or offal which is deposited by or which
accumulates from such animal, securely and closely confined to or buried upon
his or her premises and in such manner as will prevent it from being
scattered from such place of deposit into or upon any street, sidewalk,
alley, or gutter of the city, or into or upon any private property, and shall
so cover and care for it as to prevent any malodorous or offensive condition
to exist and to prevent any nuisance to arise therefrom. All such deposits
shall be promptly removed from the owner's premises and/or otherwise properly
disposed of, in no event later than 24 hours after a complaint is received by
the city. Failure to comply with this subsection is a misdemeanor.



(1978 Code, § 6-10; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 1-9



8-12.  COMMERCIAL AND FOOD SOURCE PURPOSES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No animals shall be raised, bred, or kept on any premises,
except that nonvicious domestic animals may be kept, provided they are not
kept, bred, or maintained for any commercial purposes.



   (B)   All wild animals, including birds, are deemed to be property
of the state and may not be harbored, imported, or otherwise kept on any
premises, for use as a source of food or for any other purpose, unless
otherwise permitted by state law. 



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 399, § 1, 12-16-08)  Penalty, see §
8-55



Statutory reference:



   Trapping of animals, see M.C.L.§ 324.43509



8-13.  DOMESTICATED PIGEONS.



   (A)   This chapter shall not be construed to prohibit the orderly
keeping of domesticated pigeons.  With input and assistance from
representatives of a national domesticated pigeon organization, the city has
enacted this section in an effort to expand upon antiquated state law
allowing the orderly keeping of racing pigeons to also allow the orderly
keeping of all domesticated pigeons.  In order to ensure that the keeping of
domesticated pigeons remains orderly, domesticated pigeons shall only be kept
in a loft which has been inspected and approved by the Building Department as
being in conformity with all applicable building and zoning codes and
regulations; which has been inspected and approved by animal control
personnel as being in conformity with administrative standards promulgated by
the city manager; and which has been issued a permit from the County Health
Department as a proper structure for purposes of keeping domesticated
pigeons.  A copy of the administrative standards shall be kept in the office
of the city clerk and may be obtained by any owner of an existing pigeon loft
or any applicant for a pigeon loft permit at no charge.  Existing lofts must
comply with any new or updated administrative standards unless the city
manager deems, upon written request for a waiver, that the public health and
welfare purposes behind the administrative standards will not be achieved by
requiring an existing loft to meet the new or updated standards.



   (B)   A “domesticated pigeon” is a pigeon that is seamlessly
banded upon the leg with the name of the organization with which the pigeon
is registered and with a unique identification or registration number stamped
on the band.  Acceptable organizations include the National Pigeon
Association; the American Racing Pigeon Union; the International Federation
of Racing Homers; the National Birmingham Roller Club, the American Tippler
Union; or similar organizations recognized as legitimate pigeon fancier
organizations by the domesticated pigeon industry.



   (C)   Officials from the Building Department and Police Department
shall have the right, during reasonable hours, to enter upon property and
premises for the purpose of randomly inspecting a licensed pigeon loft (or
one for which a license is pending) to ensure that the loft is being
maintained in conformity with the administrative standards promulgated by the
city manager and the standards adopted by the Macomb County Health
Department.  Revocation of the city’s loft inspection approval on file
with the Macomb County Health Department may be transmitted by city officials
to the county when:



      (1)   A licensee or applicant fails the initial inspection and
is unable or unwilling to remedy the violation(s) within 72 hours; or



      (2)   The licensee or applicant refuses to accommodate all
reasonable requests for inspection.  Unlicensed lofts are prohibited and,
unless a license application is pending, city officials may take immediate
action to eliminate such lofts including, but not limited to, issuing
citations and seeking abatement of such nuisances through the Board of
Ordinance Appeals.



   (D)   All pigeon and pigeon loft odors shall be minimized so that
they do not cross property lines.  All pigeon and pigeon loft odor
complaints shall be independently verified at the property line and tracked
to the loft by animal control personnel before a loft owner may be held
responsible under this section for the odor.  All lofts must be free from
any insect or rodent infestations.  All pigeons shall be confined to the
loft, except for reasonable but limited periods necessary for exercise,
training, and competition.  Such exercise, training, and competition periods
shall not exceed three hours at any one time.  At no time shall pigeons be
allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others, except
that reasonable exceptions shall be made for short-term training of juvenile
pigeons.  All domesticated pigeons shall be fed within the confines of their
loft.



   (E)   The owner of every domesticated pigeon shall be responsible
for the removal of any excreta deposited by the pigeon on public walks,
recreation areas, or private property.  Responsibility shall be
independently verified by an animal control officer as attributable to the
pigeon(s) at issue.



   (F)   Violation of any provision of this section is punishable as
set forth in chapter one of the city code.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 399, § 2, 12-16-08)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see M.C.L. § 433.351



   Racing pigeons, see M.C.L. § 433.19



8-14.  NUISANCE PER SE.



   Any continuing or repeated violation of this chapter shall constitute a
nuisance per se and may be abated by an action in circuit court. In addition,
any person who permits or allows a nuisance per se violation of this chapter
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.



(1978 Code, § 6-77; Ord. No. 215-A, § 6, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-15.  RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.



   Every owner of an animal shall be liable for damages for any and all
injuries to persons or property caused by such animal, to be determined and
collected in appropriate civil proceedings. Nothing in this chapter shall be
construed to impose any liability upon the city, its agents, or its employees
for damages caused by such animal.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-16.  BURIAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.



   All animals or parts of an animal, placed into any lake, river, creek,
pond, road, street, alley, lane, lot, field, meadow, or common, or in any
place within one mile of any residence, shall be buried at least four feet
under ground. The owners of any buried animal who knowingly permit the animal
to remain in a place to the injury of the health or the annoyance of the
citizens of Sterling Heights shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. A new
misdemeanor shall be charged for every 24 hours the animal remains buried in
violation of this section. The misdemeanor shall be punishable by a fine of
not less than $50 nor more than $100, or by imprisonment of not less than 30
days nor more than 90 days. This section shall not be applicable in the event
that a more restrictive zoning ordinance applies.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Burial of dead animals, see M.C.L. § 750.57



8-17.  VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Violations of this chapter are misdemeanors punishable as set
forth in § 8-55 unless otherwise specified in § 1-9(C) or unless a
different penalty is set forth in this chapter.



   (B)   Violation of this chapter may result in impoundment and/or
abatement of a nuisance.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-18.  ZONING ORDINANCE.



   No person shall establish or maintain a regulated use in violation of
the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-19.  TECHNOLOGICAL RESTRAINT; POSTING REQUIRED.



   In the event that permissible technological restraint mechanisms are
utilized as set forth in this chapter, all such mechanisms shall be
publicized by means of posting notice of the use of such mechanism or by such
means as will be open and obvious to law enforcement officers and passersby.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-20.  REPORTING OF ANIMALS HIT BY MOTOR VEHICLE.



   Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic
animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and
shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner. In the
event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at
once report the accident to the Police Department.



(1978 Code, § 6-11; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 1-9



8-21.  SALE OF RABBITS, CHICKS, DUCKLINGS PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, or
offer for sale, any baby chicks, rabbits two months old or younger,
ducklings, or other fowl or game as pets or novelties whether or not dyed or
otherwise artificially colored or treated. This section shall not be
construed to prohibit the display or sale of natural chicks or ducklings in
proper brooder facilities by hatcheries or stores engaged in the business of
selling the same to be raised for commercial purposes.



(1978 Code, § 6-5; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Sale of baby chicks, rabbits, ducklings, or other fowl or game, see
M.C.L. § 752.91



8-22.  EXPOSURE OF POISON PROHIBITED.



   No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed
with meat or other food or not, so that the same is liable to be eaten by any
animal; provided, that it shall not be unlawful to expose on one's own
premises common rat poisons mixed only with vegetable substances.



(1978 Code, § 6-6; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Exposing poisonous substances, see M.C.L. § 750.437



8-23.  ANIMALS EXCLUDED.



   (A)   EXOTIC ANIMAL means those animals that are not domestic or any
cross of those animals not domestic to North America. Except as otherwise
provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person to possess,
breed, exchange, buy or sell, or attempt any of those actions, or harbor the
following exotic or wild animals:



      (1)   Apes, monkeys, and related forms, excepting monkeys used
to assist disabled persons;



      (2)   Poisonous reptiles and other animals, spiders, and
insects;



      (3)   All species and sizes of constrictor snakes;



      (4)   Cats from the wild family, including, but not limited
to, bobcats, cheetahs, cougars, jaguars, leopards, lions, lynxes, mountain
lions, panthers, pumas, tigers;



      (5)   Nondomesticated carnivorous animals, including hybrid
crosses of nondomesticated carnivorous animals, including, but not limited
to, raccoons, skunks, foxes, wolves, etc.;



      (6)   All known species of crocodilia, including, but not
limited to, crocodiles and alligators;



      (7)   Piranha fish;



      (8)   All known species of chondrichthyes, including, but not
limited to, sharks;



      (9)   All known species of struthio, including, but not
limited to, ostriches, emus, and other ratites;



      (10)   Elephants;



      (11)   Perissodactyla, including, but not limited to,
rhinoceros and other animals with an odd number of toes, except as provided
in subsection (C);



      (12)   Artiodactyla, including, but not limited to, camels and
other hooved mammals with an even number of toes;



      (13)   Iguanas, lizards, geckos, newts, and other members of
the class reptilia;



      (14)   Hedgehogs.



   (B)   A person who owns or keeps an exotic or wild animal listed in
this section on the effective date of this chapter shall, within 30 days of
the effective date of this chapter, remove the animal from the city.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to the following:



      (1)   Zoological parks and aquariums that are accredited by
the American Association of Zoological Parks and Aquariums;



      (2)   Wildlife sanctuaries and nature preserves;



      (3)   Circuses;



      (4)   Bona fide scientific, medical, or educational research
facilities; or



      (5)   Properly licensed stables.



(1978 Code, § 6-13; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-24.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  DOGS AND CATS



DIVISION 1.  IN GENERAL



8-25.  VIOLATION NOTICES, FEE.



   The Police Department, and any other persons authorized to enforce this
article, upon witnessing violations of this article under circumstances where
it is not practical, possible, or desirable in their judgment to impound the
dog or cat, may issue to the owner of the dog or cat a notice of such
violation, pursuant to which the owner shall pay to the Police Department
within ten days a service fee in an amount equal to the impounding fee which
would have been imposed under § 8-10 had the dog or cat been impounded at
the time of the violation.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-26.  CONFINEMENT; DISEASE OR CONTAMINATION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any dog or cat to
leave the owner's premises under any conditions, unless such dog or cat has
been immunized against rabies, provided nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to prevent an owner from taking his dog or cat to the offices of
a veterinarian, for purposes of having such dog or cat immunized.



   (B)   A person who discovers, suspects, or has reason to believe
that an animal is either affected by a reportable disease or contaminated
with a toxic substance shall immediately report that fact, suspicion, or
belief to the Director of the Department of Agriculture or the Police
Department.



   (C)   A person who knowingly possesses or harbors affected or
suspect animals shall not expose other animals to the affected or suspect
animals or otherwise move the affected or suspect animals or animals under
quarantine, except with permission from the Director of the Department of
Agriculture.



   (D)   A person shall not remove or alter the official identification
of an animal. A person shall not misrepresent an animal's identity or the
ownership of an animal. A person shall not misrepresent the animal's health
status to a potential buyer.



   (E)   A violation of this section is punishable as set forth in §
1-9, except that a person who violates subsection (C) is guilty of a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not less than $300 or imprisonment of
not less than 30 days, or both.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Animals affected with reportable disease or contaminated with toxic
substance, see M.C.L. § 287.709



8-27.  CONTROL OF CATS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to have possession or
custody of any cat without having it under control or confined to his or her
premises at all times.



(1978 Code, § 6-37; Ord. No. 215-A, § 3, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



8-28.  POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.



   The purpose of this section is to establish a procedure for identifying
dogs that pose a potential or significant threat to the safety of people,
animals, or property, to impose precautionary restrictions on such dogs in an
effort to prevent a serious injury from occurring, and to promote responsible
ownership of all dogs within the city.



   (A)   Determination of a potentially dangerous dog. The
determination that a dog is potentially dangerous shall be based on the
following specific behaviors exhibited by the dog:



      (1)   Menaces, chases, displays threatening or aggressive
behavior toward, or otherwise threatens or endangers the safety of a person
or domestic animal.



      (2)   Causes injury to a person or domestic animal that is
less than a severe injury. For purposes of this section, the term "severe"
injury means permanent, serious disfigurement, serious impairment of health,
or serious impairment of a bodily function.



      (3)   Aggressively bites a person or domestic animal. For
purposes of this section,  the term "aggressively bites" means the dog
physically bit the person or animal in a manner not normally associated with
playfulness or accidental behavior while exhibiting objective signs of
aggression, attack behavior, or intent to harm.  The damage inflicted by a
bite, or lack thereof, may also be used by animal control officials as a
factor in determining whether a bite was aggressive.



      (4)   Any of the behaviors listed above exhibited in another
community and documented in an official report of any law enforcement or
animal control agency.



   (B)   Notice of determination and right of appeal. An animal control
officer shall have the authority to make a determination that a dog is
potentially dangerous if the animal control officer concludes the dog has
exhibited the behaviors specified in this section.  The owner or keeper of a
dog determined to be potentially dangerous shall be provided with a notice
containing the following information:



      (1)   A summary of the findings that form the basis for the
determination that the dog is potentially dangerous.



      (2)   Notice of requirements necessary to possess a
potentially dangerous dog in the city.



      (3)   Notice of the right to submit a written appeal of the
determination that the dog is potentially dangerous to the Board of Ordinance
Appeals within ten calendar days from the date of the notice. The notice
shall:



         (a)   Provide instructions for taking an appeal;



         (b)   Indicate that the appeal will be considered at the
next regular meeting of the Board of Ordinance Appeals to be held at least
three calendar days from the date of the notice, unless an earlier meeting is
scheduled and the owner requests in writing for the appeal to be heard at
that meeting;



         (c)   Indicate that the determination that the dog is
potentially dangerous is final and conclusive if an appeal is not taken; and



         (d)   Indicate that ownership of the dog will be deemed
forfeited to the city if any of the following occur:



            a.   An appeal is not taken and the owner has not
secured permanent relocation of the dog or satisfied all of the requirements
set forth below for possession of a potentially dangerous dog within 14
calendar days from the date of the notice.



            b.   The Board of Ordinance Appeals upholds the
determination that the dog is potentially dangerous and the owner or keeper
has not secured permanent relocation of the dog or satisfied all of the
conditions set forth in this section, and any other conditions established by
the Board, for possessing the potentially dangerous dog within 14 days of the
appeal hearing.



            c.   Animal control and the Board of Ordinance
Appeals shall have the authority, but no obligation, to extend any of the
deadlines set forth in this division for demonstrable good faith progress
toward relocation of the dog or toward satisfaction of the possession
requirements.



      (4)   Notice of the right to request removal of the
potentially dangerous classification after the dog has resided and been
licensed within the city for a minimum of three full years following the date
the dog is licensed with the city as a potentially dangerous dog without any
violations of the conditions required for keeping the potentially dangerous
dog and without any new incidents involving behavior by the dog that would
qualify for a potentially dangerous determination pursuant to this section. 
The removal request shall be sent in writing to animal control.  The
decision to remove the potentially dangerous classification shall be made in
the first instance by animal control upon a review of the history of the dog
and its residence for the three years preceding the date of the removal
request, including a premises inspection and an inspection of the dog to
ensure that the conditions set forth in this section have been followed.  If
the request is denied, the owner may appeal the denial to the Board of
Ordinance Appeals within ten calendar days.  Owners shall only be permitted
one request and one appeal during any 12-month period.



   (C)   Mitigating circumstances. An animal control officer shall have
discretion to refrain from making a potentially dangerous determination if
the animal control officer determines that the behavior was the result of the
victim abusing or tormenting the dog, was directed toward a trespasser or
person committing or attempting to commit a crime, involved accidental or
instinctive behavior while playing, did not involve a significant injury, or
other similar mitigating or extenuating circumstances.



   (D)   Impoundment.  A dog that is determined to be potentially
dangerous shall be removed from the city and placed with the Macomb County
Animal Shelter or, in the discretion of Animal Control, the owner may
authorize placement of the dog at a residential home outside of the city, or
with a qualified rescue organization or qualified dog lodging business,
during any quarantine period and until the owner has either confirmed a new
place of residence for the dog outside of the city or has exhausted any
appeals permitted by this section.  If the dog is not being housed at the
shelter, it must first be microchipped with all information required by
animal control.  All impoundment, lodging, and microchipping costs are the
sole responsibility of the dog's owner.



   (E)   Requirements for possession of a potentially dangerous dog. If
the owner of the dog requests that the dog be permitted to return to the
city, its return shall not be permitted until the following requirements have
been satisfied:



      (1)   Animal control shall confirm the following:



         (a)   The owner or keeper shall install secure fencing
at the property where the dog will reside which is maintained in good repair
with self-locking ingress or egress gates.  The fencing may be any
combination of chain link fencing and/or privacy fencing, shall only be
installed upon obtaining all required fence permits from the city, and shall
pass all required inspections prior to the dog's return to the property,



         (b)   When removed from the property of the owner or
keeper, a potentially dangerous dog shall always be restrained by a secure
leash of no more than four feet in length and under the control of a capable
person.



         (c)   A potentially dangerous dog shall have a microchip
implanted by a licensed veterinarian.  The microchip shall contain the name
and approximate age of the dog, its classification as potentially dangerous,
and the name, address, and telephone number of the registered owner.   



         (d)   The owner shall obtain and maintain public
liability insurance with policy coverage in the minimum amount of $250,000.



         (e)   Two recent color photographs of the dog, which
clearly show the color and approximate size of the animal, shall be provided
to animal control.



         (f)   The potentially dangerous dog shall meet the
requirements of the AKC's Canine Good Citizen Program, or its equivalent, to
the satisfaction of animal control.  Dogs that are under one year of age are
ineligible for the AKC Canine Good Citizen Program, so such dogs must be
enrolled in or have completed the AKC START Program or an equivalent approved
by animal control. The dog may not return to its city residence until these
requirements have been met, but it may be kept at a qualified rescue or dog
housing business until proof of successful completion of the program is
submitted to, and acknowledged by, animal control and the City Clerk.  For
every future violation of this chapter for which a dog may be determined to
be potentially dangerous which occurs after the dog has completed the
requirements of this subsection and been properly registered under this
section, additional training or testing, including but not limited to
renewing the dog's compliance with this division, may be imposed by animal
control as a condition of continuing to keep the dog within the city unless
the dog's status is changed to dangerous due to the nature or frequency of
the new violation(s).



         (g)   The potentially dangerous dog, if over 12 weeks
old, has been spayed or neutered.



         (h)   All impoundment and lodging costs have been paid
by the owner.



      (2)   Before the dog returns to any property within the city
other than a qualified rescue organization or a boarding business, the owner
of a potentially dangerous dog shall ensure that the dog's license is current
and shall register the dog with the City Clerk as a potentially dangerous dog
with all information required by the City Clerk's potentially dangerous dog
registration form, as well as the following:



         (a)   Proof of animal control's certification that the
required fence, self-locking gate, and leash have all been procured for the
dog.



         (b)   Proof of microchipping and the information
contained on the microchip.  The owner shall ensure that the microchip
information provided to the city is kept up to date.



         (c)   Proof of the required insurance policy.



         (d)   Proof of the successful completion of the required
training and temperament testing.



         (e)   Two recent color photographs of the dog, which
clearly show the color and approximate size of the animal.



      (3)   The owner or keeper of a potentially dangerous dog must,
within ten business days, report to the City Clerk if the dog has been
permanently removed from the city, has died, or has relocated within the
city.  The new address of a relocated potentially dangerous dog shall be
provided as part of the report to the City Clerk.



      (4)   After its initial registration, a potentially dangerous
dog shall be registered with the City Clerk annually and its owner or keeper
shall pay a registration fee established by the city's annual appropriations
ordinance.  This registration and fee shall be in addition to any other
requirements for annual licensing of an animal.



   (E)   Visiting Dogs.  Any dog that does not reside within the city
and is licensed by another community but which is determined to be a
potentially dangerous dog pursuant to this section shall not be subject to
the conditions for possessing a potentially dangerous dog within the city,
except that the dog shall be microchipped before its release, all impound and
microchipping costs shall be paid by the owner, and its owner and keeper
shall be advised by animal control that the dog is not to return unless all
of the conditions for possessing a potentially dangerous dog are first
satisfied.  In the event the dog is subsequently in the city without full
compliance with the requirements for possessing a potentially dangerous dog,
the person harboring or possessing the dog shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in division (F).



   (F)   Penalties.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (F)(2), any person who
owns, harbors, keeps, or possesses a potentially dangerous dog in violation
of any of the requirements of this section for possessing a potentially
dangerous dog, or who in any way aids or abets such ownership, harboring,
keeping, or possession, shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction.  The fine for a first violation shall be $500; for a second
violation, $750; and for all subsequent violations, $1,000 per violation. 
The court may only waive or reduce these fines in cases of financial
hardship, upon good cause shown, if the offender forfeits all ownership and
possessory rights to the offending dog and forfeits future dog ownership and
possessory rights until the offender has successfully completed animal
ownership educational training satisfactory to the city's animal control
officers and for a period of time determined appropriate by the court.



      (2)   In addition to the civil penalties set forth in division
(F)(1), a potentially dangerous dog shall be subject to immediate impoundment
by an animal control officer if it is determined that the dog is owned,
possessed, harbored or maintained in violation of this section. The animal
control officer shall issue a notice to the owner or keeper of the
potentially dangerous dog which indicates the hearing date at which the
city's Board of Ordinance Appeals will address the violations.  The city
shall provide notice of the hearing to any victim and/or any owner of an
animal victimized by the potentially dangerous dog.



      (3)   Any hearing scheduled for consideration by the Board of
Ordinance Appeals shall be administratively canceled if the owner or keeper
withdraws the requested appeal, corrects all correctable violations to the
satisfaction of animal control, satisfies the conditions for possessing a
potentially dangerous dog, permanently relocates the dog to the satisfaction
of animal control, or forfeits ownership rights to the potentially dangerous
dog prior to the scheduled Board hearing.  The owner or keeper shall be
responsible for all impound fees and costs, regardless of whether the hearing
is held or canceled.  If a hearing is held, the Board shall:



         (a)   Determine whether the status of the dog as
potentially dangerous shall be upheld and, if so, the conditions applicable
for return of the potentially dangerous dog to the owner or keeper, including
but not limited to deadlines for correcting any uncorrected violations and
random inspections of the premises and the potentially dangerous dog by an
animal control officer, with the owner or keeper responsible for payment of
inspection fees established by the city's annual appropriations ordinance. In
the event of noncompliance, the Board may impose conditions on removal from
the city that are rationally related to the public interest in protecting
others from any potential future harm that could be caused by the potentially
dangerous dog.  Failure to comply or remove the dog in accordance with the
decision of the Board within the timeframe established by the Board shall
result in forfeiture of ownership rights to the dog in favor of the city, in
which event animal control shall determine the final placement or disposition
of the dog.



(Ord. No. 411, § 2, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 449, § 1, 8-16-16)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous animals, see M.C.L. § 287.321 et seq.



8-28A.  DANGEROUS  DOG.



   (A)   Determination of a dangerous dog.  The determination that a
dog is dangerous shall be based on the following specific behaviors exhibited
by the dog:



      (1)   Exhibits aggressive behaviors that result in further
incidents or complaints after having been determined to be a potentially
dangerous dog.



      (2)   Causes severe injury to a person or domestic animal. For
purposes of this section, the term "severe" injury means permanent, serious
disfigurement, serious impairment of health, or serious impairment of a
bodily function.



      (3)   Kills a person or domestic animal.



      (4)   Its use in the commission of a crime, including but not
limited to dog fighting and guarding of illegal operations.



   (B)   Notice of determination. The definition of "dangerous animal"
in § 8-3 shall continue for purposes of issuing violations for harboring a
dangerous or vicious animal pursuant to § 8-8.  An animal control officer
shall have the additional authority to make a determination that a dog is to
be classified as dangerous under this article if the animal control officer
concludes the dog has exhibited the behaviors specified in this section. 
The owner or keeper of a dog determined to be dangerous shall be provided
with a notice containing the following information:



      (1)   A summary of the findings that form the basis for the
determination that the dog is dangerous.



      (2)   Notice of the prohibition of dangerous dogs within the
city.



      (3)   Notice of the right to appeal, as set forth below.



   (C)   Mitigating circumstances. An animal control officer shall have
discretion to refrain from making a determination of a dangerous dog if the
animal control officer determines that the behavior was the result of the
victim abusing or tormenting the dog, was directed toward a trespasser or
person committing or attempting to commit a crime, or other similar
mitigating or extenuating circumstances.  The animal control officer retains
discretion, however, to classify the dog as potentially dangerous if the
mitigating circumstances do not completely dispel concern about the dog's
future behaviors.



   (D)   Impoundment and euthanization. A dangerous dog is not
permitted within the city, shall be immediately impounded, and shall be
euthanized not less than ten calendar days after a determination is made by
an animal control officer.



   (E)   Right of appeal. The animal control officer shall issue a
notice to the owner or keeper of the right to appeal the determination that a
dog is dangerous to the Board of Ordinance Appeals within ten calendar days
from the date of the notice. The notice shall provide instructions for taking
an appeal and indicate that the determination is final and conclusive if an
appeal is not taken. The city shall provide notice of the hearing to any
victim and/or any owner of an animal victimized by the dangerous dog.  If
the owner forfeits ownership rights to the dangerous dog or obtains written
permission to relocate the dog to another municipality from that
municipality's chief administrative officer or chief animal control official
prior to the scheduled Board hearing, the matter shall be administratively
withdrawn from the agenda.  If relocation permission is obtained, the dog
shall first be microchipped at the owner's expense with all information
required by animal control, including the dog's designation as dangerous in
Sterling Heights and information referencing the city's incident report(s). 
The owner or keeper shall be responsible for all impound fees and costs,
regardless of whether the dog is forfeited, removed from the city, or a
hearing is held.  If a hearing is held, the Board shall determine whether
the dog is dangerous and subject to forfeiture and euthanization.



(Ord. No. 411, § 3, 2-1-11; Ord. No. 449, § 2, 8-16-16)



8-29.  RABIES; QUARANTINE; DESTRUCTION OF DANGEROUS DOGS AND CATS.



   (A)   Any dog or cat which is suspected of having rabies or any dog
or cat which has bitten a human shall be confined, quarantined, and observed
for a period of ten days by one of the following methods:



      (1)   Quarantine at the Macomb County Animal Shelter or
another animal control facility for all incidents involving harm to a human
or death to another domesticate animal; or



      (2)    For all other incidents, if authorized by an animal
control officer of the city, the confinement may be at a hospital or kennel
under the supervision of a veterinarian of the owner's choice, or at the
owner's residence in a fenced-in yard or pen, in the owner's home, or on a
chain of sufficient strength to contain the animal. In no event shall the
owner permit a quarantined animal to leave the owner's residence or to have
contact with animals or persons outside the owner's family.



   (B)   If an animal other than a dog or cat is suspected of having
rabies or has bitten a human, the procedures set forth in subsection (A)
shall be followed, except that the confinement and quarantine period shall be
as designated by an animal control officer of the city.



   (C)   Any confinement under this section, wherever located, shall be
at the owner's expense. Any expenses for laboratory analysis of an animal
confined and quarantined under this section are the responsibility of the
owner. If legal action is initiated to recover monies due under this section
for confinement expenses, the court may award reasonable attorney fees and
costs incurred to the animal control facility or other place of confinement.



   (D)   The ten-day confinement period may be extended by an animal
control officer of the city if warranted by circumstances involving harm
caused to a person or to a domesticated animal, and no animal shall be
released until the permission of the Police Department is obtained. In such
cases, the animal control officer who issued a criminal citation shall advise
the court that an expedited hearing date is requested due to the continuing
impoundment of the animal.  During the confinement period, no rabies
vaccination shall be administered.



   (E)   Whenever a dog or cat is brought to the animal shelter for
having bitten a person, the Police Department may, if deemed necessary and
advisable, and after holding such dog or cat a sufficient length of time to
meet the requirements of subsection (A) and of the health department for
investigation, cause such dog or cat to be destroyed as a dangerous or
vicious animal. Unless waived in writing, notice of intent to destroy such
dog or cat shall be given to the owner if known. The owner shall have seven 
days from mailing of such notice in which to seek a review by the district
court for the 41-A Judicial District of the order of the Police Department
for the destruction of such dog or cat.



   (F)   Failure of any resident or owner to comply and cooperate with
the requirements of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor. Failure to
comply with confinement and quarantine requirements shall also result in
confiscation of the animal and confinement at the Macomb County Animal
Shelter or other animal control facility.



   (G)   For purposes of this section, RABIES CONFINEMENT AT THE
OWNER'S RESIDENCE shall mean that the animal is kept inside a secure building
or otherwise confined so that no contact with animals or persons outside the
owner's family can occur for the confinement period. During such period of
confinement, the animal must not be let out to relieve itself without being
on a leash or lead and handled by a person capable of physically restraining
the animal.



(1978 Code, § 6-50; Ord. No. 215-A, § 4, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03; Ord. No. 411, §§ 6,7,  2-1-11)



8-30.  UNLAWFUL NOISE.



   No person shall harbor or keep any dog or cat which by loud, frequent,
or habitual barking, whining, yelping, howling, crying, or by any other noise
shall disturb the peace and quiet of any person or cause an annoyance or
disturbance to the neighborhood, or to people passing upon the streets of the
city.



(1978 Code, § 6-25; Ord. No. 215-A, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-31.  NUMBER OF ANIMALS PERMITTED.



   (A)    Notwithstanding any other ordinance to the contrary, it shall
be unlawful for any person or owner to keep or harbor more than four animals
older than four months of age at any one address or premises.



   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:



      (1)   Puppies and kittens not exceeding four months of age;



      (2)   The business premises of a licensed veterinarian; or



      (3)   Kennels operating in conformance with state law and
applicable zoning provisions.



(1978 Code, § 6-3; Ord. No. 215-A, § 1, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-32.  DISPLAY OF DOGS AND CATS TO AUTHORITY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to show or
exhibit, at any reasonable time, any dog or cat in his or her possession or
custody to any licensed inspector, police officer, animal control officer, or
health official of the city or county.



   (B)   Each owner or keeper of a cat within the city shall produce,
upon request of a law enforcement officer, a certificate of vaccination for
such cat.



(1978 Code, § 6-37; Ord. No. 215-A, § 3, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 1-9



8-33.  PARENTAL LIABILITY.



   The parent or guardian of any minor claiming ownership of any dog, cat,
or other animal subject to this chapter, shall be deemed to be the owner of
such animal and shall be charged for all penalties and fees imposed under
this chapter.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-34.  CONDUCT DIRECTED TOWARD DOGS ASSISTING OR SERVING THE BLIND.



   (A)   An individual shall not do either of the following:



      (1)   Willfully and maliciously assault, beat, harass, injure,
or attempt to assault, beat, harass, or injure a dog that he or she knows or
has reason to believe is a guide or leader dog for a blind individual, a
hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired individual, or a service dog for a
physically limited individual.



      (2)   Willfully and maliciously impede or interfere with, or
attempt to impede or interfere with duties performed by a dog that he or she
knows or has reason to believe is a guide or leader dog for a blind
individual, a hearing dog for a deaf or audibly impaired individual, or a
service dog for a physically limited individual.



   (B)   In a prosecution for a violation of subsection (A), evidence
that the defendant initiated or continued conduct directed toward a dog
described in subsection (A)(1) after being requested to avoid or discontinue
that conduct or similar conduct by a blind, deaf, audibly impaired, or
physically limited individual being served or assisted by the dog shall give
rise to a rebuttable presumption that the conduct was initiated or continued
maliciously.



   (C)   The terms used in this section shall have the meaning assigned
to them by M.C.L. § 750.50a.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



Statutory reference:



   Guide or leader dog, see M.C.L. § 750.50a



8-35.  ANIMALS USED IN LAW ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)    As used in this section the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



      DOG HANDLER .  A peace officer who has successfully completed
training in the handling of a police dog pursuant to a policy of the law
enforcement agency that employs that peace officer.



      PHYSICAL HARM .  Any injury to a dog's or horse's physical
condition.



      POLICE DOG .  A dog used by a law enforcement agency of this
state or of a local unit of government of this state that is trained for law
enforcement work and subject to the control of a dog handler.



      POLICE HORSE .  A horse used by a law enforcement agency of this
state or of a local unit of government of this state for law enforcement work.



      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM .  Any injury to a dog's or horse's
physical condition or welfare that is not necessarily permanent but that
constitutes substantial body disfigurement, or that seriously impairs the
function of a body organ or limb.



   (B)   A person shall not intentionally cause physical harm to a
police dog or police horse.



   (C)   A person shall not intentionally harass or interfere with a
police dog or police horse lawfully performing its duties.



   (D)   Except as provided by state law, a person who violates
subsection (B) or (C) is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit an individual from being
charged with, convicted of, or punished for any other violation of law
committed by that individual while violating this section.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Police dog or horse, see M.C.L. § 750.50c



8-36.  ELECTRONIC VACCINATION REPORTING. 



   (A)   Beginning January 1, 2014, every veterinarian shall transmit
to the city's designee the certificate of vaccination for every dog that
resides or is kept within the city and that is vaccinated by the
veterinarian.  Certificates may be transmitted no later than the fifteenth
day of the month following the month in which the rabies vaccination was
administered by the veterinarian.  The certificate shall be in a form or
format required by the City Clerk and shall include all information required
by the City Clerk for licensing purposes and by Animal Control for public
safety purposes, including but not limited to all of the information included
on the standard rabies vaccination certificates used by the veterinarian in
the ordinary course of business. 



   (B)   The City Clerk may waive the vaccination reporting requirement
set forth in this section for one-year intervals if the veterinarian or owner
produces a written statement from the veterinarian each year indicating that
the dog should not be vaccinated because vaccination will have an adverse
health impact on the dog.  In such instances, the owner must include with
the dog license application a signed affidavit affirming "As the owner of an
unvaccinated dog, I am aware of and assume all of the potential liability and
risk and I recognize the potential for court-ordered euthanasia and/or
quarantine of the dog should it bite a person or animal or otherwise expose a
human to rabies.  Under penalty of forfeiture of the dog without court
proceedings, I agree to keep the unvaccinated dog muzzled and properly under
control while it is on a public sidewalk or in any place open to the
public." 



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the term "veterinarian" shall
include, but not be limited to, any veterinarian, veterinary doctor,
individual acting under the direction or supervision of a veterinarian or
veterinary doctor, animal hospital, veterinary clinic, veterinary facility,
or any individual who administers a dog's rabies vaccination within the City.



   (D)   A failure to comply with the requirements of this section
shall be deemed a municipal civil infraction, punishable as provided in
Chapter 1 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 431, § 1, 10-1-13)



8-37-8-40.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  DOG LICENSING



8-41.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   Any person owning, keeping, possessing, harboring, or having
custody within the city of any dog six months old or older must obtain a
license for such dog, pursuant to state law, from the City Clerk for a fee to
be determined by the county. No person shall keep, possess, harbor, or have
custody of an unlicensed dog which is required to be licensed under this
section.



   (B)   The following shall be unlawful:



      (1)   For any person to own any dog six months old or older
that does not at all times wear a collar with a tag approved by the Director
of Agriculture, attached as provided in this chapter; or



      (2)   For any person, except the owner or authorized agent, to
remove any license tag from a dog.



   (C)   A person who owns or harbors a dog shall produce proof of a
valid dog license upon request of a person who is authorized to enforce this
chapter.



   (D)   The owner of a dog that is four or more months old shall
apply, within 30 days, to the City Clerk or the Clerk's authorized agent for
a license for each dog owned or kept by him or her. This subsection will not
apply to a nonresident keeping a dog within the city for no longer than 30
days.



   (E)    The licensing period shall begin April 1.  Licensing periods
of 1, 2, and 3 years shall be available as options to applicants, except that
no license shall be issued for a duration longer than the time during which
the dog’s rabies vaccination certificate is valid plus 90 days.  All
licenses shall expire at the end of March 31 during whichever licensing
period was issued to the applicant.



   (F)   Written application for licenses shall be made to the City
Clerk. The license application shall state the breed, sex, age, color, and
markings of the dog, and the name and address of the current and last
previous owner. The application for a license shall be accompanied by a valid
certificate of a current vaccination for rabies, with a vaccine licensed by
the United States Department of Agriculture, signed by an accredited
veterinarian who directly supervised the vaccination. The certificate for
vaccination for rabies shall state the month and year of expiration for the
rabies vaccination, in the veterinarian's opinion. When applying for a
license, the owner shall pay the required license fee.



   (G)   The owner of a dog that is required to be licensed under this
section shall keep the dog currently vaccinated against rabies by an
accredited veterinarian with a vaccine licensed by the United States
Department of Agriculture.



   (H)   A person who becomes owner of a dog that is four or more
months old and that is not already licensed shall apply for a license within
30 days. A person who owns a dog that will become four months old and that is
not already licensed shall apply for a license within 30 days after the dog
becomes four months old.



   (I)   No license or license tag issued for one animal shall be
transferable to another animal. No person shall use any license for any
animal other than the animal for which the license was issued.



   (J)   If a dog license is lost or destroyed, the license holder
shall obtain a duplicate license from the city upon payment of the prescribed
replacement license fee.



   (K)   The City Clerk shall maintain a record of the identifying
numbers of all tags issued and shall make this record available to the public
during business hours. These records will be kept for a period of three years.



(1978 Code, § 6-23; Ord. No. 215-A, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03; Ord. No. 431, § 2, 10-1-13)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Dog law, see M.C.L. §§ 287.261 et seq.



8-42.  LICENSE FEES.



   License fees shall be established by  the annual appropriations
ordinance.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 388, § 3, 1-3-07)



Statutory reference:



   Dog licenses, see  M.C.L. § 287.266



8-43.  LICENSE FEE EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   A dog which is an authorized law enforcement dog, or which is
used as a guide or leader dog for a blind person, a hearing dog for a deaf or
audibly impaired person, a service dog for a physically limited person, or a
dog owned by a person over the age of 60, is not subject to any fee for
licensing.



   (B)   The terms used in this section shall have the meanings
assigned to them by M.C.L. §  287.291.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Dogs not subject to license fees, see  M.C.L. § 287.291



8-44.  IDENTIFICATION TAGS.



   (A)   Upon acceptance of the license application and fee, the City
Clerk shall issue a durable identification tag or collar, stamped with an
identifying number and the year of issuance. Tags should be designed so that
they may be conveniently fastened or riveted to the animal's collar or
harness.



   (B)   Dogs must wear identification tags affixed to substantial
collars at all times. Every dog and cat that is not required to be licensed
shall bear an identification tag setting forth the name and address of its
owner or keeper.



(1978 Code, § 6-23; Ord. No. 215-A, § 2, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Dog license tags, see  M.C.L. § 287.267



8-45.  PENALTY FOR STEALING OR CONFINING LICENSED DOG.



   Any person who shall steal, or confine and secret any dog licensed
under this chapter or kept under a kennel license, unless legally authorized
to do so, or unless such confining is justifiable for the protection of
person, property, or game, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$100, or imprisonment in the County Jail for not less than 60 nor more than
90 days, or both in the discretion of the court.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Penalty for stealing or confining licensed dog, see  M.C.L. § 287.286b



8-46.  PUBLIC NUISANCES.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any owner or keeper of an animal to fail to
exercise proper care and control of the animal so as to have it become a
public nuisance. For purposes of this section, a public nuisance includes:



      (1)   An animal which is a safety or health hazard, which
damages or destroys the property of another (including garden and flower beds
and trees), which creates offensive odors which materially interfere with or
disrupt another person in the conduct of lawful activities at such person's
home, or which urinates or defecates upon private property not owned or
exclusively occupied by the owner or keeper or upon public property if the
feces deposited by the animal are not immediately removed by the owner.



      (2)   An animal at large that jumps on, or attempts to herd a
person or persons, or that runs after and vocalizes at horses, joggers,
pedestrians, bicyclists, or any vehicle being ridden or driven upon the roads
or any public grounds or place within the city.



      (3)   An animal that exhibits exuberant greeting behavior
while not on its owner's property and without the intent to harm, including
but not restricted to jumping up, chasing, and excessive mouthing.



      (4)   An animal that chases or attacks wildlife (including
birds) or livestock on property not owned or exclusively occupied by the
owner, whether or not the animal injures or destroys the wildlife or
livestock.



      (5)   An animal that is required to be licensed under this
chapter but is unlicensed.



   (B)   The Police Department or the City Attorney may initiate
proceedings for elimination of the nuisance.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Unlicensed animal, see M.C.L. § 287.277



8-47.  PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN VIOLATIONS.



   Unless designated as a municipal civil infraction in § 1-9(C) or a
specific penalty is otherwise set forth, any person violating or failing or
refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall pay a fine not less than
$10 nor more than $100, or shall be imprisoned in the County Jail for not
exceeding 90 days, or be subject to both such fine and imprisonment. Any
person presenting a false claim, knowing it to be false, or receiving any
money on such false claim, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction, shall pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $100, or
shall be imprisoned in the county jail for not exceeding 90 days, or both
such fine and imprisonment.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Penalties; disposition of fines, see M.C.L. § 287.286



8-48.  EXCEPTIONS.



   None of the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to require
the licensing of any dog imported into this city, for a period not exceeding
30 days, for show, trial, breeding, or hunting purposes.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



Statutory reference:



   Dogs imported temporarily, see M.C.L. § 287.289



8-49.  REVIEW OF LICENSE OF REPEAT OFFENDERS.



   The City Clerk shall review automatically all licenses issued to animal
owners against whom three or more ordinance violations have been assessed in
a 12-month period. Licenses may be revoked by the City Clerk after notice and
an opportunity for a hearing are afforded to the owner.



(1978 Code, § 6-53; Ord. No. 215-A, § 4, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-50.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  FERRETS



8-51.  RABIES; VACCINATIONS; INCIDENT REPORTS; HANDLING GUIDELINES;
CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   A person shall not own or harbor a ferret over 12 weeks of age
unless the ferret has a current vaccination against rabies with an approved
rabies vaccine administered by a veterinarian, unless otherwise exempt from
this requirement under state law.



   (B)   A person who owns or harbors a ferret that has bitten,
scratched, caused abrasions, or contaminated with saliva or other infectious
material an open wound or mucous membrane of a human being shall report the
incident within 48 hours to the county public health department.



   (C)   A person who owns or harbors a ferret that has potentially
exposed a person or other animal to rabies by biting, scratching, causing
abrasions, or contaminating open wounds or mucous membranes with saliva or
other infectious material shall handle the ferret in accordance with current
published guidelines of the centers of disease control and prevention.



   (D)   A person who owns or harbors a ferret shall produce proof of a
valid rabies certificate signed by a veterinarian for the ferret upon request
of a law enforcement officer.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



Statutory reference:



   Ferrets; vaccination required, see M.C.L. § 287.892



8-52.  CONFINEMENT.



   (A)   An owner shall prevent a ferret from leaving the owner's
property unless the ferret is confined or leashed and under the direct
control of the owner or a responsible person designated by the owner.



   (B)   A person shall not release a ferret into the wild or abandon a
ferret.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



Statutory reference:



   Ferrets; confinement, see M.C.L. § 287.894



8-53.  HOBBY BREEDERS.



   Hobby breeders shall be regulated in accordance with the provisions of
state law. A person who violates the state law hobby breeder regulations is
guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



Statutory reference:



   Ferrets; breeding of, see M.C.L. § 287.893



8-54.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES



8-55.  VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES.



   (A)   A person who violates this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor
unless otherwise specified in § 1-9(C) or elsewhere, and shall pay the costs
of the prosecution. In addition, the violation is punishable by one or more
of the following unless a contrary provision is otherwise set forth:



      (1)   Imprisonment for not more than 90 days.



      (2)   A fine of not less than $500.



      (3)   Community service work of not more than 120 hours.



      (4)   Relinquishment of the privilege of animal ownership,
either permanently or for a defined period of time set by the court.



      (5)   Regardless of whether relinquishment is ordered, the
court may order the defendant to pay the costs of care, housing, and
veterinary medical care for the animal as applicable.



      (6)    Private or group obedience classes, evaluation by a
behavior specialist, and/or completion of a responsible ownership course.



   (B)   A person who violates § 8-52(A) is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of not more than $100, and shall pay the costs of the
prosecution.



   (C)   A person who violates § 8-41(A) is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine as set forth in § 1-26(B) of
the city code, except that the court shall instead assess a fine in
accordance with the schedule set forth in § 1-26(A) upon receipt of
certification by the city clerk and/or an animal control officer of the city
that the person, before the appearance date on the citation, properly
licensed and registered the dog as required by this chapter, including
payment of all licensing, registration, and late fees.



   (D)   A law enforcement officer may issue an appearance ticket for
any misdemeanor violation of this article as described in subsection (A).



   (E)   In addition to any other action authorized by this article and
by state law, a law enforcement officer may bring an action to do one or more
of the following:



      (1)   Obtain a declaratory judgment that a method, act, or
practice is a violation of this article.



      (2)   Obtain an injunction against a person who is engaging,
or about to engage, in a method, act, or practice that violates this article.



   (F)   Any person who owns or harbors an animal after a court has
ordered relinquishment of animal ownership rights is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in this section.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03; Ord. No. 411, §§ 4, 9, 2-1-11)



Statutory reference:



   Ferrets; violations, see M.C.L. § 287.899



8-56-8-60.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  ENFORCEMENT



8-61.  ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.



   (A)   Whenever a law enforcement officer has probable cause to
believe that a violation of this chapter has occurred, the officer may issue
a citation to the violator, stating the nature of the violation with
sufficient particularity to give notice of the charge to the violator. Police
and animal control officers shall enforce all of the provisions of this
chapter.



   (B)    No person shall knowingly interfere with, impede, or obstruct
any police or animal control officer who is attempting to discharge or is in
the course of discharging an official duty or fail to obey the lawful order
of a police or animal control officer.



(1978 Code, § 6-80; Ord. No. 215-A, § 7, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)



8-62.  RIGHT OF ENTRY GRANTED.



   Police, animal control, and code enforcement officers are hereby
authorized to enter upon any premises in the city for the purposes of
responding to and investigating complaints relating to a violation of this
chapter, where the officer has reasonable cause to believe that an immediate
response is required to ensure the health, safety, and welfare of a person or
an animal, or where the animal in question is mobile and its capture would be
hindered by the delay necessitated in obtaining a search warrant. If entry
onto the premises is denied, the officer may issue an appropriate citation
and/or seek a search warrant.



(Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



8-63-8-70.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  HUNTING AND TRAPPING



8-71.  PROHIBITIONS.



   In the interest of public health and safety and the general welfare of
the citizens of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person, unless
exempted by § 8-72:



   (A)   To hunt or pursue any animal or wildlife at any time within
the limits of the city by means of a firearm, either handgun or rifle, or by
any weapon or explosive device, including air rifles, spring guns, bow and
arrow, slingshot, or by any other instrument potentially dangerous to human
safety.



   (B)   To trap or snare any animal or wildlife at any time within the
limits of the city by means of a steel leg trap, wire snare, pit, net, baited
hook, weighted log, wire cage, or any other kind of trapping device.



   (C)   To use poison or a chemical by itself or in bait or feed to
attract and kill wildlife.



(1978 Code, § 6-64; Ord. No. 215-A, § 5, 12-19-89; Ord. No. 368, § 1,
3-18-03)  Penalty, see § 8-55



8-72.  EXCEPTIONS.



   Any prohibitions against hunting or trapping made under this article
shall not apply to:



   (A)   State or local law enforcement officers in the discharge of
their official duties.



   (B)   Any governmental official or local law enforcement official,
when such hunting or trapping is necessary or incident to a scientific or
biological survey or when related to any aspect of wildlife management and
control.



   (C)   Any property owner or his or her designated agent who hunts or
traps on his or her own private property to destroy or control animals
causing damage to the property; the use of a lawful exterminator is also
permitted as required. For purposes of this section, only live traps may be
utilized.  LIVE TRAPS shall mean such traps which capture, but do not harm
or kill, the trapped animal.



(1978 Code, § 6-65; Ord. No. 368, § 1, 3-18-03)



CHAPTER 9:  BICYCLES



9-1.  DEFINITION.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is over 20 inches in
diameter. It includes pedal bicycles with helper motors rated less than one
brake horsepower transmitted by friction and not by gear or chain, which
produces only ordinary pedaling speeds up to a maximum of 20 miles per hour.
It shall also include every chain-driven drive propelled by human power upon
which a person may ride having three wheels, one of which is in the front and
center of the device and the other two being in the rear and connected to
each other by means of an axle, which rear wheels are over 20 inches in
diameter.



(1978 Code, § 7-1)



9-2.  LICENSE GENERALLY.



   (A)   Application for a bicycle license shall be made upon a form
provided by the city and shall be made to the City Clerk or his or her
designate. The City Clerk shall not accept an application for a bicycle
license unless it is accompanied by a bill of sale indicating the serial
number of the bicycle or a physical inspection of the bicycle has been made
to determine the serial number. In the event the bicycle being licensed does
not have a serial number supplied by the manufacturer, the City Clerk may
assign a number to that bicycle and place the number on the frame of the
bicycle, which shall serve as the serial number of that bicycle for the
purposes of this chapter.



   (B)   The Clerk, upon receiving proper application therefor, is
authorized to issue a permanent bicycle license tag.



   (C)   The Clerk shall not issue a license for any bicycle when he or
she knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that the applicant is not the
owner of or entitled to the possession of such bicycle.



   (D)   The Clerk shall keep a record of the number of each license,
the date issued, the name and address of the person to whom issued and the
number on the frame of the bicycle for which issued.



(1978 Code, § 7-2)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate bicycles, see M.S.A. § 9.2306; M.C.L. §
257.606



9-3.  ISSUANCE, ATTACHMENT AND THE LIKE OF LICENSE TAG.



   (A)   The Clerk, upon issuing a bicycle license, shall also issue a
license tag bearing the license number assigned to the bicycle and the name
of the city.



   (B)   The license tag shall be firmly attached to the upright part
of the frame of the bicycle which supports the seat, between the seat and the
sprocket. The license tag should be facing the front of the bicycle when
attached and shall be plainly visible.



   (C)   No person shall remove a license tag from a bicycle, except in
the event the bicycle is dismantled and no longer operated upon any street in
the city.



   (D)   In the event a bicycle is dismantled or damaged beyond use,
the registered owner of the bicycle shall notify the Clerk that the license
tag is no longer valid. The Clerk shall then eliminate and remove that
license tag from the file.



(1978 Code, § 7-3)



9-4.  DAMAGING, ALTERING AND THE LIKE SERIAL NUMBER OR LICENSE TAG.



   No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or
alter the serial number of any bicycle registered pursuant to this chapter.
It shall be unlawful for any person to mutilate, alter or destroy any license
tag during the time in which such tag is valid. Nothing contained in this
section shall prohibit the Clerk from stamping numbers on the frames of
bicycles upon which no serial number can be found or upon which said number
is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes.



(1978 Code, § 7-4) Penalty, see § 1-9



9-5.  IMPOUNDMENT OF UNLICENSED BICYCLES.



   Any bicycle, the owner of which has failed to comply with the licensing
requirements of this chapter, shall be impounded by the Police Department.
All bicycles impounded shall be released upon proof of ownership and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, the owner
shall be 18 years of age or older; otherwise, the owner must be accompanied
by his or her parent or legal guardian.



(1978 Code, § 7-5)



9-6.  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP GENERALLY.



   (A)   Upon the sale or other transfer of ownership of a registered
bicycle, the original owner shall furnish the new owner with a bill of sale
indicating the date and registration and serial numbers.



   (B)   Upon the purchasing or other transfer of ownership of a
registered bicycle, the new owner shall be required to register the bicycle
according to this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 7-6)



9-7.  TRANSACTIONS WITH MINORS INVOLVING SECONDHAND BICYCLES.



   No person shall conduct any transaction involving the buying, selling
or trading of a secondhand bicycle with a minor child, without the expressed
knowledge and consent of that child’s parent or legal guardian.



(1978 Code, § 7-7)



9-8.  RENTAL AGENCIES NOT TO RENT CERTAIN BICYCLES.



   A rental agency shall not rent or offer any bicycle for rent, unless
the bicycle is licensed and a license tag is attached thereto as provided in
this chapter and the bicycle is equipped with all equipment required under
Chapter 50 of this Code.



(1978 Code, § 7-8)



CHAPTER 10:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 11:  BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



11-1.  UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATIONS-GENERALLY.



   (A)   This section, together with §§ 11-2, 11-3 and 11-4, shall be
known and may be cited as the "Public Utility Safety Ordinance."



   (B)   As used in this section and §§ 11-2, 11-3 and 11-4, the
following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as follows.



      PUBLIC UTILITY. Any industry having underground facilities and
being regulated by the Michigan Public Service Commission and shall include,
but shall not be limited by such enumeration, the Michigan Bell Telephone
Company, Consumers Power Company, Southeastern Michigan Gas Company, Michigan
Consolidated Gas Company, the Detroit Edison Company, Michigan Gas Storage
Company and Buckeye Pipeline Company.



      EXCAVATOR. Any person who undertakes to remove earth prior to
constructing a new facility or repairing an old facility located underground
or above the ground.



      MAJOR INSTALLATION. Any facility of any public utility that is
designed to serve more than one single-family residence building.



(1978 Code, § 8-1)



11-2.  SAME-MAP.



   All public utilities, after January 1, 1967, are required to file with
the city a current map showing the approximate location of every underground
facility in the city. The maps shall be updated every six months and the
revisions shall be filed by the last day of July of each year. The maps shall
be drawn to the scale of one inch per 200 feet. The purpose of this
requirement is to provide, for public record, notice of installations of
public facilities. The maps are not required for the purpose of providing an
accurate daily guide to the precise location of all public utility facilities.



(1978 Code, § 8-2)



11-3.  SAME-NOTICE OF NEW WORK.



   (A)   All public utilities shall notify the city of any new work
undertaken on underground facilities in the city. The notice shall be
provided in advance. The notice may be served by registered letter or
personally upon the City Manager or the Superintendent of Public Works.



   (B)   The city waives the requirement of advance notice of any work
on underground facilities in the city when the work is begun under emergency
conditions; provided, that notice shall be provided the city of the location
and nature of the emergency work within a reasonable time after it is
undertaken.



(1978 Code, § 8-3)



11-4.  SAME-PROTECTION DURING EXCAVATING WORK.



   (A)   All public utilities shall, upon reasonable request by the
city or any excavator, provide a spotter or inspector at the scene of any
excavating work undertaken in the city, for the purpose of aiding the
excavator in determining the location of public utility underground
installations. The Michigan Public Service Commission shall be called upon,
if a dispute arises over the reasonableness of a request, to make a
recommendation as to whether or not the request is reasonable.



   (B)   The foregoing provisions of this section and §§ 11-1, 11-2
and 11-3 shall in no way alter existing legal, statutory or common-law duties
of safety imposed upon excavators. All excavators shall have the duty to
ascertain the exact locations of public utility installations in the city by
diligently checking with the utility companies in advance as to the exact
positioning of their installations.



(1978 Code, § 8-4)



Cross reference:



   Excavations generally, see §§ 17-15 et seq.



11-5.  LOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF UNDERGROUND ELECTRICAL SERVICE.



   Provisions of this section and all of its subsections shall pertain
only to the location or distribution of underground electrical service to
houses. The installation of such underground electric service shall comply
with the following:



   (1)   No transformer or junction box shall be placed on the lot line
so as to obstruct the erection of a fence;



   (2)   All services to buildings from the rear property line shall
follow the side property line to a point perpendicular to the building. The
service cables shall be no closer than one foot nor more distant than two
feet from such property line. Depth will be that depth which is required by
the utility company;



   (3)   Deviation from the installation requirements set forth in this
section shall not be allowed unless written approval is obtained from the
Building Official and, if approved, a diagram of the installation, as built,
shall be posted on the inside cover of the distribution panel;



   (4)   The utility company shall post on the meter box, in
unobstructed view, notice of warning of all underground services.



(Ord. No. 352, § 1)



11-6.  INTENT OF CITY TO ENFORCE MICHIGAN CONSTRUCTION CODE WITH PARTICULAR
CODE UPDATES.



   Pursuant to Public Act 245 of 1999, the State of Michigan will have a
uniform construction code within the State of Michigan upon the promulgation
of various code updates (building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical) by the
Director of Consumer and Industry Services after October 15, 1999. The City
of Sterling Heights has previously filed with the state a Notice of intent to
enforce the Michigan Construction Code Act indicating the city’s desire to
be the enforcement agency for the Michigan Building, Electrical, Mechanical
and Plumbing Codes after each Code has been promulgated by the Director of
Consumer and Industry Services, which updates have been filed (or will be
filed) after October 15, 1999.



(Ord. No. 352, § 2)



11-7.  ENFORCEMENT OF MICHIGAN CONSTRUCTION CODE WITH CODE UPDATES;
DESIGNATION OF CITY AS ENFORCEMENT AGENCY; ADOPTION OF FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY
AND FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP.



   (A)   The Michigan Construction Code, comprised of the following
codes, as promulgated by Director of Consumer and Industry Services pursuant
to the Michigan Construction Code Act, Public Act 230 of 1972, as amended,
(M.C.L. §§ 125.1501 et seq.) shall be enforced within the city :



   (B)    The Michigan Construction Code includes, without limitation,
the Michigan Building, Electrical, Mechanical and Plumbing Codes as they have
been and will be promulgated and amended from time to time. The Building
Official of the city is designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the
enforcement responsibilities of the city under Public Act 230, as amended,
and the city assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of
the Michigan Construction Code after the particular code updates are
promulgated by the Director of Consumer and Industry Services.



   (C)   Code appendix enforced.  Pursuant to the provisions of the
state construction code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of Act 230 of the
Public Acts of 1972, as amended, Appendix G of the Michigan Building Code
shall be enforced by the Building Official within the city.



   (D)   Designation of Regulated Flood Prone Hazard Areas.  The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
entitled "Macomb County, Michigan and all Jurisdictions" and dated 9/29/06
and the Flood Insurance Rate Map(s) (FIRMs) panel number(s) of 26099C0218G,
0219G, 0238G, 0302G, 0304G, 0306G, 0307G, 0308G, 0309G, 0312G, 0316G, 0317G,
0326G, 0328G, and 0336G and dated September 29, 2006 are adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of Section 1612.3 of the Michigan Building Code.



(Ord. No. 352, § 2; Ord. No. 386 § 2, 10-3-06)



11-8.  PENALTIES.



   A person or corporation, including an officer, director or employee of
a corporation, or a government official or agent charged with the
responsibility of issuing permits or inspection buildings or structures who
does any of the following which is applicable to such person or corporation
or such governmental official or agent shall be responsible for a municipal
civil infraction and subject to a civil fine as provided in section 1-26 of
the City Code, plus any costs, damages and expenses in other sections as
authorized by Public Act 236 of 1961, Chapter 87, as amended:



   (A)   Knowingly violates any provision of the Michigan Building,
Electrical, Mechanical or Plumbing Code or any rule for the enforcement of
any such Code;



   (B)   Knowingly constructs or builds a structure or performs any
work in violation of the terms of the permit issued for such work;



   (C)   Knowingly fails to comply with any lawful order issued by an
enforcing agency, a board of appeals;



   (D)   Knowingly makes a false or misleading written statement or
knowingly omits required information or a statement in an inspection report,
application, petition, request for approval or appeal to an enforcing agency,
a board of appeals or any state commission established pursuant to the
Michigan Construction Code Act;



   (E)   Knowingly refuses entry or access to an inspector lawfully
authorized to inspect any premises, building or structure pursuant to the
Michigan Construction Code Act;



   (F)   Unreasonably interferes with an authorized inspection;



   (G)   Knowingly issues, fails to issue, causes to issue or assists
in the issuance of a certificate, permit or license in violation of the
Michigan Construction Code Act or any rule promulgated under the Act or other
applicable laws;



   (H)   Knowingly conceals a violation of the Michigan Construction
Code Act or a rule promulgated under the Act or other applicable laws, if
such party has a duty to report such violation. The enforcing agency,
together with officers of the Sterling Heights Police Department, are the
city officials authorized to issue citations for violations which are civil
infractions under this chapter.



(Ord. 352, § 18, 12-19-00)



11-9-11-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  BUILDING CODE



11-21.  ENFORCEMENT OF MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE.



   The Michigan Building Code, as promulgated by the Director of Consumer
and Industry Services, shall be enforced within the city after the effective
date of the Michigan Building Code. The Building Official of the city, or his
or her designee, is designated as the enforcing agency responsible for
discharging the city’s duties of administration and enforcement under the
Michigan Building Code, as promulgated from time to time.



(Ord. No. 352, § 3; Ord. No. 396, § 1, 5-6-08)



11-22-11-33.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  ELECTRICAL CODE



11-34.  ENFORCEMENT OF MICHIGAN ELECTRICAL CODE.



   The Michigan Electrical Code, as adopted by the Director of Consumer
and Industry Services, shall be enforced within the city after the effective
date of the Michigan Electrical Code. The Building Official of the city, or
his or her designee, is designated as the enforcing agency responsible for
discharging the city’s duties of administration and enforcement under the
Michigan Electrical Code, as promulgated from time to time.



(Ord. No. 352, § 4; Ord. No. 396, § 2, 5-6-08)



11-35-11-57.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  PLUMBING CODE



11-58.  ENFORCEMENT OF MICHIGAN PLUMBING CODE.



   The Michigan Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Director of Consumer and
Industry Services, shall be enforced within the city after the effective date
of the Michigan  Plumbing Code. The Building Official of the city, or his or
her designee, is designated as the enforcing agency responsible for
discharging the city’s duties of administration and enforcement under the
Michigan Plumbing Code, as promulgated from time to time.



(Ord. No. 352, § 6, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 396, § 3, 5-6-08)



11-59-11-70.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  MECHANICAL CODE



11-71.  ENFORCEMENT OF MICHIGAN MECHANICAL CODE.



   The Michigan Mechanical Code, as adopted by the Director of Consumer
and Industry Services, shall be enforced within the city after the effective
date of the Michigan Mechanical Code. The Building Official of the city, or
his or her designee, is designated as the enforcing agency responsible for
discharging the city’s duties of administration and enforcement under the
Michigan Mechanical Code, as promulgated from time to time.



(Ord. No. 352, § 7, 12-19-00)



11-72-11-83.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE



11-84.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the "Property Maintenance Code of the
City of Sterling Heights."



(1978 Code, § 8-181; Ord. No. 267, § 1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 298, § 2,
6-18-91; Ord. No. 367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-85.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to establish minimum levels of property
maintenance for buildings, structures, and premises throughout the city, to
prevent and eliminate dangerous, vacant, and/or neglected buildings or
structures in the city, to prevent and eliminate blight, and to encourage the
rehabilitation and re-occupancy of buildings where reasonably possible.



(Ord. No. 367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



DIVISION 1.  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



11-86.  ADOPTION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   A certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the
City Clerk, being marked and designated as "The International Property
Maintenance Code,  2015 Edition," as published by the International Code
Council, is adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sterling
Heights in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions
and maintenance of all property, buildings, and structures; to provide the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and
conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary, and fit
for occupation and use; to provide for the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such
existing structures as herein provided; and to provide for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees therefore.  Each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the International Property
Maintenance Code are referred to, adopted, and made a part of this Code as if
fully set forth in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions,
and changes, if any, prescribed in § 11-87 and Divisions 2, 3, and 4 of this
article.



(1978 Code, § 8-182; Ord. No. 267, § 2, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 298, § 3,
6-18-91; Ord. No. 312, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 329, § 1, 12-16-97; Ord. No.
367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 414, §  1,
6-07-11; Ord. No. 462, § 1, 3-18-19)



11-87.  LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE.



   The International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 Edition, shall govern
generally property maintenance matters in the city, provided that adoption of
the International Property Maintenance Code shall not repeal any other
provisions of this Code regulating property maintenance unless expressly
repealed by the City Council. To further the goal of protecting the public
health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses of the city, the
following sections of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015
Edition, and its Appendices, are amended as set forth in the following
paragraphs.



   The following sections are amended or deleted as follows:



   101.1 Title.  These regulations shall collectively be known as the
Property Maintenance Code of the City of Sterling Heights, referred to in
this Property Maintenance Code as "this Code."



   Section 103. PROPERTY MAINTENANCE ENFORCEMENT.



   103.1 General.  The City Manager shall serve as the executive official
overseeing property maintenance within the city, and shall be known as the
Code Official for purposes of this article. The Code Official shall designate
which city employees shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions
of this Code.



   103.2 Appointment.  The City Manager is appointed by the City Council
in accordance with the City Charter. If there is a vacancy in the position of
the City Manager, the person appointed by the City Council to serve as acting
City Manager shall serve as the Code Official until a new City Manager is
appointed.



   103.5 Fees.  The fees for activities and services performed by the
department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code shall be
established by the city's appropriations ordinance.



   104.1 General.  The Code Official shall designate which city personnel
shall enforce the provisions of this Code.



   104.2 Inspections. The Code Official may make periodic and required
inspections, or may accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or
individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be
certified by the responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The Code Official is authorized to engage such expert
opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that
arise.



   104.3 Right of entry.  The Code Official is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or perform the duties
imposed by this Code, subject to constitutional restrictions on unreasonable
searches and seizures.  If entry is refused or not obtained, the Code
Official is authorized to seek a warrant if required by law in order to
authorize entry into the structure or premises without the consent of the
owner or person in charge of the premises.  The Code Official shall not
enter a dwelling without the permission of the owner, owner's authorized
agent, or the occupant, unless a warrant has been secured, or there is
imminent danger to life.



   106.2 Notice of violation. The Code Official may serve a notice of
violation or order prior to taking any of the enforcement actions available
under § 11-141 of the Code of Ordinances. Notice with respect to removal of
noxious weeds may be given in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan
Noxious Weeds statute, currently M.C.L. §§ 247.61 et seq., the substantive
provisions of which have been incorporated into Section 302.4.1 of this
Property Maintenance Code.



   106.3 Prosecution of violation.  Any responsible party who does not
maintain his property in accordance with the provisions of this Code, or who
fails to  comply with any notice of violation issued by the Code Official,
shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction, unless this
Code specifically designates the offense as a misdemeanor.  All municipal
civil infractions shall be strict liability offenses as defined in this Code.
The Code Official shall take one or more of the enforcement actions
authorized by § 11-141 of the City Code.



   106.4 Violation penalties.  Any person who violates a provision of
this Code, or fails to comply with any of the requirements contained in it,
may be prosecuted within the limits provided by state and local law. Each day
that a violation continues to exist shall be deemed a separate offense.



   106.5 Violations constitute nuisance; abatement of violation.  Any
buildings, structures, or premises which remain in violation of this Code or
any other provision of the City Code relating to property maintenance
constitute a public nuisance which shall be ordered abated by a court of
competent jurisdiction of the Board of Ordinance Appeals if:



      (a)   The owner, owner's authorized agent, or responsible
party has been given notice of the violation(s); and



      (b)   A reasonable time period to correct the violation(s) has
expired.



   106.5.1 Emergencies.  The Code Official may take emergency corrective
action without prior notice to the responsible party in the case of imminent
danger as provided in § 109.



   106.5.2 Authority for additional action.  The imposition of the
penalties provided in this article shall not preclude the City Attorney from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, abate, or correct the violation,
or to prevent the illegal occupancy of a building, structure, or premises, or
to stop an illegal act, conduct, business, or utilization of the building,
structure, or premises.



   Section 107.1 shall be deleted.



   Section 107.2 shall be deleted.



   Section 107.3 shall be deleted.



   108.1.1 Unsafe structures.  An unsafe structure is one that is found
to be dangerous to the life, health, property, or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not meeting minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment, or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally
unsafe, or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial
or complete collapse is possible. Unsafe structures include, but are not
limited to, dangerous buildings as defined in Division 2 of this article.



   108.3 Notice.  Whenever the Code Official has condemned a structure or
equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and
served on the owner, owner's authorized agent, or responsible party in
accordance with § 11-142 of the City Code.  If the notice pertains to
equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned equipment.



   109.5 Costs of emergency repairs.  Costs incurred in the performance
of emergency work shall be paid in the first instance by the city.  A lien
shall be imposed upon the property upon which the work was performed equal to
the cost incurred by the city, plus an administrative charge in the amount
established by the City Council's annual appropriations ordinance. Legal
counsel for the city may bring action against the owner of the premises or
owner's authorized agent where the unsafe structure is or was located for the
recovery of such costs, together with any legal costs incurred in recovery of
the amount due.



   Section 110.2 shall be deleted.



   110.3 Failure to comply.  If the owner of a premises or owner's
authorized agent fails to comply with a demolition order within the time
prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and
removed, either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition and removal
shall be paid in the first instance by the city.  A lien shall be imposed
upon the property upon which the work was performed equal to the cost
incurred by the city, plus an administrative charge in the amount established
by the City Council's annual appropriations ordinance.  Upon authorization
from the City Council, legal counsel for the city may bring action against
the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure was located for the
recovery of such costs, together with any legal costs incurred in recovery of
the amount due.



   111.2 Membership of board. The board of appeals shall be the Board of
Ordinance Appeals established in Chapter 2 of the City Code.



   111.2.1 Appeals.  Appeals of actions taken by the Code Official under
this article shall be heard by the Board of Ordinance Appeals established in
Chapter 2 of the City Code, unless expressly provided otherwise in this
article or the City Code.



   Section 111.2.2 shall be deleted.



   Section 111.2.3 shall be deleted.



   Section 111.2.4 shall be deleted.



   Section 111.2.5 shall be deleted.



   Section 111.4.1 shall be deleted.



   111.6.1 Minutes.  Minutes of each board meeting shall be prepared in
accordance with the requirements of the Open Meetings Act.



   111.7 Court review.  An appeal or an application for review by a court
of competent jurisdiction may be filed after a final decision of the Board in
accordance with applicable Michigan law.



   Section 202 is amended to add or revise the following definitions, to
be inserted in alphabetical order:



   Board: The Board of Ordinance Appeals created by Chapter 2 of the City
Code.



   Code:  Article VI of Chapter 11 of the City Code, also known as the
Property Maintenance Code.



   Code Official:  The City Manager and such employees designated by the
City Manager to enforce the provisions of this Code.



   Dangerous building:  See Division 2 of Article VI of this chapter.



   Graffiti:  An inscription or drawing made upon a rock, wall, or other
surface visible to the public which is not specifically permitted as a sign
under the sign regulations of the zoning ordinance.



   Junk:  Personal property, including but not limited to recreational
equipment, building materials, furniture, or any other personal property
stored outside of a building, that is dilapidated, in disrepair, or otherwise
not in compliance with the minimum maintenance requirements of this Code,
which has a negative aesthetic impact upon adjacent properties or the
neighborhood in the reasonable judgment of the Code Official.



   Lamppost:  A post upon which an electric or gaslight lantern is
mounted.



   Noxious weeds:  Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), dodders (any species
of Cuscuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard, and Indian mustard, species
of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus
arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa
incana), giant hogweed (Heracleum mantegazzianum), ragweed (Ambrosia elatior
l.), and poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (Toxicodendron
vernix), grasses in excess of six (6) inches in height, and all other
grasses, annual plants, weeds and vegetation, except regularly maintained and
weeded lawn areas, regularly trimmed, pruned and maintained trees and shrubs,
cultivated flowers and vegetables, weeded beds and gardens, or fields devoted
to growing any grain crop such as wheat, oats, barley, or rye, or to
agricultural fields or fruit or vegetable gardens devoted to fruits and
vegetables that will be harvested during the current growing season.  All
plants defined to be weeds are deemed by the City Council to be noxious and a
common nuisance in accordance with Public Act 359 of 1941, M.C.L. §§ 247.61
et seq., the Michigan Noxious Weed statute.



   Outdoor yard displays:  Any display or yard ornamentation located on
the exterior of the premises (other than a sign) designed to attract
attention to the premises, including holiday displays, monuments, yard
lights, sculptures, and statues.



   Responsible party:  The owner, owner's authorized agent, lessee,
occupant, guest, or other person, corporation, or entity having possession
and/or control of premises.  In the case of a condominium unit, both the
owner, lessee, or occupant of the unit and the condominium association for
the condominium development shall be considered a responsible party with
respect to matters for which the association is responsible for maintenance
under the master deed of the condominium project. In the case of a mobile
home park or property upon which a mobile home is situated, both the owner,
lessee, or occupant of the mobile home and the mobile home park or property
owner shall be considered a responsible party with respect to matters for
which the property owner is responsible or for which the property owner may
exercise just cause termination of the tenancy pursuant to the Revised
Judicature Act of 1961, as amended. All uses of the term occupant throughout
this article shall be deemed to refer to a responsible party as defined by
this section. For purposes of this division, a real estate broker or agent
managing a property shall not be a responsible party unless so designated in
a writing signed by the owner and the real estate broker or agent.



   Rodent harborage:  The existence of any condition which permits a
rodent to enter or leave a given space or building or gain access to food,
water, or shelter in occupied or unoccupied premises or on vacant land.



   Storage device:  A storage pod, trailer, mechanical container, or
substantially similar unit or device utilized or designed for the storage,
keeping, transportation, or removal of personal property or waste.



   Yard lights:  Ornamental outdoor lights of not more than two feet in
height placed on the ground and used to highlight a residence or landscaping.
The term shall not include a lamppost.



   Yard ornamentation:  Any ornamental item affixed to the ground and
located in the front or side yard of the premises visible from the public
right-of-way designed to draw attention to the premises including, but not
limited to, statues, monuments, fountains, bird baths, sculptures, lampposts,
yard lights, fence ornamentation, and other similar items.



   The following sections are amended or added to read as follows:



   301.2 Responsibility.  The responsible party shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with the requirements of this
Code, except as otherwise expressly provided in this Code. A person shall not
occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which
are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the
requirements of this article.  Occupants of a dwelling unit are responsible
for keeping that part of the dwelling unit or premises which they occupy
and/or control in a clean, sanitary, and safe condition.



   301.3 Vacant structures and land.  All vacant buildings and structures
and their premises, or vacant land, shall be maintained in a clean, safe,
secure, and sanitary condition so as to not contribute to blighting or
adversely affect the public health or safety. During the period when any
residential, commercial, or industrial building is vacant, closed, or
otherwise not open for business or occupancy for more than 30 consecutive
days, the owner or party-in-interest or other responsible parties shall be
subject to the following regulations:



      (1)   If any exterior openings of the building are boarded up
or required to be boarded up, such shall be done in a neat and workmanlike
manner using one-half inch water resistant plywood (or such other material
approved by the Code Official) sized to fit within the exterior openings,
which shall be securely fastened in place and coated with an appropriate
neutral color which blends with or harmonizes with the exterior color of the
building so as to be as inconspicuous as possible. Intact windows on vacant
or unused buildings shall not be covered or obstructed with newsprint or
newspaper.  In the absence of traditional window treatments such as blinds
or curtains, such windows may be covered on the inside only with neutral
colored construction paper that blends with and is harmonious with the
exterior color of the building so as to be as inconspicuous as possible, and
only in conjunction with interior renovations undertaken with a valid
building permit.  The Code Official shall request the owner or responsible
party to replace any broken glass and repair, replace, or paint the plywood
material or paper window coverings within a period not exceeding ten working
days.  The exterior premises adjacent to any vacant building shall be
maintained in a clean, aesthetically pleasing condition, including
maintenance of signage, lighting, parking areas, sidewalks and other common
areas. The owner or responsible party shall be subject to the penalties and
abatement procedures as provided in this Code and other applicable provisions
of the Code of Ordinances.



      (2)   The responsible party shall comply with all other
applicable provisions of this article relating to vacant buildings.



   301.4. General maintenance and exterior property and premises. All
exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a neat, orderly, and
attractive condition, including but not limited to the regular removal of
trash and debris from the exterior property and premises and the maintenance
of landscaping and removal of weeds as required by Section 302.4 of this
Property Maintenance Code.



   302.1.1 Attractive nuisances.  No person shall permit any physical
condition or use of property or its appurtenances which constitutes an
attractive danger to children, including but not limited to open wells,
swimming pools, shafts, basements, excavations, or pits, or unsafe fences or
structures, or discarded refrigerators or freezers with doors attached.



   302.2.1 Installation of landscaping.  For a single family residential
lot or site condominium unit where a soil erosion permit is not required by
the City Code, the lot or unit shall be seeded or sodded to prevent soil
erosion as soon after issuance of a certificate of occupancy as weather
permits and in no event later than 12 months after a certificate of occupancy
is issued. All lawn areas shall be watered, weeded, and maintained in an
aesthetically pleasing condition. The Board of Ordinance Appeals may, upon an
appeal, permit other suitable ground cover if it prevents soil erosion and
will not detract from the aesthetics of the neighborhood. If the owner or
occupant of a single family residence fails to install suitable landscaping
within the time set forth above, such condition may be considered a public
nuisance subject to abatement as provided in this Code or the City Code.



   302.4 Landscaping and removal of weeds.  All landscaping located on
the exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a neat, orderly,
and attractive condition, including but not limited to, the regular mowing of
lawn areas, periodic trimming and pruning of trees and shrubs, the watering
and weeding of lawn and landscaped areas, the removal and replacement of dead
or diseased trees, shrubs, and plants, the removal of weeds in parking lots,
driveways, sidewalks and other public areas and the regular removal of trash
and debris from premises. All premises and exterior property shall be
maintained free from noxious weeds as defined in this Property Maintenance
Code in accordance with Section 302.4.1 of this Property Maintenance Code.



   302.4.1 Noxious Weeds. The following regulations and procedures shall
apply to noxious weeds and their removal:



      1.   The owner, agent, or occupant of (a) any subdivided land
(lot) in a subdivision in which buildings have been erected on 60% of the
lots, or (b) a lot or parcel adjacent to a paved street or road used or open
to the public upon which noxious weeds are found growing shall destroy such
noxious weeds before they reach seed bearing stage or six (6) inches in
height, and prevent their regrowth, or prevent them from becoming a detriment
to public health for a depth of the lot or parcel, or the depth of 10 rods
(165 feet), whichever is less in accordance with the provisions of this
Section 302.4.1 and where such parcel abuts a subdivision, for a distance of
at least 24 feet from the perimeters of the subdivision.



      2.   If the owner, agent, or occupant of the lot or parcel
upon which noxious weeds are found fails to destroy the weeds as required by
the notice given in accordance with subsection 302.4.1.3 below, the city or
its agent may enter the lot or parcel and destroy the noxious weeds to the
depth of the lot or parcel, or the depth of 165 feet (165'), whichever is
less and for a distance of at least 24 feet from the perimeter of the
subdivision as set forth in subsection 302.3.1.1.  The city may use
mechanical equipment or other reasonable methods that do not damage the
property or adjacent sidewalk. The city may cut or destroy weeds as many
times as is necessary each year and may charge the expenses incurred by the
city to the property owner as provided in subsection 302.4.1.4.



      3.   The city may give notice of the obligation of an owner of
a lot or parcel to destroy noxious weeds by publishing a notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the county during the month of March
advising that weeds which are not cut by May 1 of that year will be cut by
the city and that the owner of the lot or parcel will be charged with the
cost of doing so as provided in subsection 302.4.1.4 below. The notice shall
contain all information required by the Michigan Noxious Weeds statute,
currently M.C.L. § 247.64.  Alternatively, the city may give notice to the
owner of a lot or parcel of his obligation to destroy noxious weeds by
certified mail with return receipt requested (or equivalent).



      4.   The expenses incurred by the city in destruction of the
noxious weeds shall be paid by the owner of the lot or parcel, and the city
shall have a lien upon the lot or parcel for the amount of the expense,
including administrative expenses, attorney fees, recording fees and other
expenses incurred in connection with imposition of the lien, and applicable
penalties and interest until the amount of the lien is collected.  The lien
may be enforced in the manner provided by the City Charter, Michigan laws
applicable to the enforcement of tax liens, or city ordinance adopted by the
City Council.



   302.5.1 Rodent prevention.  In order to prevent rodent infestation,
all owners or occupants in the city shall:



      (1)   Store and keep all garbage and debris on their premises
in compliance with Chapter 23 of the City Code.



      (2)   Maintain those portions of the building and premises
under their control free from the accumulation of trash, debris, rubbish, or
similar materials that may provide hiding places, nesting places, or
harborage for rodents.



      (3)   Store and handle all building materials, boxes, cartons,
machinery, raw materials, fabricated goods, food or food stuffs, or any other
materials that might provide harborage or food supply for rats in compliance
with the City Code or other methods approved by the city.



      (4)   Store or pile firewood safely and neatly at least eight
inches above the ground with an open space underneath and in piles not higher
than six feet above ground level. No such storage piles shall be located in
any front yard or within three feet of any side lot line.



      (5)   Keep all lots, vacant or occupied, as well as all
buildings and structures free from all litter, garbage, or debris at all
times.



      (6)   Elevate to a height of at least 48 inches above ground
level all containers used for the feeding of wild birds or animals.



   302.8 Motor vehicles and storage devices.  The following regulations
apply to the parking, storage, and keeping of motor vehicles and storage
devices within the City:



   302.8.1 Except as permitted by other laws, ordinances, codes, or
regulations, no inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicle or trailer shall be
parked, kept, stored, or otherwise left on any premises.



   302.8.2 No motor vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. 
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside of an approved
spray booth.



      Exception:  A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes,
and provided the location of the work is zoned to allow such activity and a
corresponding use permit has been issued by the City for the site.



   302.8.3 No motor vehicle, regardless of whether it is operable or
licensed, shall be parked or stored in a manner that is visible from any
public right-of-way unless otherwise permitted under federal or state laws or
other City ordinances or regulations governing the parking and storage of
motor vehicles.



   302.8.4 No storage device shall be installed, set up, or maintained on
any premises unless it is kept on a paved driveway and is located a minimum
of eight (8) feet from any public sidewalk, and no storage device shall
remain on any premises in violation of any other applicable City ordinances
and regulations governing their use or maintenance.



   302.8.5 Any vehicle in violation of this section that is parked,
stored, abandoned, or otherwise left in a parking area of a property that is
vacant, abandoned, or not in use, or parked, stored, abandoned, or otherwise
left unattended upon unimproved land, shall be removed within seven (7) days
after being conspicuously tagged with a notice of the violation or warning
citation by any code enforcement personnel or police officer, or within seven
(7) days of mailing of a notice of the violation if the vehicle cannot be
accessed in order to tag it due to the presence of a barrier such as a fence,
wall, or similar partition.



   302.8.6 Any vehicle in violation of this section that is parked,
stored, or kept in a side yard, rear yard, or front yard of an improved
single-family or dual-family residential property shall be removed within
seven (7) days after the front door of the home on the site has been
conspicuously posted with notice of the violation by any code enforcement
personnel or police officer.



   302.8.7 Any storage device that is stored or kept on any premises shall
be removed within seven (7) days after the front door of the building on the
site, or in the case of vacant land, the storage device itself, has been
conspicuously posted with notice of the violation by any code enforcement
personnel.  Violations of this section shall be the responsibility of the
property owner, property occupant, or person/entity responsible for placement
and removal of the storage device, jointly and severally.



      Exception:  A storage device may be kept upon a premises for
longer than seven (7) days if the project for which it is being used has been
issued a valid permit by the City and the project is active and ongoing. 
The Code Official may also allow short-term deviations from the seven (7) day
removal requirement upon good cause having been established due to weather
conditions, good faith progress, or force majeure conditions not the fault of
the owner or occupant of the premises.



   302.8.8 If a vehicle or storage device in violation of this section has
not been removed within the time required by this section, the City or its
contracted agent may enter upon the property to remove the vehicle or storage
device to a place of storage selected by the City.  In the event the vehicle
or storage device is not accessible or cannot be removed without breaking or
passing through a barrier, the City may secure an administrative warrant for
the removal of the vehicle or storage device.  In the event of removal, the
City and its personnel and agents shall have no liability or responsibility
for any loss or damage to the vehicle or storage device, or the contents
thereof.



   302.8.9 Retrieval of a vehicle or storage device removed from a
property pursuant to this section shall be contingent upon the owner paying
all costs of removal, including but not limited to actual impound and storage
costs, and in the case of a vehicle, ensuring that the vehicle is properly
registered and insured. 



   302.8.10 The notice of violation or warning citation issued pursuant to
this section shall include a notice advising the recipient of the following:



      (1)   A summary of the findings that form the basis for the
determination that the vehicle, storage pod, trailer, or mechanical container
is in violation of this section.



      (2)   A summary of the requirements and rights set forth in
section 302.8 and its subparts.



      (3)   Notice of the right to submit a written appeal of the
determination to the Board of Ordinance Appeals within seven (7) days from
the date on the notice.  The notice shall include the following:



         a.   Instructions for taking an appeal;



         b.   The appeal will be considered at the next regular
meeting of the Board of Ordinance Appeals to be held at least three (3)
calendar days from the date the appeal request is received by the City,
unless an earlier meeting is scheduled and the owner requests in writing for
the appeal to be heard at that meeting;



         c.   The determination is final and conclusive if an
appeal is not taken; 



         d.   The owner of the premises will be responsible for
all costs associated with re-inspection, appeal hearing(s), costs associated
with preparing an administrative warrant, towing, and storage unless the
conditions underlying the violation determination have been corrected within
seven (7) days from the date on the notice or a storage permit has been
obtained.  Failure to pay the invoice within thirty (30) days is a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  The City
shall have a lien upon the lot or parcel for the amount of the invoice,
including administrative expenses/fees, attorney fees, recording fees, and
other expenses incurred in connection with imposition of the lien, and
applicable penalties and interest until the amount of the lien is
collected.  The lien may be enforced in the manner provided by the City
Charter, Michigan laws applicable to the enforcement of tax liens, or
applicable City ordinances; and



         e.   The Board of Ordinance Appeals may grant an appeal
only if it finds that a preponderance of the evidence favors reversal of the
violation determination due to an error or mistake made by the City. 



   302.10 Outdoor yard displays or other yard ornamentation. Outdoor yard
displays and yard ornamentation not visible from a public right-of-way and
otherwise in compliance with applicable zoning and regulatory restrictions
are permitted but must be maintained in accordance with this article and to
prevent deterioration, rodent or other infestations, and attractive
nuisances.  Outdoor yard displays and yard ornamentation visible from a
public right-of-way are permitted but subject to the following restrictions:



      1.   The display and/or ornament(s), individually or
collectively, shall not create a visual or physical distraction, hazard,
obstruction, or impediment for vehicles, pedestrians, or bicyclists traveling
on an adjacent public right-of-way.



      2.   The display and/or ornament(s), individually or
collectively, shall not consist of, include, or be composed of junk, garbage,
refuse, or scrap, as defined elsewhere in the City Code or by state law.



      3.   The display and/or ornament(s), individually or
collectively, shall not consist of, include, or be composed of any material
or substance which reflects light to the extent that it directs the reflected
light into a nearby residence or a traveling automobile at any time.



      4.   No portion of a display and/or ornament(s) shall be
farther than 10 feet from an exterior wall of the habitable area of the
dwelling, nor within 10 feet of a neighboring property.



      5.   Only 1 yard ornament is permitted for every 20 feet of
real property linear street frontage along the street to which the property
is assigned a postal address.  Each ornament permitted by this subsection
shall not exceed 4 feet in height and 2 feet in width.  Although they may
have additional street frontage along a second street, corner lots shall also
be subject to the restrictions in this subsection.



      6.   One (1) additional yard ornament, not to exceed 6 feet in
height and 3 feet in width, is permitted as the focal point of an outdoor
yard display and shall not be counted against the ornament limitations
governed by street frontage in subsection 5.



      7.   The purpose of the restrictions in this section is to
eliminate a one size fits all approach to the regulation of yard
ornamentation.  The new restrictions will reduce visual clutter on smaller
lots while allowing additional ornamentation for larger lots.  However, the
restrictions of this section shall not be enforced against yard displays
and/or yard ornamentation that were in compliance with the previous
regulations set forth in this section prior to June 7, 2011, so long as such
displays and/or ornaments are not modified thereafter.  Upon modification of
a nonconforming display or removal/replacement of a nonconforming yard
ornament, the restrictions of this section shall apply to the extent that the
nonconformity shall be eliminated and not replaced.



   Exceptions.  This subsection shall not prohibit any of the following:



      (1)   The placement of one yard ornament, which is a focal
point of landscaping, provided it



does not exceed six feet in height measured from the base of the item;



      (2)   The placement of not more than six yard ornaments, which
do not exceed four feet in height measured from the base of the items;



      (3)   The display of the flag of the United States of America
or the State of Michigan flag or other governmental entities;



      (4)   The installation or operation of one lamppost and yard
lights not more than two feet in height which illuminate landscaping or
walkways or a residence, provided the same are directed away from any public
right-of-way;



      (5)   Temporary outdoor displays for periods of not more than
60 days if associated with a holiday celebration or event, provided the
temporary displays for any site do not exceed 120 days in any one calendar
year; and



      (6)   Any sign authorized by applicable codes, ordinances, or
statutes.



   302.11 Graffiti.  No person shall allow any graffiti to remain upon
any property or premises so as to be visible from a public sidewalk, public
right-of-way, or place which is accessible to the public.



   302.12 Bird infestations.  All property shall be kept free of bird
infestations which cause or contribute to conditions that are conducive to an
unhealthful or disease-causing condition.



   302.13 Hose connections.  All exterior water hose connections shall
comply with the requirements of the Michigan Residential Code and shall have
vacuum breakers installed at each hose bib location.



   302.14 Backflow preventers.  Backflow prevention protects the public
potable water system from possible contamination.  Because backflow
preventers contain parts that may break or wear out, all backflow preventers
installed in residential homes and used for lawn irrigation shall be tested
and recertified by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester every
three (3) years.



   304.14 Insect screens.  During the period from May 1 to October 15,
every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of
habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas
where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are
processed, manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with approved
tightly fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25mm)
and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing
device in good working condition.



      Exception: Screen doors shall not be required where other
approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.



   304.20 Detached accessory structures.  All detached accessory
structures, regardless of size, must comply with the requirements of the
Residential Code for exterior building envelopes if set up or installed on
the premises for longer than seven (7) days.



   304.21 Fences during residential construction.  During construction of
new residential homes within an existing neighborhood, fencing shall be
installed around the perimeter of the lot to protect it from intrusions and
to protect against harm to others during construction.  The fencing shall
consist of metal mesh material and shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in
height.  A top rail shall be installed to maintain the fencing's
integrity.  Access gates must open into the site and not outward.  All
fencing shall be maintained to ensure its integrity.  If surface mounted
fencing is installed, it shall not be permitted to fall into disrepair.



   304.22 Residential construction requirements.  During the construction
of new residential homes or additions onto or renovations of existing
residential homes:



   304.22.1 All public sidewalks adjacent thereto shall be maintained to
ensure safe and passable condition for the public and passersby.



   304.22.2 Trash containment in the form of a dumpster or containment
area with a minimum height of three (3) feet shall be provided to ensure
against debris blowing or escaping from the site. 



   304.22.3 Temporary bathroom facilities shall be provided and accessible
to the contractors working on site.  Such facilities shall be maintained on
a weekly basis or more frequently if conditions therein begin to have
external impacts on the area.  Such facilities shall be located a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet from any adjacent residential home or property line.



   304.22.4 Signage shall be conspicuously posted on the site, prior to
any work commencing, with contact information including, but not limited to,
the site address, the applicant's name, address, and telephone number, and
the permit number.



   304.22.5 The site shall have a clear unobstructed accessway, free of
snow, ice, or other foreign material, to ensure safe access for City
inspectors.



   304.23 Fencing of non-residential construction sites.  During
construction or renovation projects on non-residential sites, and for other
projects for which the Building Official determines sufficient cause requires
it, the active construction area shall be screened by fencing a minimum of
six (6) feet in height consisting of metal material and privacy screening. 
Such fencing shall be installed with vertical and horizontal supports to
provide structural integrity.  Access gates must open into the site and not
outward.



   304.24 Multifamily balconies.  All exterior balconies, decks, and
similar appurtenances not at ground level and designed for use by tenants,
owners, or guests of a residential unit in a multifamily structure shall be
inspected and re-certified by a qualified structural engineer every five (5)
years if the multifamily structure is more than ten (10) years old (measured
from the date the multifamily structure was first approved for occupancy by
the City).  The evaluation shall include a complete assessment of the floor
joists, flooring materials, and guardrails.  For multifamily developments
consisting of multiple buildings or more than 20 units with non-ground level
balconies, the Building Official may approve a phased inspection process
rather than require all of the inspections on the same cycle.  Initial
inspection reports required by this subsection shall be submitted to the
Building Official by September 1, 2020, unless the multifamily development is
less than ten (10) years old at that time, in which case the initial
inspection reports for that development shall be due by September 1st of the
year in which the development reaches its tenth (10th) year of existence. 
Any repairs required as a result of the engineer's inspection report must be
completed through the permitting process established by the Building
Department and in accordance with the timeframe set by the Building Official,
depending on the severity of the deficiency.  For balconies with significant
distress, the Building Official may require the multifamily development to
barricade the balcony for safety purposes until the repairs are completed. 
In circumstances where the balcony maintenance is the responsibility of a
unit owner and not the owner or operator of the entire multifamily
development, unit owners and oversight associations shall be jointly and
severally responsible for ensuring compliance with this subsection.



   308.1 Accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or junk.  All exterior
property and premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free
from any accumulation of rubbish, garbage, or junk. Notwithstanding any
provision of this section, all owners and responsible parties shall comply
with the provisions of Chapter 23 of the City Code.



   602.3 Heat supply.  Every owner and operator of any building who
rents, leases, or lets one or more dwelling unit, rooming unit, dormitory, or
guestroom on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the
occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from October 15 to June
15 to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.



      1.   Exception:  When the outdoor temperature is below the
winter outdoor design temperature for the city, maintenance of the minimum
room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is
operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature
for the city shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the International
Plumbing Code.



      2.   In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30ºF (-1ºC) a minimum temperature of 65ºF (18ºC) shall be maintained.



   602.4 Occupiable workspace.  Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October 15 to June 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) during the period the spaces are
occupied.



      Exceptions:



      (1)   Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.



      (2)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.



   604.2 Service.  The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall
serve as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in
accordance with the Michigan Residential Code. Dwelling units shall be served
by a three-wire, 120/240-volt, single-phase electrical service having a
rating not less than 100 amperes. Service equipment shall be dead front,
having no live parts exposed whereby accidental contact could be made. All
plug type fuses shall be Type S.



   604.3.3 Evidence of inadequacy.  Any of the following, without
limitation, shall be considered evidence of inadequacy:



      (1)   Use of cords in lieu of permanent wiring.



      (2)   Oversizing of overcurrent protection for circuits,
feeders, or service.



      (3)   Unapproved extensions to the wiring system in order to
provide light, heat, or power.



      (4)   Electrical overload.



      (5)   Misuse of electrical equipment.



      (6)   Lack of lighting fixtures in bathrooms, laundry rooms,
furnace room, stairway, or basement.



   605.5 Entrances and exits.  Where two or more entrances and/or exits
exist, at least two shall be illuminated by exterior lights. Exterior lights
shall be controlled by interior wall switches, located for convenient and
readily accessible use.



   605.6 Living room.  The living room shall be provided with a
conveniently located wall-switch controlled light or receptacle. The switched
receptacle may be one of the required receptacles in the room.



   605.7 Kitchen.  The kitchen shall be provided with illumination. The
required illumination shall be controlled by a wall switch.  A separate
kitchen appliance circuit shall be provided, supplying a minimum of  three
grounding-type duplex receptacle outlets. Two receptacles shall be readily
accessible and spaced for convenient use of portable appliances.  New
appliance circuits shall be 20 ampere capacity and GFCI protected unless
otherwise allowed by the Michigan Residential Code or Michigan Building Code
as applicable.



   605.8 Bathroom.  Bathrooms shall be provided with illumination,
controlled by a conveniently located wall switch.  Receptacles in light
fixtures are prohibited. At least one bathroom receptacle shall be required
and shall have GFCI protection as required by the Michigan Residential Code
or Michigan Building Code as applicable.



   605.9 All other habitable rooms.  Habitable rooms shall be provided
with a conveniently located wall-switch-controlled light or receptacle. A
minimum of two additional duplex receptacles are required.



   605.10 Basement. The basement shall have a minimum of one lighting
outlet for general illumination. All enclosed areas that may be walked into
(except coal bins) shall be provided with a lighting outlet. The basement
shall be on a separate circuit.



   605.11 Laundry area. Laundry areas shall be provided with illumination.
A grounding-type duplex receptacle shall be provided adjacent to the laundry
equipment, on a separate circuit. New laundry circuits shall be 20 ampere
capacity.



   605.12 Space heating system.  Heating equipment that requires
electricity for operation of any facet shall be provided with an individual
circuit. A disconnect switch shall be provided on or adjacent to the
equipment.



      Exception: Thermal-pile controlled furnaces.



   605.13 Stairwells.  Stairwells shall be adequately illuminated.
Lighting outlets shall be controlled by wall switches. Switches shall not be
located where it is necessary to use darkened stair sections for their
operation. Stairwells connecting finished portions of dwellings shall be
provided multiple-switch control: One at the head, the other at the foot of
the stairwell.



(1978 Code, § 8-183; Ord. No. 267, § 3, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 298, § 4,
6-18-91; Ord. No. 298-A, § 1, 9-17-91; Ord. No. 298-B, §§ 2, 3, 4, 5; Ord.
No. 312, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 279-A, § 5, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 328, § 6,
11-5-97; Ord. No. 329, § 2, 12-16-97; Ord. No. 367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord.
No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 414, §§ 2 - 6, passed 6-12-11; Ord. No.
424, § 1, 2-5-13; Ord. No. 462, § 2, 3-18-19)



11-88.  NON-HOMESTEAD RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY INSPECTION PROGRAM.



   (A)   As a result of the high incidence of foreclosures during
recent years, the number of non-homestead residential properties in the city
has risen dramatically.  Statistically, such properties account for more
than half of the single-family residential properties that are reviewed by
the Board of Ordinance Appeals each year for exterior property maintenance
violations.  In the interest of protecting residential property values for
residents whose homestead remains within the city, the non-homestead
residential property inspection program set forth in this section is hereby
created.



   (B)   Non-homestead single-family residential properties within the
city shall be subject to a non-complaint based exterior property maintenance
inspection once during every two calendar years. Upon completion of the
inspection, the property owner shall be assessed a fee established by the
city's annual appropriations ordinance for the biennial inspection. 
Violations discovered during the inspection or the registration period shall
be addressed in the same manner as all other property maintenance and
nuisance violations, and the same inspection and Board of Ordinance Appeals
fees shall apply. 



   (C)   As used in this subsection, the term "non-homestead
single-family residential property" and "non-homestead residence" shall mean
any parcel of property that is zoned for, or used for, single-family
residential purposes, but which is not recorded as the owner's primary
residence for homestead exemption tax purposes, or which is not owned by a
person or a person's trust but is instead owned by a corporate or other type
of legal entity.  The following are excluded from the requirements of this
section:



      (1)   Mobile home parks;



      (2)   A non-homestead residence where its owner resides during
part of the year and the owner does not rent the residence during the owner's
absence; and



      (3)   A non-homestead residence owned by a property owner who
also owns and occupies a homestead property elsewhere within the city.



   In the event one parcel of property contains more than one
single-family residence, each non-homestead residence shall be subject to the
two-year registration program and shall be registered, if possible, by its
distinct residential address.



   (D)   The inspection fee authorized by this section shall be paid by
the property owner within 30 days of the date of a city invoice for the
inspection.  The city shall have a lien against the real property to secure
payment.  If the invoice remains unpaid after 30 days, the amount of the
invoice shall be placed upon the tax roll, and shall be subject to the same
penalties, interest, and collection procedures that are applicable to
delinquent taxes.



   (E)   Enforcement of the lien to collect the inspection fee shall
not be the exclusive means of collection and the city may collect such fee in
any manner permitted by law.



   (F)   An owner may appeal the city's determination that the owner's
property is a "non-homestead single-family residential property" by
submitting a written letter to the City Manager or designee within 30 days of
receiving either a notice that the property has been designated as a
"non-homestead single-family residential property" or within 30 days of
receiving an invoice for the initial inspection.  The City Manager or
designee may overturn the determination, uphold the determination, or uphold
the determination but waive or reduce the applicable fee if the status of the
property changed such that it no longer meets the definition of a
non-homestead single-family residential property, as set forth in this
section, during either 30-day period.  An appeal will toll the deadline for
payment of the inspection invoice, which shall become due within 30 days
following the date of the City Manager's written appeal determination if the
determination does not waive the inspection fee.



(Ord. No. 426, § 1, 3-5-13)



11-89-11-100.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  DANGEROUS BUILDINGS



11-101.  DEFINITION OF DANGEROUS BUILDING.



   (A)   DANGEROUS BUILDING.  A building or structure that has one or
more of the following defects or is in one or more of the following
conditions:



      (1)   A door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of
exit that does not conform to the approved fire code of the city;



      (2)   A portion of the building or structure if damaged by
fire, wind, flood, or other cause so that the structural strength or
stability of the building or structure is appreciably less than it was before
the catastrophe and does not meet the minimum requirement of the city's
property maintenance code for a new building or structure, purpose, or
location;



      (3)   A building or structure or part of a building or
structure which is an unsafe building under the approved fire code of the
city, and which fails to maintain the required separation between dwelling
units under the applicable standards of the approved fire code of the city
and state building code act;



      (4)   A part of the building is likely to fail, become
detached or dislodged, or collapse and injure persons or damage property;



      (5)   A portion of the building or structure has settled to
such an extent that walls or other structural portions of the building or
structure have materially less resistance to wind than is required in the
case of new construction by this Code;



      (6)   A building or structure, or a part of a building or
structure, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty
construction, or the removal or movement of some portion of the ground
necessary for support, or for other reason, is likely to partially or
completely collapse, or some portion of the foundation or underpinning of the
building or structure is likely to fall or give way;



      (7)   A building, structure, or a part of the building or
structure that is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used;



      (8)   A building or structure that is damaged by fire, wind,
or flood, or is dilapidated or deteriorated and becomes an attractive
nuisance to children who might play in the building or structure to their
danger, or becomes a harbor for vagrants, criminals, or immoral persons, or
enables persons to resort to the building or structure for committing a
nuisance of an unlawful or immoral act;



      (9)   A building or structure used or intended to be used for
dwelling purposes including the adjoining grounds that, because of
dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, or
otherwise, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation, is in a condition
that the Building Official or Health Department inspector determines is
likely to cause sickness or disease, or is likely to injure the health,
safety, or general welfare of people living in the dwelling, near the
dwelling, or the community at large;



      (10)   A building or structure that is vacant, dilapidated,
and open at door or window, leaving the interior of the building exposed to
the elements or accessible to entrance by trespassers;



      (11)   A building or structure that remains unoccupied for a
period of 180 consecutive days or longer, and is not listed as being
available for sale, lease, or rent with a real estate broker licensed under
Article 25 of the Occupational Code, Act No. 299 of the Public Act of 1980,
being M.C.L. §§ 339.2501 to 339.2515.  For purposes of this subsection,
BUILDING or STRUCTURE includes, but is not limited to, a commercial building
or structure. This subsection does not apply to either of the following:



         (a)   A building or structure as to which the owner or
agent does both of the following:



            1.   Notifies the Sterling Heights Police
Department that the building or structure will remain unoccupied for a period
of 180 consecutive days or longer. The notice shall be given to the Police
Department by the owner or agent not more than 30 days after the building or
structure becomes unoccupied.



            2.   Maintains the exterior of the building or
structure and adjoining grounds in accordance with this Code and other
applicable codes of the city.



         (b)   A secondary dwelling of the owner that is
regularly unoccupied for a period of 180 days or longer each year, if the
owner notified the Sterling Heights Police Department that the dwelling will
remain unoccupied for a period of 180 consecutive days or more each year. If
the status of the dwelling changes such that it no longer qualifies for the
notice required under this subsection, the owner who has given the notice
prescribed by this subsection shall notify the Police Department within 30
days to advise that the dwelling no longer qualifies for this exception. As
used in this subsection, SECONDARY DWELLING means a dwelling such as a
vacation home or summer home that is occupied by the owner or a member of the
owner's family during part of the year.



      (12)   A building or structure that is partially completed
unless such building or structure is in the course of construction in
accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and
unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time period.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396 § 4, 5-6-08)



Statutory reference:



   Dangerous buildings defined, see M.C.L. § 125.539



11-102.  NOTICE OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS; HEARING; SERVICE.



   (A)   If a building or structure is found by the Code Official to be
a dangerous building, the city shall issue a notice that the building or
structure is a dangerous building.



   (B)    The notice shall be served on the owner, agent, or lessee
that is registered under M.C.L. § 125.525. If an owner, agent, or lessee is
not registered under M.C.L. § 125.525, the notice shall be served on each
owner or party in interest in the building or structure in whose name the
property appears on the last city tax assessment records.



   (C)   The notice shall specify the time and place of a hearing
before the Board of Ordinance Appeals on whether the building or structure is
a dangerous building.



   (D)   The notice shall be served in the same manner as a notice of
hearing before the Board of Ordinance Appeals as specified in § 11-142 of
the City Code.



   (E)    The owner of a building determined to be a dangerous building
by the Board of Ordinance Appeals under this division shall comply with an
order of the Board of Ordinance Appeals which specifies the actions the owner
must take in order to eliminate the building's classification as a dangerous
building. (The registered agent for purposes of service of notice or process
shall not have the responsibilities of the owner as a result of having been
designated as the registered agent for the owner). The Board of Ordinance
Appeals may rely upon the Code Official or Building Official for purposes of
drafting an order containing the specific remedies which are deemed to be
needed. The order of the Board of Ordinance Appeals may be served upon the
owner personally or in accordance with Division 4 of this article, including
any required posting. Failure to comply with the order of the Board of
Ordinance Appeals shall be a misdemeanor punishable as prescribed in Chapter
1 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396 § 4, 5-6-08)



11-103-11-115.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 3.  VACANT BUILDINGS.



11-116. PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this division is to protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents and businesses of the City by preventing blight,
protecting property values, avoiding the creation and maintenance of nuisance
conditions, and ensuring safe and sanitary maintenance of commercial and
industrial buildings and structures.  Vacant buildings can, and have, become
attractive nuisances for minors, transients, and criminals.  Such buildings
can also fall into disrepair, both outside and inside, to the point of
creating dangerous or unhealthy conditions, and such buildings also require
regular attention to prevent unsecured doors and windows, broken water pipes,
theft of metals and other materials, fire risks, overgrowth of grass, weeds,
shrubs, and bushes, illegal dumping, and vermin activity.  Such neglect
ultimately requires the expenditure of more resources by both the City and
the building owner to address and remediate the issues.  Therefore, this
division is intended to emphasize prevention and proactive measures to ensure
against such neglect and disrepair.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-117.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this division, the following words and phrases are
defined as follows:



   ABANDONED VACANT BUILDING means a vacant building or structure as
defined in this section that has been vacant for 30 days or more and meets
any of the following criteria:



      (1)   Provides a location for loitering, vagrancy,
unauthorized entry, or other criminal activity;   



      (2)   Has one or more broken or cracked windows;   



      (3)   Has one or more doors, entranceways, or access points
that are not secured against human or animal entry;   



      (4)   Has taxes in arrears for a period of time exceeding 365
days;    



      (5)   Has utilities disconnected or not in use, whether
voluntarily or involuntarily;    



      (6)   Is not maintained in compliance with any applicable
provisions of the City Code;    



      (7)   Is only partially completed; or   



      (8)   Is not fit for human occupancy.   



   BUILDING means a structure with a roof supported by columns or walls to
serve as a shelter or enclosure, or a tenant space consisting of a fire area
exceeding 12,000 square feet.



   EVIDENCE OF VACANCY means any condition that, on its own or combined
with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe the
property is vacant.  Such conditions include, but are not limited to,
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; accumulation of newspapers, circulars,
flyers, and/or mail; the return of mail sent to the property by City; failure
to respond to any notices posted on the property by the City; past due
utility notices and/or disconnected utilities; accumulation of trash, junk,
and/or debris; broken or boarded up windows and/or doors/doorways; abandoned
vehicles, auto parts, or auto-related materials; the absence of window
coverings; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with
habitation or occupation; statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery
agents, or government employees that the building is vacant; and/or evidence
located on the internet indicating that the building is vacant.



   OWNER means an individual, co-partnership, association, corporation,
company, fiduciary, or other person or legal entity having a legal or
equitable title or any interest in the real property where the building is
located.



   STRUCTURE means anything constructed or erected the use of which
requires location on or attachment to the ground, including but not limited
to buildings.



   VACANT PROPERTY means an unimproved lot or parcel of real property that
is not residentially zoned or utilized for residential use and is not
currently in lawful use or lawfully occupied, and/or an improved lot or
parcel of real property with at least one building or structure that is not
residentially zoned or utilized for residential use and is not currently in
lawful use or lawfully occupied.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-118.  REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY.



   (A)   Every owner of a vacant property in the City shall be
responsible for registering that property with the Building Department by
complying with the affidavit and registration and inspection fee requirements
in this division within:   



      (1)   Sixty days from the date this division takes effect or
from the date the property becomes vacant, or   



      (2)   If the property includes an abandoned vacant building,
30 days from the date this division takes effect or from the date the vacant
building becomes an abandoned vacant building, or within ten days of the
inspection required by this division.   



   (B)   The requirements of this section shall not apply to any site
with an active permit authorizing development or redevelopment of a building
or structure on the site.   



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-119.  REGISTRATION AFFIDAVIT.



   Owners who are required to register their properties pursuant to this
division shall do so by submitting a copy of a driver's license and an
affidavit containing the information specified in this section.  The
affidavit may be provided by an agent for an owner provided the agent's
written authorization from the owner is included with the affidavit.



   (A)   The name, date of birth, and driver's license number of the
owner(s) of the property.    



   (B)   A mailing address where mail may be sent that will be
acknowledged as received by the owner(s).  If certified mail/return receipt
requested is sent to the address and the mail is returned marked "refused" or
"unclaimed" or if ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever
reason, then such occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has
failed to comply with this requirement.    



   (C)   The name of an individual or legal entity responsible for the
care and control of the property.  Such individual may be the owner, if the
owner is an individual, or someone other than the owner with whom the owner
has contracted.   



   (D)   A current address, telephone number, facsimile number, and
email address where communications may be sent that will be acknowledged as
received by the individual or legal entity responsible for the care and
control of the property.  If certified mail return receipt requested is sent
to the address and the mail is returned marked refused or unclaimed, or if
ordinary mail sent to the address is returned for whatever reason, then such
occurrence shall be prima facie proof that the owner has failed to comply
with this requirement.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)   



11-120.  REGISTRATION, INSPECTION, AND OTHER FEES.



   All fees applicable to this division shall be set by the City's annual
appropriations ordinance.  A fee shall be established for registration,
inspections, and the filing of any additional or new owner's affidavit.  For
properties that are not registered within the required time, an additional
fee for the added cost of the City's expenses in having to determine
ownership shall also be established.  The payment of all fees required under
this division is secured by a lien against the property, which may be placed
on the tax roll for collection in the same manner and subject to the same
interest and penalties applicable to delinquent special assessments.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-121.  REQUIREMENT TO KEEP INFORMATION CURRENT.



   If at any time the information contained in the registration affidavit
is no longer valid, the property owner shall file a new affidavit containing
current information within ten days.  No fee shall be assessed to update a
registered owner's current information.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-122.  ANNUAL INSPECTIONS; WINTERIZING.



   (A)   The owner(s) of improved vacant property shall immediately
obtain and pay for the City's safety and maintenance inspection of the vacant
building thereon, obtain necessary permits, make required repairs, and obtain
inspections from the City annually thereafter until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued and the building is being lawfully occupied and
utilized.     



   (B)   The safety and maintenance inspections shall be designed to
ensure the building is safe, secured, and well-maintained.  The owner(s) or
owner's agent shall demonstrate that all water, sewer, electrical, gas, HVAC
and plumbing systems, exterior finishes and walls, concrete surfaces,
accessory buildings and structures, roofing, structural systems, foundation,
drainage systems, gutters, doors, windows, parking areas, signage, driveway
aprons, service walks, sidewalks, and other areas accessible by the public
are sound, operational, or properly disconnected.   



   (C)   By November 1 of each calendar year, or as soon thereafter
between November 1 and April 1 when a property becomes subject to the
registration requirements of this division, the owner of improved vacant
property shall submit a sworn statement to the City under penalty of perjury,
on a form provided by the City, indicating that the building(s) on the
property have been fully inspected and winterized by a licensed contractor
for purposes of ensuring appropriate heating, fire suppression, plumbing, and
electrical systems therein to prevent or minimize the risk of pipes freezing
or breaking and fires.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-123.  MAINTENANCE AND SECURITY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every owner is responsible for compliance with the
requirements of this section, which apply to all vacant properties from the
time of vacancy, including the time between vacancy and when registration is
required.   



      (1)   Vacant property and buildings thereon shall be
maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in all federal, state,
and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the standards
set forth in this chapter and Chapter 300 of the Property Maintenance
Code.   



      (2)   Vacant property and buildings thereon shall be kept free
from conditions that give the appearance to any reasonable observer that the
property is abandoned.   



      (3)   Vacant buildings shall be maintained in a secure manner
so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons, animals, or vermin. 
"Secure manner" includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of
windows, doors, gates, and any other opening of such size that may allow a
person, animal, or vermin to access the interior of the building.     



      (4)   On a weekly basis, owners shall inspect or cause the
inspection of vacant property and buildings thereon to verify compliance with
this section and all other applicable laws and regulations.  If the property
is owned by a person other than an individual and/or the owner is located
more than 30 miles away, a qualified local property management company or
agent shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the
requirements of this section and any other applicable laws and regulations
are being met.  The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour
contact telephone number of the property management company or agent, which
shall have its place of business within 30 miles of the property.  The
posting shall be no less than 18" x 24" and shall be of a 72 point Arial font
and shall also contain the words:  "THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY" and "TO REPORT
PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL".  The posting shall be placed on the interior of
a window or secured to an exterior portion of the building facing the street
to the front of the property so it is visible from the street.  If no such
area exists, the posting shall be on a stake of sufficient size to support
the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the
property, but not readily accessible to vandals.  The local property
management company shall create and maintain a written record of its
inspections and provide written notice to the owner, any person registered as
responsible for the care and control of the property, and the City regarding
any conditions or areas that are not in compliance with the requirements of
this division.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-124.  FIRE DAMAGED BUILDINGS.



   If a building is fire damaged, the owner has 90 days from the date of
the fire to apply for a permit to start construction or demolition. 
Extensions of 90 days may be granted by the Building Department if the owner
demonstrates substantial progress toward completing the work.  Failure to do
so will result in the property being deemed vacant and subject to the
requirements of this division.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-125.  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   If a building is not secured as required by this division and the City
has secured the property, the City and/or its contracted agent may enter or
re-enter the building to conduct inspections to assure compliance with the
requirements of this division, to determine if there are emergency or
hazardous health and safety conditions that require remediation, and to
correct any conditions that are out of compliance with the requirements of
this division or that constitute emergency or hazardous health and safety
conditions.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-126.  RE-OCCUPANCY.



   Occupancy is prohibited within, and an occupancy or use permit shall
not be issued by the City for, any vacant or unoccupied building or structure
on vacant property until all violations have been corrected and all
outstanding costs, assessments, and/or liens owed to the City have been paid
in full.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-127.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   Violations of this division are municipal civil infractions, punishable
as provided in Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances.  Each day during which a
violation continues is a separate offense.  Owners and management agents, if
any, including their principals and managers, shall be jointly and severally
responsible for any violations of this division.



(Ord. No. 462, § 3, 3-18-19)



11-128 – 11-140.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 4.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



11-141.  ALTERNATIVE ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS.



   Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation
of this  chapter, or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, the city may proceed with any of the following enforcement actions:



   (A)   Schedule and proceed with a hearing before the Board of
Ordinance Appeals, in accordance with the provisions of § 11-142 of the City
Code;



   (B)   Issue an appearance ticket to the owner or responsible party,
to be addressed in district court, in accordance with the provisions of §
11-143 of the City Code;



   (C)   Initiate circuit court action to abate the violation in
accordance with established city procedures, the provisions of § 11-144 of
the City Code and applicable Michigan law;



   (D)   Initiate condemnation proceedings to acquire the premises, in
accordance with the provisions of § 11-145 of the City Code and applicable
Michigan law.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-142.  BOARD OF ORDINANCE APPEALS PROCEEDINGS AND DETERMINATION;
CORRECTIVE ACTION; ADMINISTRATIVE WARRANTS.



   (A)   If the Code Official determines that there has been a
violation of this chapter , or has reasonable grounds to believe that a
violation has occurred, he may issue a notice of violation to the owner or
other responsible party prior to holding a hearing before the Board of
Ordinance Appeals.



   (B)   Any notice of violation given shall:



      (1)   Be in writing;



      (2)   Include a description of the real property sufficient
for identification;



      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the
notice is being issued;



      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time
for the repairs, actions, and/or improvements required to bring the premises
into compliance with the City Code;



      (5)   Include a statement that, if all corrections ordered to
be made in the notice have not been completed within the prescribed time
period specified in the notice, an administrative hearing will be held before
the Board of Ordinance Appeals, for which the owner or responsible party will
be assessed a hearing fee;



      (6)   Include the time, date, and place of the hearing, and a
statement that the owner, responsible party, or their representative shall be
entitled to be heard with respect to why the ordered corrective repairs,
actions, and/or improvements have not been made or should not be required; and



      (7)   Be delivered personally, or sent by first class mail to
the responsible party, which may be based upon the name and address on the
records of the city assessing department. If the notice is sent by mail, then
a copy of the notice shall also be posted on the property in a conspicuous
place.



      (8)   The Code Official may also cause a sign to be posted
within the public right-of-way in front of the subject property, or as near
as possible thereto, designating the property as one for which the Board of
Ordinance Appeals will be addressing outstanding property maintenance
concerns.



   (C)   Hearing. The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall conduct a
hearing on the date fixed in the notice, which hearing may be adjourned from
time to time by the Board of Ordinance Appeals as needed to properly complete
the hearing.



   (D)   After the expiration of the time established in the notice for
curing of all violations, but before the date fixed in the notice for the
hearing, the Code Official shall have the premises reinspected to determine
whether the corrections have been completed, and shall report the findings of
the inspection to the Board of Ordinance Appeals. In the event that all
violations are determined by the Code Official to be corrected, the hearing
before the Board of Ordinance Appeals may be canceled by the Code Official.



   (E)   Opportunity to be heard. The Code Official, property owner,
responsible party, any interested party, and/or their representative(s) shall
be given an opportunity to be heard at the hearing and to present evidence on
the matter before the Board.



   (F)   Order for corrective repairs after hearing. At the conclusion
of the hearing, the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall determine, in its
discretion, whether a violation of this Code or of any other provision of the
City Code relating to property maintenance exists. If the Board determines
that a violation does exist, it shall order specific corrective repairs,
actions and/or improvements to be taken by the responsible party (or the
City), including, if necessary, in the discretion of the Board, a vacation of
occupancy and/or a physical demolition of the structure; provided, however,
demolition of the structure shall not be ordered unless a health or safety
hazard exists, or unless a condition of disrepair has existed for at least 12
months.  The order shall also indicate that the City shall be permitted to
initiate the required repairs, actions, and/or improvements.  In so doing,
the City may utilize the services of a reputable contractor and invoice the
property owner for such contractor's services and all applicable
administrative fees set by the City Council in the annual appropriations
ordinance.  Such invoice shall be paid by the property owner within the time
period prescribed on its face.  The Board shall provide its order, or
written notice thereof, to the owner or responsible party, and shall advise
such party of the right to appeal the Board's decision to the Macomb County
Circuit Court. The Board shall keep official minutes of its meetings, which
shall include findings of fact and the terms of the order issued by the Board.



   (G)   The administrative hearing fee established under the city's
appropriation ordinance is intended to recover the city's costs for
scheduling and preparing for a hearing before the Board of Ordinance
Appeals.  The fee shall be paid by the owner or responsible party if all
corrections are not completed by the time specified in the notice. The fee
shall not be refunded if the hearing before the Board of Ordinance Appeals is
canceled under subsection (D) above.  Similarly, invoices for the
improvements ordered by the Board of Ordinance Appeals are intended to
recover the city's costs for implementing the improvements and/or for
securing, utilizing, and monitoring a contractor to do so.  Any person who
fails to pay the fee and/or the invoice shall be subject to the penalties set
forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  The costs incurred by the city for
abatement action under this section, including attorney fees, court costs,
title searches, administrative fees imposed under the Appropriations
Ordinance, and any other costs incurred in connection with the abatement
action, shall be paid by the owner within 30 days of the date of a city
invoice for such services.  The city shall have a lien against the real
property to secure payment.  If the invoice remains unpaid after 30 days,
the amount of the invoice shall be placed upon the tax roll, and shall be
subject to the same penalties, interest, and collection procedures that are
applicable to delinquent taxes.



   (H)   After the Board of Ordinance Appeals has ordered that
improvements and/or abatement action take place on a subject property, and
after the deadline for the property owner to initiate and complete such
improvements and/or abatements has expired, the Code Official shall cause
such improvements and/or abatement action to be undertaken and completed,
utilizing either City personnel, an independent contractor, or both.  In
such instances, the property owner has already been afforded more due process
than would otherwise be afforded by seeking an administrative warrant or
other ex parte court order for abatement of the existing conditions. 
Therefore, a court order and/or administrative warrant is unnecessary. 
However, in situations where the property owner has expressed hostility
toward the City's personnel, or is known to have a weapon or dangerous animal
on the premises, or has otherwise locked or barricaded access to the
offending property or condition, or in any other situation that causes the
City's personnel to have unusual concern, the Code Official or his/her
designee may take the additional step of subscribing an affidavit and seeking
an appropriate administrative warrant from the 41-A District Court in order
to be able to present a court order to the property owner for the entry
required to perform the improvements or abatements, and to take such related
actions as may be necessary in order to do so.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-143.  APPEARANCE TICKETS.



   (A)   If the Code Official determines, or has reasonable grounds to
believe that a violation of this Code or of any other provision of the City
Code relating to property maintenance exists, he may issue an appearance
ticket requiring the responsible party to appear in court to answer the
appearance ticket within the time period specified in the notice.



   (B)   The appearance ticket shall contain the information and shall
be in the form specified by Michigan law.



   (C)   The appearance ticket shall specify, if required by law, the
options available to the responsible party with respect to responding to the
appearance ticket.



   (D)   The appearance ticket shall be served upon the responsible
party as provided by Michigan law.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-144.  CIRCUIT COURT ACTION.



   (A)   If the Code Official determines, or has reasonable grounds to
believe that a violation of this Code or of any other provision of the City
Code relating to property maintenance exists, the city may, in accordance
with procedures established by the City Manager and City Council, proceed
with the filing of an action in the Macomb County Circuit Court to compel the
owner or responsible party to bring the property into compliance with the
provisions of this Code and the City Code by taking corrective action with
respect to the property, building, or structure, or by demolishing the
building or structure.  The city may proceed under this section instead of
proceeding to a hearing before the Board of Ordinance Appeals.



   (B)   The Circuit Court action shall be brought in accordance with
applicable Michigan law, and shall provide the responsible party, after
notice as required by law, an opportunity to be heard prior to any corrective
action or demolition taking place, unless otherwise authorized by the Court.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-145.  EMINENT DOMAIN.



   (A)   The City may institute and prosecute proceedings under its
power of eminent domain to eliminate a structure which is determined  to
have a blighting effect on the city. The purposes of rehabilitating 
blighted areas and the prevention, reduction, or elimination of blight,
blighting factors, or causes of blight contemplated by this article are
hereby declared to be public purposes within the meaning of the constitution,
state laws, and municipal charters relative to the power of eminent domain.



   (B)   All condemnation action taken by the city under its eminent
domain authority shall be in accordance with applicable Michigan law.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-146.  SUPPLEMENTARY NATURE OF ARTICLE.



   This article is intended to supplement other laws, ordinances, and City
Code provisions, and is not intended to supersede or repeal other ordinances
or City Code provisions except where expressly provided.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-147.  CONFLICT.



   Where a provision of the Property Maintenance Code adopted in this
article is considered to be in conflict with another provision of the City
Code or any other city ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion or protection of the health and safety of the
public, as determined in the reasonable discretion of the Code Official,
shall prevail.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-148.  FAILURE TO COMPLY; PENALTY.



   Any person who violates a provision of this article or who fails to
comply with any of the requirements in this article, and any person who
obstructs, hinders, or interferes with the Code Official or any agent or
employee of the city when carrying out tasks contemplated in this chapter, a
directive of the Code Official, or a certificate issued under the provisions
of this article, shall be subject to the penalties prescribed by Chapter 1 of
the City Code.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 4, 5-6-08)



11-149-11-180. RESERVED.



ARTICLE VII.  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES



11-181.  REQUIRED DEPOSITS.



   The Building Official, City Engineer, City Planner, City Development
Director, City Manager or their respective designates shall have authority to
require a developer, builder, homeowner or other applicant to deposit with
the city an amount reasonably necessary to ensure that such developer,
builder, homeowner or applicant completes its obligations under the city code
and ordinances on a timely basis, together with  an administrative fee to
the city as set forth in the city’s annual appropriations ordinance. A
deposit may be required for any of the following:



   (A)   To ensure that a developer or builder completes all site work
or improvements, public utility and right-of-way improvements, soil erosion
measures, grading or landscaping associated with an approved site plan,
subdivision plan, condominium plan, mobile home park plan, planned unit
development plan, special development option plan, special land use approval
or variance or required by the provisions of any city code, ordinance,
standard or regulation;



   (B)   To ensure that a builder or applicant completes all site work
or improvements, soil erosion measures, grading or landscaping within a
reasonable specified time period as required by any permit, plot plan or by
the provisions of any city code, ordinance, standard or regulation;



   (C)   To ensure that any site work or improvements or public utility
and right-of-way improvements required by the city based upon its inspection
will be completed by a reasonable completion date in connection with the
issuance of permits for models and other structures prior to completion of
such improvements;



   (D)   To ensure that any outstanding items required by the city
based upon its inspection will be completed by a reasonable completion date
in connection with the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for a
structure or dwelling;



   (E)   To ensure that no damage is done to public or private property
or improvements or landscaping located upon public or private property;



   (F)   To ensure that any site under development is cleaned up on a
daily basis, that trash and debris are always contained and disposed of
regularly and that public streets and adjacent properties are kept free from
dirt, mud or construction debris;



   (G)   To ensure that any other requirements relating to the
construction process for which any deposit is required under other applicable
provisions of the city codes, ordinances, standards or regulations are
completed or satisfied on a timely basis.



(Ord. No. 352, § 16, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396,
§ 6, 5-6-08)



11-182.  PROCEDURE.



   (A)   When the Building Official, City Engineer, City Planner, City
Development Director, City Manager or their respective designate determines
that a developer, builder, homeowner or other applicant should make a deposit
with the city to ensure that such person fulfills its obligations to the city
as set forth in subparagraph (A), the developer, builder, homeowner or
applicant shall deposit with the city an amount determined by the appropriate
city official to be necessary to fulfill the unfinished obligations. The
amount shall be the sum necessary to perform the outstanding obligations
based upon either: (i) an approved estimate submitted by the developer,
builder, homeowner or applicant , or (ii) a reasonable estimate made by the
Building Official, City Engineer, City Planner, City Development Director,
City Manager or their respective designate. The City Council shall establish
by resolution or ordinance the minimum performance guarantee for the addition
to or alteration, modification or new construction of a single family
residence, multiple family residential building or commercial or industrial
building.



   (B)   The performance guarantee required may be either a cash
deposit made with the city or an irrevocable letter of credit drawn upon a
financial institution satisfactory to the city.



   (C)   If the developer, builder, homeowner or applicant fulfills its
obligations by the specified time, the cash deposit shall be returned without
interest (less a processing fee established by an ordinance or resolution
adopted by the City Council).



   (D)   If the amount of the deposit exceeds $10,000, the developer,
builder, homeowner or applicant may request a rebate of part of the deposit
in reasonable proportion to the ratio of the work completed as the work
progresses.



   (E)   If the developer, builder, homeowner or applicant fails to
complete the required work by the specified date, the city may utilize any or
all of the deposited funds or funds available through the letter of credit to
complete such person’s obligations and to pay the city’s administrative
fee established by the annual appropriations ordinance. . If  there are
excess funds available after completion of the work, the surplus shall be
returned (or the unused portion may be retained by  the city for the cost of
preparing or reviewing  any reimbursement agreement, together with any costs
or fees incurred by the city in securing use of such funds in the event of
the default of the developer, builder, homeowner or applicant).



   (F)   The city may require the developer, builder, homeowner or
applicant to execute an agreement in a form satisfactory to the City Attorney
requiring the developer, builder, homeowner or applicant to: (i) fulfill its
obligations by a specified date, (ii) deposit with the city or other
financial institution acceptable to the city an amount determined to be
sufficient to complete such person’s obligations, with the  administrative
fee payable to the city as established by the annual appropriations
ordinance, and (iii) authorize the city to utilize the funds for completion
of the outstanding items. The developer, builder, homeowner or applicant
shall be responsible for reimbursement to the city of the cost of preparing
or reviewing such agreement, together with any costs or fees incurred by the
city in securing use of such funds in the event of the default of the
developer, builder, homeowner or applicant.



(Ord. No. 352, § 16, 12-19-00; Ord. No. 367, § 10, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396,
§ 4, 5-6-08)



11-183.  ADDITIONAL PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES AND COST RECOVERY.



   Builders, developers, and similar applicants shall not record a master
deed, easement agreement, restrictive covenant, vacation agreement, retention
basin agreement, or similar document or device until the Office of
Engineering has reviewed it, obtained the City Attorney's review and approval
if needed, and provided its final approval for recording in writing.  All
such documents shall also include performance guarantees and obligations
satisfactory to the Office of Engineering.  Final approvals and final
permits shall not be issued until the city has been reimbursed for the City
Attorney's review, whether by direct payment, withdrawal from a performance
guarantee fund, or other means satisfactory to the Office of Engineering.



(Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-184-11-193.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VIII.  MOVING OF BUILDINGS



11-194.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Building Moving
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 8-194; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-195.  RESERVED.



11-196.  MOVING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No building having a floor area of more than 50 square feet shall be
moved out of, through or from one location to another within the city or on
any of the public ways thereof without securing a written permit therefor.



(1978 Code, § 8-196; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



Cross reference:



   Permits generally, see Ch. 29



11-197.  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE AND PERMIT.



   Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this article, the
applicant  shall file a written application with the Office of Building
Services. The application for a permit shall give the name of the owner and
the description of the building to be moved; give its dimensions; state the
purpose; and give the locations from which and to which it is to be moved,
together with the routes proposed to be followed. In case the building has a
floor space area of more than 400 square feet, or in case it is over 15 feet
in height, and if the building is to be located within the city, the
application must be accompanied by photographs showing each of the four side
elevations of the building and must likewise be accompanied with a copy of a
full set of plans for the building as it is proposed to complete the same
after moving; also, in such case, the application must be made at least seven
working days in advance of the moving day or longer, if so required by the
City Manager, in order to make the necessary arrangements.



(1978 Code, § 8-197; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08) 



11-198.  AGREEMENT REQUIRED FROM PERMIT APPLICANT IN CERTAIN CASES.



   Before the moving of any building over 400 square feet in area or over
15 feet in height is authorized, the applicant for the moving permit shall be
required to sign a written agreement prepared by the City Attorney and
approved by the City  Manager by which the applicant agrees to conform to
the terms of this article and other requirements of the city.



(1978 Code, § 8-198; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-199.  PERMIT FEES.



   The permit fees for moving any building, and all preliminary inspection
fees, shall be established by the annual appropriations ordinance. 
Preliminary inspection fees may be refunded in the event a permit is not used
and is canceled upon written request by the applicant, less the amount of
actual expenses incurred by the city.  Applicants shall return all canceled
permits to the city.



(1978 Code, § 8-199; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08) 



11-200.  BOND OR INSURANCE.



   Before any permit is issued under the provisions of this article, the
moving contractor shall furnish a surety bond conditioned upon saving the
city harmless from public liability or damage to private property or a policy
of public liability insurance, which bond or insurance policy shall be in
limits of not less than $25,000 for injuries to one person or $50,000 for
damages in one accident set by the City Engineer and City Attorney.



(1978 Code, § 8-200; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-201.  CASH DEPOSITS; APPROVAL FOR PLUGGING SEWER CONNECTIONS; FILLING
EXCAVATIONS AND REMOVAL OF DEBRIS.



   (A)   The moving contractor shall make a cash deposit or provide a
letter of credit in an amount set by the City Engineer to guarantee the
payment of any and all damages to public property caused by the moving
operations, including any damage to street surfaces, sidewalks, street
lights, public buildings, or any and all other damage to public property, and
also to guarantee payment of all inspection fees and expenses incurred by the
city as a result of the moving operations.  The moving contractor shall
secure the approval of the Director of Public Works of the plugging of sewer
connections before covering the work.  He or she shall fill all excavations
which result from the moving of the building and shall remove all materials
and debris from the premises from which the building is to be moved if the
premises are located within the city, and all materials and debris which may
be deposited or disrupted elsewhere during the moving process.  The burning
of such materials and debris is prohibited.



   (B)   The city shall retain the moving contractor's cash deposit for
approximately 30 days after the moving operations are completed, during which
time it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to estimate the amount of
damage, if any, to public and private property resulting from the moving
operations and to ascertain whether all materials and debris have been
removed from the premises from which the building was moved and all other
areas where materials and debris may have been deposited elsewhere during the
moving process. The City Engineer shall make a written report in regard
thereto and place the same on file. The amount of the contractor's deposit,
less the amount of damage, if any, to public and private property and less
the expense, if any, of removing material and debris from public or private
properties, shall be returned to him or her as soon as practicable.  In case
the amount of such damage and/or cleaning up and removal expense shall be
more than the amount of the deposit, the contractor shall pay the city the
difference within ten days after receiving a statement thereof from the City
Engineer.



   (C)   The owner or moving contractor, on the owner's behalf, shall
also file a cash deposit in an amount set by the City Engineer to guarantee
that the building will be completed according to the plans and specifications
on file with the city and will be in full compliance with his or her
agreement with the city and the requirements of the City Building Code and
fit for occupancy within six months from the date when the moving permit is
granted. The owner shall be entitled to the return of the cash deposit upon
completion of the building within six months and approval and issuance of a
certificate of occupancy by the city.   



(1978 Code, § 8-201; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



Cross references:



   Excavations, see Ch. 17;



   Refuse, see Ch. 23;



   Sewers, see Ch. 53



11-202.  RESERVED



11-203.  RESERVED



11-204.  RESERVED



11-205.  ROUTE TO BE FOLLOWED; RULES GOVERNING MOVING OPERATIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the moving contractor to move the building over
the route designated by the City  Engineer . In the process of moving the
building, it shall be done in a way to least obstruct the street and as
expeditiously as possible. The building shall not be left standing at any
street intersection at any time except in case of unavoidable occurrence
making such standing necessary in the opinion of the City Engineer . It shall
be the duty of the moving contractor to erect a safe and sufficient barrier
around any part of a street occupied by the building during the nighttime and
maintain sufficient colored lights or flares thereon during the hours at
night for the protection of the public.



(1978 Code, § 8-205; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-206.  INSPECTION OF MOVING OPERATIONS.



   During the moving operation it shall be the duty of the Office of
Engineering , at least once each day and for such length of time as  the
City Manager deems advisable, to inspect the moving operation and take any
steps necessary to prevent injury to public or private property or any undue
interference with public travel. This obligation shall not, however, create
any legal liability for the city due to any private property damage that is
nevertheless caused during the moving process. The city shall be paid for the
cost of the use of all city equipment required to be used or to be present
during the moving operation and in addition shall be paid  the actual hourly
cost to the city, plus the administrative fee established by the city’s
annual appropriations ordinance, for the services of each of the city’s
representatives present for inspecting the moving process.  Written notice
shall be given the City Manager at least 48 hours in advance of the moving
date. The time of moving shall be set by the city official in charge. No
building shall be moved at a time earlier than that agreed upon by the moving
contractor and the city authorities.



(1978 Code, § 8-206; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-207.  BUILDING TO BE OCCUPIED AS DWELLING AFTER MOVE TO CONFORM TO OTHER
DWELLINGS IN AREA.



   All buildings moved to a location within the city and which are to be
used for residential purposes shall conform, so far as possible, to the
general type, age and construction of the predominant residential buildings
in the area adjacent to the proposed site, which comply with or are more
restrictive than the zoning and aesthetic regulations of the street upon
which located.



(1978 Code, § 8-207; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-208.  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY FOR MOVED DWELLINGS.



   Any building moved for the purpose of being occupied as a residence
within the city shall not be occupied during the moving operations or until
the building has been completed and approved by the Building Official and a
certificate of occupancy has been issued by the city. Before such certificate
of occupancy is issued, it shall be the duty of the Building Official or
other duly authorized representative of the city to make a final inspection
for the purpose of ascertaining whether such building is completed according
to the plans, specifications and agreements on file with the city, is in full
compliance with the requirements of the City Building Code and is fit for
human occupancy. If the certificate of occupancy is not applied for within
six months after the permit for moving a building is granted, or if the
building is not completed and ready for human occupancy within six months,
the cash deposit required by § 11-201 or any part thereof shall be declared
forfeited to the city and the city may institute proceedings to have the
building condemned and torn down, or city may complete the owner’s
obligations under this section; provided, that upon application to the Board
of Ordinance Appeals by the person owning the building and for good cause
shown, the time for completing the work  so that it may be occupied may be
extended for one or more periods of 90 days, upon payment of the sum 
established by the annual appropriations ordinance for each such extension.
The Board of Ordinance Appeals  may, upon granting of an extension, require
a new cash deposit to be made and a new agreement executed.  In the event
the city's expenses for condemning and tearing down the building, or for
completing the owner's obligations, exceed the amount of the forfeited
deposit and any other monies deposited under this section, the owner shall
pay the city the difference within ten days after receiving a statement of
the balance due from the City Engineer.



(1978 Code, § 8-208; Ord. No. 396 § 6, 5-6-08)



11-209-11-218.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IX.  NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS



11-219.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUILDING DEVELOPMENT. Any improvement to commercial or residential
property, including but not limited to a subdivision, apartment complex, a
condominium complex, industrial complex, shopping mall or any complex of like
nature.



   COMMERCIAL. Any use of property which is nonresidential, including but
not limited to business, industrial or professional uses.



   MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. Any residential building in which
more than one family or tenant may reside, including but not limited to
apartment buildings, condominium buildings, town house buildings and
complexes that are similar in nature.



   THOROUGHFARE. Any surface which is designed for vehicular traffic,
including but not limited to all expressways, limited access highways,
streets, roads, avenues, boulevards, courts, terraces, drives and lanes,
whether public or private, including private thoroughfares located in any
building development.



(1978 Code, § 8-219; Ord. No. 274, § 1, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-220.  COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.



   According to the system set out in this article, all thoroughfares
within the city shall have a name, all property adjacent to any thoroughfare
shall be numbered and the assigned numbers shall be displayed on buildings
and structures.



(1978 Code, § 8-220; Ord. No. 274, § 2, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-221.  BASE LINES ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   A base line shall be established extending from the westerly
to the easterly city limits on a line concurrent with Fourteen Mile Road, and
all thoroughfares extending in a general northerly direction therefrom shall
be numbered beginning with 33000 at such base line, the numbers increasing in
series of one or more even hundred of numbers to each block, as practicable.



   (B)   Another base line shall be established extending from the
northerly to the southerly city limits on a line concurrent with Dequindre
Road and all thoroughfares extending in a generally easterly direction shall
begin numbering with 1900 at such base line and shall increase in series of
one or more even hundred of numbers to each block, as practicable.



(1978 Code, § 8-221; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-222.  CERTAIN STREETS .



   For the purposes of this article, Canal Road shall be considered
extending in a generally easterly direction and numbered accordingly, Clinton
River Road shall be considered as extending in a generally easterly direction
and numbered accordingly, Utica Road shall be considered as extending in a
generally northerly direction and numbered accordingly and Moravian Road
shall be considered as extending in a generally easterly direction and
numbered accordingly.



(1978 Code, § 8-222; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-223.  RECTIFYING LINES GENERALLY.



   The City Engineer shall establish rectifying lines on certain
thoroughfares and the number on thoroughfares intersection same shall be
rectified or corrected at each point of intersection.



(1978 Code, § 8-223; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-224.  NEW BASE AND RECTIFYING LINES.



   The City Engineer shall establish such additional base and rectifying
lines as may be necessary for the numbering of new districts, but such new
lines shall not conflict with the base and rectifying lines established by
this article.



(1978 Code, § 8-224; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-225.  NUMBERING SYSTEM GENERALLY.



   Numbers shall be assigned progressively from the base line and from the
rectifying lines in series of one or more even hundreds to each block, as
nearly as practicable and as required by the length of the blocks, the
unassigned numbers of a series to be dropped at the end of each block, and
the succeeding blocks shall be numbered beginning with the first number of
the following series. Thoroughfares, regardless of where they begin, but
which extend in the same general direction, shall be numbered in the same
series in parallel blocks.



(1978 Code, § 8-225; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-226.  AMOUNT OF SPACE ALLOWED FOR EACH FULL NUMBER.



   One full number shall be allowed for each five feet of frontage on each
side of all thoroughfares.



(1978 Code, § 8-226; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-227.  ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS ON THOROUGHFARES.



   The City Engineer shall assign numbers on the thoroughfares of the city
and shall maintain suitable charts of all thoroughfares indicating the names
and numbering. The assignment of numbers shall be done in writing.



(1978 Code, § 8-227; Ord. No. 274, § 3, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-228.  ASSIGNMENT OF ODD AND EVEN NUMBERS.



   Facing progressive with the numbers, even numbers shall be assigned to
the right-hand side of the thoroughfares and odd numbers shall be assigned to
the left-hand side.



(1978 Code, § 8-228; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-229.  NUMBERING SYSTEM ON FREEWAYS AND LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAYS.



   All freeways and limited access highways within the city shall be
numbered continuously, regardless of direction, as may be determined from
appropriate base lines.



(1978 Code, § 8-229; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-230.  DISPLAY, SIZE, AND COLOR OF NUMBERS.



   All buildings and structures within the city shall display the numbers
assigned by the City Engineer in accordance with the following:



      (1)    Numbers on all residential buildings shall meet the
requirements of chapter 3 of the International Property Maintenance Code as
adopted in this chapter of the code of ordinances;



      (2)   Multifamily residential buildings shall have a building
address sign on or at the front of the building that will identify all
addresses located within a multifamily residential building;



      (3)   Numbers on commercial buildings shall be displayed on
the front of the building or on a sign at the front of the building and at
the rear of the building if there is an access at the rear of the building to
a hard-surfaced area upon which vehicular traffic may maneuver, and all said
numbers shall be at least four inches in height;



      (4)   All numbers displayed on or at the front of the
buildings shall be displayed in such a manner as to be readily visible to
occupants of vehicles on thoroughfares immediately in front of such buildings
during all hours of normal daylight;



      (5)   The color of the numbers for both residential and
commercial buildings shall be in contrast with the immediate background upon
which they are mounted;



      (6)   This section shall be construed to mean that, if the
numbers are hidden by an awning or other appurtenance, the owner of the
building or persons having control shall provide supplementary numbers in
such a manner as to comply with this article;



      (7)   The numbers shall be permanently affixed at the time of
any final inspection of the building.



(1978 Code, § 8-230; Ord. No. 274, § 4, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-231.  FEES.



   The City Council may, by resolution or through the annual
appropriations ordinance, establish a fee or fees to be paid to the city for
performing the service of assigning numbers in accordance with this article.



(1978 Code, § 8-231; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-232.  NAMES ON PRIVATE THOROUGHFARES.



   Prior to commencing construction on a thoroughfare, property owners of
thoroughfares shall submit a name for the proposed thoroughfare to the City
Engineer for approval. The City Engineer may approve the proposed name if it
is proper and suitable for public display and use and is not the same as, or
so similar to, the name of any existing thoroughfare within the city so as to
be confusing and likely to delay the response time of the Fire and Police
Departments and other emergency vehicles. The owner of the thoroughfare shall
erect a sign at each intersection which displays the name of the thoroughfare
in accordance with the standards of the City Engineer and in such a manner as
to be visible from the intersecting thoroughfares.



(1978 Code, § 8-232; Ord. No. 274, § 5, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-233.  CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.



   The owner of a building or private thoroughfare which is not named or
numbered in accordance with this article shall make the necessary corrections
and obtain the necessary permits or authority as required in this chapter
within 30 days after receiving a notice from the city specifying any
violation of this chapter and any corrective action that is required.



(1978 Code, § 8-233; Ord. No. 274, § 6, 4-18-89; Ord. No. 396 § 7, 5-6-08)



11-234-11-241.  RESERVED.



CHAPTER 12:  BUSINESS REGISTRATION AND REGULATIONS



ARTICLE I.  BUSINESS REGISTRATION



12-1.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the City of Sterling Heights "Business
Registration Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 8.2-1; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-2.  PURPOSE.



   All businesses shall be registered annually within the city:



   (1)   To assist the city with information to help provide:



      a.   More adequate police and fire protection;



      b.   More equal and equitable real and personal property
taxation;



      c.   Better efficiency and economy in furnishing public
utility services;



      d.   More comprehensive and informed planning and zoning uses
of land and structures; and



   (2)   To establish a registry of businesses operating within the
city for the general information of the public and for the promotion of the
city.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-2; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   The word BUSINESS, when used in this article, shall mean any trade,
occupation, profession, work, industry, commerce or other activity owned or
operated by any person within the city, except the word BUSINESS shall not
include home occupations, as defined in the city zoning ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-3; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-4.  CERTIFICATION OF REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Requirement established. It shall be unlawful for any person
to operate a business within the city without having first obtained a
certificate of registration.



   (B)   Registration form. In order to register, the owner or operator
of a business shall submit registration information on a form prepared by the
City Clerk which may require that full identification information be provided
for owners and operators, including dates of birth and driver license
numbers. The information on the registration form shall be true and accurate.
The business and the person signing the form shall be responsible for the
accuracy of the information.



   (C)   Fees. Fees for registration shall be set by the City Council
in the annual appropriations ordinance. There shall be no fee for renewal of
registration.



   (D)   Prohibition. No certificate of registration shall be issued by
the City Clerk until a certificate of occupancy has been issued and where the
existing or proposed business would be illegal under any law or ordinance.



   (E)   Issuance. After the filing of a fully completed registration
form, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate of registration.



   (F)   Duration. The certificate of registration shall be effective
until the following April 30.



   (G)   Renewals. By April 1 of each year, the City Clerk shall send
each holder of a certificate of registration a copy of the filled in
registration form for the previous year, and each business shall return it by
April 30 of each year with a signed statement the information has not changed
and is correct as of that date or with the addition of whatever information
is needed to correct the registration form.



      (1)   Issuance of a sticker. Upon receipt of the form, and
upon determining compliance with the requirements of this article, the City
Clerk shall issue a sticker indicating registration for the current year,
which shall be affixed to the certificate of registration by the business.



      (2)   Issuance of a new certificate. If there is a necessity
of the issuance of a new certificate due to a name change or other reason,
the City Clerk shall issue a new certificate of registration.



   (H)   Transfer. No certificate of registration may be transferred by
the holder to any other person.



   (I)   Inspection. The City Clerk or his or her agent shall have the
right of inspection of the premises to assure compliance with this article,
either before or after the issuance of a certificate of registration.



   (J)   Display. The certificate of registration shall be prominently
displayed in the place of business.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-4; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-A, § 1,
10-4-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1, 10-19-93; Ord. No. 388, § 6, 1-3-07) Penalty,
see § 1-9



12-5.  REVOCATION AND/OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Noncompliance. In the event of any noncompliance with the
provisions of this article after a certificate of registration has been
issued, the certificate may be revoked or suspended by order of the City
Clerk until the noncompliance has been corrected as determined by the Clerk.



   (B)   Written notice. Upon any revocation and/or suspension, the
City Clerk shall notify in writing the business of the action taken and shall
specify the nature of any violations.



   (C)   Hearing. Any business aggrieved of the action taken by the
City Clerk may request a hearing before the City Council to be held within 21
days of the request.



   (D)   Final determination. The City Council shall determine whether
or not a violation has occurred and, if so, shall determine whether the
revocation and/or suspension should be continued and, if so, under what
conditions.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-5; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-6.  EXEMPTIONS.



   No registration shall be required of any agency of the United States of
America, the State of Michigan or any political subdivision of the state.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-6; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-7.  OTHER CITY REQUIREMENTS.



   Obtaining a certificate of registration shall not relieve any business
from obtaining any other license, permit or approval as may be required by
any other city ordinance, requirement, regulation or standard.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-7; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-8.  PRIVACY REGULATION.



   The City Clerk shall withhold from public disclosure any personal
information provided to the city under this article, except where disclosure
is required by the Freedom of Information Act.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-8; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 270-B, § 1,
10-19-93; Ord. No. 270-C, § 1, 1-19-99)



12-9.  RESERVED.



12-10-12-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  BUSINESS REGULATIONS



DIVISION 1.  SECONDHAND MERCHANTS



12-21.  GENERAL REGULATIONS GOVERNING ALL SECONDHAND MERCHANTS.



   (A)   The regulations in this division shall apply to all secondhand
merchants within the city, regardless of any other provisions of the city
code, unless specifically exempted by this division.  A SECONDHAND MERCHANT
is any person, corporation, member of a co-partnership, firm, or limited
liability company that purchases, receives, stores, passes through, or
exchanges secondhand personal property of any kind in any condition to
facilitate or promote the re-sale of such property.  By way of illustration
and not limitation, pawn shops, pawnbrokers, flea market dealers, junk
dealers, automobile wrecking yards, nonferrous metal dealers, jewelers,
jewelry exchange participants, precious metal and gem dealers, videogame
retailers, electronics stores, toy stores, video stores, and any other store
or operation are all deemed to be secondhand merchants for purposes of this
division if they purchase, receive, store, pass through, or exchange
secondhand personal property of any nature. 



   (B)   Every secondhand merchant shall register with the city as a
secondhand merchant prior to undertaking any transactions involving
secondhand personal property.  The registration form shall include all
information required by the City Clerk and the Police Department, including
but not limited to all formal and informal names of the business or
operation, all business and emergency contact information, hours of
operation, location(s), name(s) of owners and operators, names(s) of managers
or supervisors, dates of birth and driver's license numbers for owners,
operators, managers, and supervisors.  The fees for registration and
renewals shall be set by the City Council in the annual appropriations
ordinance.  After the filing of a fully completed registration form and
payment of the required fee, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate of
registration, except no certificate shall be issued if the business or
operation does not have a proper certificate of occupancy or other required
licenses or registrations.  The certificate of registration shall be
effective until the following April 30.  By April 1 of each year, the City
Clerk shall send each holder of a certificate of registration a copy of the
completed registration form for the prior year, and each business or
operation shall return it by April 30 with a signed statement that the
information has not changed and is correct as of that date or with the
addition of whatever information is needed to update or correct the
registration form.  Upon receipt of the properly completed renewal, and upon
determining compliance with this division and other applicable laws and
ordinances, the City Clerk shall issue a sticker indicating registration for
the current year, which shall be affixed to the certificate of registration
by the business.  No certificate of registration may be transferred by the
holder to any other person or entity.  The City Clerk and his or her agent
shall have the right to inspect the premises of any secondhand goods business
or operation to ensure compliance with this section, either before or after
issuance of a certificate.  The certificate of registration shall be
prominently displayed in the place of business where it can readily be viewed
by customers and members of the public who enter the establishment.



   (C)   Unless otherwise permitted by law or ordinance, a secondhand
merchant shall not purchase or receive any item or goods:



      (1)   From any person under the age of 18 years without the
written consent of a parent or guardian;



      (2)   From any person whom the secondhand merchant has reason
to suspect stole the item or goods, or is attempting to sell or dispose of a
stolen item or goods, or who has been identified by law enforcement or code
enforcement authorities via written or electronic notice as someone from whom
secondhand goods should not be received or purchased;



      (3)   From any person between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. of the following day.



   (D)   A secondhand merchant shall keep a record of every person or
business with whom any secondhand property transaction is conducted and a
record of all property purchased, received, stored, passed through, or
exchanged.  Every secondhand merchant, by 10:00 a.m. on the next day that
the secondhand merchant is open for business or within 48 hours if the
secondhand merchant does not operate out of a traditional storefront, must
transmit a report to the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee of all
transactions in which the secondhand merchant received secondhand or used
personal property.  A transaction reported by electronic transmission under
this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the Chief of
Police so requests.  The report must be transmitted via e-mail or internet
through an electronic information data manager designated by the Chief of
Police to facilitate the collection and transmission of such reports.  The
reports shall be in a format designated by the contractor or service
provider. The report shall include all identifying marks or other unique
descriptors which distinguish the property from similar items.  All jewelry
and precious metals or gems, and any property that does not have a serial
number, or a product name, or a make and model, shall be photographed from
three angles and the photographs shall be included with the report.



   (E)   All secondhand merchants must have the equipment or software
necessary to transmit the required reports through the electronic information
data manager designated by the Chief of Police installed and operational no
later than April 30, 2013.  The Police Department will require all
secondhand merchants to electronically submit data beginning April 1, 2013.



   (F)   Exemptions.



      (1)   The purchase, receipt, storage, passing through, or
exchange of an antique is exempt from the requirements of this division if
the primary business of the secondhand merchant is the sale or collecting of
antiques.  This exemption does not mean that an antique dealer is exempt
from the requirements of this division if the transaction involves an item
that is not an antique.  An ANTIQUE is a decorative object, piece of
furniture, or other work of art created in, or in the style of, an earlier
period that is collected and valued for its beauty, workmanship, and age.



      (2)   The purchase, receipt, storage, passing through, or
exchange of clothing is exempt from the requirements of this division if the
primary business of the secondhand merchant is the sale or consignment of
clothing.



      (3)   Private residential sales commonly known as "garage
sales," "yard sales," or "estate sales" involving tangible personal property,
whether new, used, secondhand, damages, or discarded and not otherwise
regulated, including but not limited to clothing, household effects, tools,
garden implements, toys, recreation equipment, and other similar personal
household property, advertised by any means whereby the public at large is
made aware of such sale, are exempt from the requirements of this division so
long as such sales take place at a residentially zoned property, occur less
than three times per year, and occur for less than three consecutive days. 



      (4)   An organization or non-profit entity which is tax-exempt
and tax-deductible under an IRS rule, ruling, or determination, and to which
all of its secondhand items are donated without payment to the donor by the
organization, is exempt from the requirements of this division.



      (5)   Auctioneers and auction houses are exempt from the
requirements of this division. 



      (6)   Individuals engaging in an incidental transaction
between themselves are exempt from the requirements of this division, where
neither individual engages in the transaction as part of a more frequent
practice designed to produce income.



      (7)   Retail merchants who repossess their own merchandise
sold on a title retaining contract or chattel mortgage basis or who accept
merchandise as a part payment on new sales are exempt from the requirements
of this division.



      (8)   New articles, wares, or merchandise purchased at
wholesale from manufacturers, wholesale, distributors, or jobbers for retail
sale to customers are exempt from the requirements of this division.



      (9)   Old rags, paper, used books, magazines, tapestries, and
household furniture are exempt from the requirements of this division.



      (10)   Secondhand or used tires are exempt from the
requirements of this division when removed from the vehicle to which such
tires are attached in the presence of the person receiving them.



      (11)   Persons whose principal business is that of dealing in
new goods, articles, and merchandise and who do not buy secondhand goods,
articles, and merchandise outright, but occasionally accept in trade or
repossess electrical appliances, gas appliances, lighting fixtures,
electrical motors, radios, watches, jewelry, precious stones, and musical
instruments, are exempt from the requirements of this division.



      (12)   Used car dealers are exempt from the requirements of
this division.



      (13)   Art galleries are exempt from the requirements of this
division.



   (G)   Regardless of an exemption set forth in this division, all
secondhand merchants must still comply with any and all state law
requirements and separate ordinance requirements governing the nature of
their business, the nature of their transactions, and any recording and
reporting requirements set forth therein.



   (H)   Penalties.



      (1)   Any violation of this division may be charged against
the owner or operator of the secondhand merchant operation, as well as
against any responsible employee(s) or agent(s). 



      (2)   A first violation of any of the requirements of this
division is a municipal civil infraction, punishable as set forth in Chapter
1 of the city code.



      (3)   A second or subsequent violation of any of the
requirements of this division within any 12 month period of time is a
misdemeanor, punishable by up to 90 days in jail, a fine up to $500, or
both. 



      (4)   A third violation of any of the requirements of this
division, in addition to the penalties set forth in subsection (3) above,
occurring within a seven year period of time shall result in the secondhand
merchant operation or business being deemed a nuisance.  Upon receipt of
written notice from the city that the secondhand merchant's operation or
business has been deemed a nuisance, all secondhand property transactions
must cease and the secondhand merchant's registration will be revoked. 
Thereafter, the secondhand merchant shall not engage in any secondhand
merchant activities covered by this division.  After a period of one year,
the secondhand merchant may petition the City Manager for the privilege of
resuming the secondhand merchant activities.  The secondhand merchant shall
provide any and all information requested by the City Manager during the
petition review process.  If the secondhand merchant has honored the
cessation order, has provided the City Manager will all requested
information, and has not violated any laws during the closure period, the
City Manager shall allow the operation or business to resume on an indefinite
probationary status.  Any violation of this division during the probationary
operation of the business shall result in permanent closure.



   (I)   Appeal.  The city's determination that a business or
individual must register as a secondhand merchant may be appealed to the
Ordinance Board of Appeals within 14 days of written notice of the
determination.  Because the interests of residents and law enforcement in
finding and reclaiming stolen property outweigh the interests of a business
or individual in conducting secondhand property transactions, the business or
individual shall not engage in secondhand goods transactions without
complying with the requirements of this division during that appeal time
period and during the pendency of the appeal.  During the appeal time
period, during the pendency of the appeal, and during any period when a
registration certificate has not been issued or has been revoked, the Chief
of Police shall have the authority to post one or more conspicuous notices on
the premises indicating that the business or individual is not authorized to
undertake any transactions involving secondhand property.  Persons or
entities who are cited for a municipal civil infraction or charged with a
misdemeanor pursuant to this division after expiration of the 14-day notice
period may not avail themselves of this appeal provision, but may instead
defend against the charge in the district court if desired.



(Ord. No. 425, § 1, 3-5-13)



12-22-12-40.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES



12-41.  SHORT TITLE.



   This division shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights Cigarette
Vending Machine Ordinance" and may be cited as such.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-41; Ord. No. 293, § 1, 4-16-91)



12-42.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   In the interest of comporting with state law prohibiting the sale of
tobacco products to minors and protecting the health and welfare of the
residents of the city, especially minors, this division regulates the
placement of cigarette vending machines within the city limits.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-42; Ord. No. 293, § 1, 4-16-91)



12-43.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES. Includes any machine which dispenses
cigarettes or other tobacco products upon insertion of coins or tokens.



   MANAGEMENT OF THE WORKPLACE. The individuals responsible for the daily
operation and supervision of a private place of business.



   MINORS. Includes any individual who has not attained his or her 18
birthday.



   OWNER, OPERATOR or DISTRIBUTOR. The individual owning and/or exercising
control of the operation of the cigarette vending machines, including
responsibility for stocking the machines and collecting the proceeds of sales.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-43; Ord. No. 293, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 293-A, § 1,
10-19-93)



12-44.  LICENSES REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall use a cigarette vending machine to sell
tobacco products without first obtaining a license for the placement of the
cigarette vending machine in compliance with the provisions of this division.



   (B)   No cigarette vending machine shall be issued a license unless
it is either:



      (1)   To be located in an establishment in which access by
minors is prohibited by law;



      (2)   To be located in an area, office, plant, factory or
private membership club that is not open to the public and is located not
less than 20 feet from all entrances and exits that are accessible to the
general public.



   (C)   Notwithstanding the above provisions, licenses may be granted
for cigarette vending machines located in an establishment that has a Class C
license under M.C.L. § 436.2(t) and one of the following applies:



      (1)   If the establishment has a bar that is located in a room
that is separated from the remainder of the establishment by a wall and a
doorway and the cigarette vending machine is located entirely in that room;



      (2)   If the establishment has a bar that is located in a room
that is separated from the remainder of the establishment by a wall and a
doorway and the cigarette vending machine is located not more than 20 feet
from the bar, is located clearly within the bar area and not in a hallway,
coatroom, restroom or similar unrelated area and is under the direct visual
supervision of an adult.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-44; Ord. No. 293, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 293-A, § 2,
10-19-93)



12-45.  LICENSES.



   (A)   Licenses shall be issued in accordance with the following:



      (1)   Licenses shall be issued annually by the City Clerk upon
application;



      (2)   Applications for a license shall include the following
information:



         a.   Name and business address of the owner, operator or
distributor of each cigarette vending machine;



         b.   Address at which each machine is to be placed and
its location within the establishment;



         c.   A statement that the applicant is familiar with the
provisions of this division and will comply with it;



      (3)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee, the
amount of which shall be established by the City Council in the annual
appropriations ordinance;



      (4)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Council will
provide the owner, operator or distributor with an identification label for
each licensed cigarette vending machine.



   (B)   Each cigarette vending machine licensed under this chapter
shall have permanently affixed, in a conspicuous place, an identification
label provided by the City Clerk. No person shall transfer identification
labels from one cigarette vending machine to another.



(1978 Code, § 8.2-45; Ord. No. 293, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 388, § 7,
1-3-07)



DIVISION 3.  OUTDOOR PATIO SPACE ("OPS")



12-46.  PURPOSE.



   Many service industry business establishments, including but not
limited to establishments that serve alcoholic beverages for on-site
consumption, utilize outdoor patio spaces at various times throughout the
year for patrons to congregate for a variety of purposes, such as dining,
drinking, and/or enjoying some form of entertainment.  At times, the use of
such areas can result in disturbances to neighboring properties, noise
violations, and occupancy concerns.  This division establishes licensing
requirements designed to minimize the adverse secondary effects of such uses.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-47.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   The term "outdoor patio space" is abbreviated in this division as an
OPS and includes, but is not limited to, a designated area outside of the
primary structure to which it is attached, whether or not it is functionally
capable of being completely enclosed, that is utilized for patron seating,
dining and/or drink service for patrons, and any other form of patron
congregation, with the exception of an outside area that is designated solely
for smoking and which complies with the Dr. Ron Davis Smoke-Free Air Law. 
An OPS must be licensed by the city if it falls within any of the following
categories:



   (A)   The OPS is defined by a perimeter of walls, fencing, trees,
shrubbery, or any other design that restricts ingress and egress from the
OPS, and the OPS is larger than 100 square feet.



   (B)   The business to which the OPS is open later than 10:00 p.m.
Sunday through Thursday and/or later than 11:00 p.m. on Friday and
Saturday.  However, a license will not be required for the OPS if it is not
accessible to the public or otherwise being utilized during unusual occasions
when indoor business operations are extended beyond those times.



   (C)   Total tabletop space available outdoors on the site for patron
use exceeds 100 square feet.



   (D)   Any form of amplified sound is transmitted on, in, from, or
through the OPS.



   (E)   The OPS is part of an area licensed or authorized for
alcoholic beverage consumption and/or service under the Liquor Control Code.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-48.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   By March 1, 2017, any person desiring a license to utilize an
OPS for which a license is required under this division shall file with the
City Clerk an application, under oath, on a form provided by the City
Clerk.  Applications shall include the following information:



      (1)   The full name of the applicant and whether the applicant
is an individual or a corporation, partnership or other business entity;



      (2)   The name under which the business is operated and a copy
of the current business registration and any applicable business licenses;



      (3)   The business address and all telephone numbers for the
business;



      (4)   A copy of the signed lease for the business premises and
written consent of the owner to utilize an OPS on the premises, if the
premises are not owned by the applicant;



      (5)   The site plan number and the date of the meeting at
which the site plan for the OPS was approved by the Planning Commission (if
applicable), including a layout plan of the OPS showing:



         a.   Its overall design and placement on a scaled site
plan;



         b.   The location of all seats, tables, serving areas,
exits, trash receptacles, and any other temporary fixtures;



         c.   Lighting (other than decorative lighting);



         d.   Speakers, amplifiers, televisions, display screens,
stages or performance areas, and similar installations designed to facilitate
entertainment;



         e.   Design of any walls, railings, planters, and other
screening and boundary elements; and



         f.   If outdoor heating elements are proposed (permanent
or temporary), the location and design of such elements, which shall be
required to meet all applicable codes prior to installation.



      (6)   The full name, address, and phone number of each
individual who manages or is principally in charge of the operation of the
business, with such information to be updated immediately with any new or
changed information not found on the initial list;



      (7)   A detailed summary or description of the nature and type
of services to be provided within the OPS;



      (8)   The days and times the OPS will be open to patrons;



      (9)   A release and authorization for the city, through its
agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into
the truth of the statements set forth on the application and the
qualifications of the applicant for the license;



      (10)   Additional business establishments with an OPS that
have been owned and/or operated by the applicant, in whole or in part, within
the past ten years;



      (11)   Such other information as may be required by the Clerk;



      (12)   A written declaration by the applicant, given under
oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained
in and attached to the application is true and correct.



   (C)   All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount set by the city's annual appropriations
ordinance.



   (D)   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1
of the city code, for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent, or
untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to
conceal any material fact or to give or use any fictitious name in applying
for a license under this division. Any license obtained in violation of this
division shall be void.



   (E)   Each application shall also be accompanied by: 



      (1)   A fully executed maintenance agreement acceptable to the
City Attorney, assuring the upkeep and maintenance of, and the prevention of
nuisances created by operation of, the OPS.  The agreement shall remain in
effect for as long as the OPS is operated and properly licensed, and shall
include the applicant's agreement to cease operating the OPS until the
operation is in full compliance with the requirements of the maintenance
agreement.  Any modifications to the OPS may require an amended maintenance
agreement.



      (2)   A public liability and property damage insurance policy
insuring the establishment and its personnel against any liability arising
out of its utilization of an OPS on the premises. The city, including its
employees, agents, officials, officers, and volunteers, shall be named as an
additional insured. No person or entity shall maintain, utilize, or allow to
be utilized any OPS unless the insurance required by this section is in force
at the time of such operation.



      (3)   A fully executed indemnity agreement, approved by the
City Attorney, whereby the applicant and property owner agree to indemnify
and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from any
claim arising or resulting in any manner from the operation of the OPS.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-49.  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR OPS LICENSES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a properly and fully completed application for
a license, the City Clerk shall provide a copy of the application materials
to the City Manager or his or her designee and shall forward a copy of the
application materials to the following for their review, investigation, and
recommendation:



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner; and



      (5)   City Development Director.



   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D), upon receipt of
favorable recommendations from each of the investigating officials listed in
subsection (A), the City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.



   (C)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Clerk shall notify each
of the following of the issuance:



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner;



      (5)   City Development Director; and



      (6)   City Manager.



   (D)   Denial.  The City Clerk shall deny an application for any of
the following reasons:



      (1)   The operation or facility, as proposed in the
application, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, the city's building, fire, zoning, and health ordinances.



      (2)   The business is not registered with the City Clerk, does
not have a proper certificate of occupancy, has unresolved code, liquor
control, and/or property maintenance violations, is in default to the city
for taxes or other obligations, or has pending litigation or pending
ordinance violations in court.



      (3)   The applicant made a false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact or omission in the license application or any document
required by the city in conjunction therewith, or has failed to submit all
required information or the required fee.



      (4)   The applicant has had a similar permit or license
denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency.



      (5)   The applicant has not provided all of the information
required to be submitted with an application pursuant to this division.



      (6)   The OPS or its use is no longer in compliance with
approved plans or other approvals on file with the city.



   (E)   If the City Clerk denies an application, he or she shall
notify the applicant by regular mail addressed to the applicant at the
address shown on the application. Such notice shall specify the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed action.



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action.



      (3)   A statement that the individual or entity has the right
to appeal the decision to the Board of Ordinance Appeals by submitting a
written application to the City Clerk or his or her designee within 14
calendar days.



   (F)   The City Clerk shall grant or deny a license application under
this division within 60 days of receipt of the application, except that the
City Clerk may extend that deadline upon request of an applicant in order for
the applicant to attempt to remedy any correctable violations that would
require denial if left uncorrected.  The applicant may extend the deadline
as often and for as long as it believes it will need, except that upon the
expiration of one year from receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall
issue a final grant or denial decision and close the matter.  Thereafter, a
new application from the applicant shall not be accepted by the City Clerk
for a period of six months unless accompanied by documentation of a material
change in circumstances, including but not limited to a correction or
elimination of any previously outstanding violations or other reasons for
denial.  An OPS that is or has previously been lawfully in use prior to
March 1, 2017 may continue to be utilized as an OPS while the license
application is pending, unless the city identifies an immediate risk or
hazard to public safety requiring closure, so long as the application is
properly completed and submitted to the City Clerk prior to March 1, 2017.



   (G)   Each license issued under this division shall be valid until
January 31 of the calendar year following the year in which it was issued. 
The expiration date shall be designated by the City Clerk on the license.  A
renewal form and any applicable fee must be submitted to the City Clerk prior
to expiration of the license in order for the OPS use to continue.  Upon
receipt of a properly completed renewal form and any applicable fee, the
license will be deemed renewed until and unless the City Clerk denies the
renewal due to inaccurate or incomplete information or for any of the reasons
a license may be suspended or revoked under this division.



   (H)   A party aggrieved, including but not limited to the applicant
or an adjoining property owner or tenant, may appeal any decision under this
section to the Board of Ordinance Appeals within 14 calendar days after the
contested decision.  An appeal must be made in writing and submitted to the
City Clerk or his or her designee and shall contain the reasons supporting
the appeal and any evidence that supports it.  The person appealing may
review the evidence that is the basis of any grant, inaction, or denial
during the city's normal business hours.  The city shall send notice of the
meeting at which the appeal will be heard to all addresses within 1,500 feet
of the OPS.  The scope of the Board's review shall be limited to verifying
the facts supporting a written decision to grant, not act upon, or deny a
license.  If the Board finds that the facts supporting the decision are
correct, the grant, inaction, or denial shall not be disturbed.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-50.  USE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed upon a wall of the establishment within the OPS or at the inside
entrance to the OPS, including the approved layout of the OPS, unless the
license is issued with a QR code that enables city personnel to scan the
license and review the approved layout plans electronically.  All licenses
shall be made available, upon request, for inspection by any patron, police
officer, or city official in order to confirm the information contained in
the licenses.  Within 72 hours of any change in fact, policy, or method
which would alter the information provided in a license application, or on
the license itself, the applicant/licensee shall notify the City Clerk of
such change(s) in writing.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fraudulently make
use of, to his or her own or another's benefit, a license issued to him, her,
or another in accordance with this division.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to counterfeit or
forge the license required by this division or to deface or otherwise alter a
license issued under the provisions of this division.



   (D)   A license issued under this division is not transferable,
separable, or divisible, and the authority conferred shall be conferred only
upon the individuals named on the license.  Upon sale, transfer, or
relocation of the establishment, the license therefor shall be null and void
unless pre-approved by the City Clerk.  It shall be the duty of all owners
or licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer, or relocation of the
establishment to immediately report such sale, transfer, or relocation to the
City Clerk's office.  The failure to do so shall result in an immediate
suspension of the license. An application for transfer shall be in writing,
shall contain the same information as required by this division for an
initial application for a new license, and shall be accompanied by the same
fee as required for an application for a new license.



   (E)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person operating an
establishment to permit or allow an employee or any person whatsoever to
violate any of the terms of this division while on the premises of the
establishment, and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person at a licensed
establishment to condone or allow any unlawful activity to occur on the
licensed premises, whether within or outside the actual licensed building or
the OPS.



   (F)   The hours of operation of an OPS shall be consistent with the
hours of operation of the principal business to which it is attached, and a
licensee shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the OPS is utilized between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-50A.  REGULAR INSPECTIONS AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All premises used by a licensee under this division shall be
periodically inspected by the Police Chief, Building Official, Fire Marshal,
City Development Director, and City Planner, or their authorized
representatives, for the safety of the OPS and compliance with all applicable
laws, codes, ordinances, and any conditions imposed by any board or
commission.  A search warrant shall not be required for such inspections, in
accordance with the opinion of the Michigan Supreme Court in Gora v City of
Ferndale, 456 Mich 704 (1998).  It is unlawful for any licensee to deny or
refuse access to the premises or to hinder the official in any manner in the
performance of his or her responsibilities under this division, and such
refusal shall constitute sufficient grounds for immediate revocation of a
license granted under the provisions of this division.  The following
minimum standards shall be maintained:



      (1)   An OPS must comply with all applicable construction,
building, and fire codes and all other governmental laws and regulations,
including all technical codes, as well as the conditions of any permits,
licenses, or other approvals issued for, or governing, the use of the OPS.



      (2)   (a)   An OPS must be "open air" but be enclosed
around its perimeter to prevent ingress and egress from any location except
the principal structure to which it is attached.  Enclosures shall consist
of metal railing, wood railing, brick walls, or other durable materials
approved by the Building Official.  No exits, doors, or gates shall be
installed in the enclosure unless required by federal or state laws or codes,
or unless specifically authorized by the Fire Department, Building Official,
or a board or commission.  Access to the OPS, and departure therefrom, shall
not be permitted from any location other than the principal structure unless
for emergency purposes.  The OPS shall be located adjacent and connected to
the indoor premises and all patrons shall enter and exit the OPS from inside
the principal structure.  The perimeter of the OPS shall be shielded and
screened through the use of walls, fencing, trees, shrubbery, and/or other
materials designed to mitigate sound and light emanating from the OPS.



         (b)   Exception:  An OPS licensed under this division
that consists solely of outside tables provided for patrons of the business
is not required to comply with this division.



      (3)   Lighting for the OPS shall be shielded so as to prevent
glare to adjacent properties, public rights-of-way, vehicles, and pedestrians.



      (4)   The OPS shall only be operated in accordance with a plan
approved by the City Planner (or, if applicable, the Planning Commission) for
mitigation of any potential nuisance caused by the use of speakers, amplified
music, televisions, displays, lighting, performances, or other forms of
entertainment.



      (5)   If required by the City Planner due to proximity of the
OPS to nearby properties that may be residential or otherwise in use, the
establishment shall post conspicuous signage visible to users of the OPS
advising patrons to respect neighboring properties by not yelling, screaming,
littering, singing, or otherwise engaging in activities that could disturb a
neighboring property, and to depart the premises at the conclusion of their
visit by leaving courteously and expediently, with no loitering in the
parking areas or outside of the establishment.



      (6)   The establishment shall employ sufficient staff to
ensure that noise levels within the OPS are not distracting any nearby
residents and/or businesses, and also to maintain compliance and reduce
congestion.  The establishment shall also maintain staff to continuously
patrol and monitor the exterior of the premises to address any noise and/or
nuisance issues and facilitate the dispersal of individuals loitering on the
site but outside of the OPS.



      (7)   Unless an alternative is specifically approved by the
City Planner or a city board or commission, the ingress and egress points to
and from an OPS into the principal structure (if applicable) shall be
designed to muffle, mask, or prevent lights, vibration, and/or sound from
inside the principal structure that could impact neighboring properties by
installation of a vestibule, transition room, or hallway with a sound
muffling door at each access point, or by installing a sound-muffling
revolving door.  All ingress and egress doors shall remain closed unless
being utilized for immediate ingress or egress, or unless the business is
closed to the public and employees are utilizing the doors during daylight
hours for cleaning, stocking, and similar business purposes.



      (8)   An OPS and shall be regularly maintained in a safe,
clean, litter-free, and orderly condition.



      (9)   All chairs, benches, tables, and other installations
that are part of the outdoor seating area shall be of quality, durable
material and shall be removed and stored in a legal location and manner when
the OPS is not in use.



      (10)   Elevated platforms are prohibited unless specifically
authorized by the City Planner or a city board or commission.



      (11)   If applicable, the maximum occupancy permitted in the
OPS shall be posted in the OPS and at the inside entrance to the OPS in a
conspicuous place.  The licensee shall ensure that the number of occupants
in the OPS does not exceed the posted limit at any time.  A server or other
person employed by the licensee who briefly enters and exits an OPS shall not
be considered an occupant for the purposes of this division.



      (12)   All required city, county, and state permits, licenses,
and approvals shall be secured prior to any OPS license becoming effective.



   (B)   For an OPS that is located upon property that adjoins, or is
located within 500 feet of (measured from the approved boundary of the OPS to
the applicable property line), any property zoned for, utilized for, or
depicted on the city's master plan for future residential purposes, the
following additional regulations apply:



      (1)   The applicant is required to comply with a nuisance
mitigation plan.



      (2)   The nuisance mitigation plan must be submitted by the
applicant with the license application.  The nuisance mitigation plan will
be presented by the City Planner to the Planning Commission for review under
the standards set forth in the zoning ordinance.   



      (3)   Failure to comply with the nuisance mitigation plan as
approved by the Planning Commission shall be grounds for the Planning
Commission to revise or revoke the nuisance mitigation plan.  Ongoing or
recurring instances of noncompliance shall be submitted by the City Planner
to the Planning Commission for review.  A license issued under this division
shall be suspended by the City Clerk in the event that the Planning
Commission revokes an approved nuisance mitigation plan.  The license shall
be reinstated if the Planning Commission later approves a new or revised
nuisance mitigation plan or if the City Planner determines that the
noncompliance is otherwise corrected.



      (4)   Ongoing instances of unforeseen or unintended
consequences adverse to other properties or which extend beyond the property
line shall be submitted by the City Planner to the Planning Commission for
review and consideration of potential amendments to the terms and conditions
applicable to the OPS.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



12-50B.  VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, any violation of the provisions of
this division shall result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction
citation carrying a fine of $500.  A second or subsequent violation of the
same provision within any consecutive 12-month period shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the city code.  Any and
all entities, owners, managers, and operators may be issued a citation if
deemed to be jointly responsible for the same violation. 



   (B)   Any second violation of the same provision of this division,
and/or any third violation of any provision of this division, within any
consecutive 12-month period shall cause the City Clerk to suspend the license
for 30 days.  Any fourth violation of this division within any consecutive
12-month period shall cause the City Clerk to review the license for
revocation.  The City Clerk shall solicit a review of the development and
utilization of the OPS from the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official,
City Development Director, and City Planner.  The review shall be limited to
determining whether the license should be revoked, either for (1) ongoing
nuisance conditions, (2) continued violations of the original city approvals
relating to the OPS application, and/or (3) other law, ordinance, or code
violations arising out of the use and/or maintenance of the OPS and
reasonably related to the public health, safety, and welfare.  In the event
that any of them recommend revocation, the City Clerk shall issue notice to
the licensee that the license is revoked.



   (C)   The licensee may submit a written request to appeal any
suspension or revocation pursuant to the appeal provisions set forth in this
division. 



      (1)   All suspension appeals shall be reviewed by the City
Manager or his/her designee.  Review is limited to (1) finding error in the
conclusion of the City Clerk regarding the number and/or nature of
violations, (2) finding that the licensee has satisfactorily demonstrated
that one or more of the underlying violations was due to causes outside of
its control, or (3) the licensee has implemented significant remedies to
prevent future violations.  A written decision shall be provided to the
licensee within 14 calendar days. 



      (2)   All revocation appeals shall be heard by the Board of
Ordinance Appeals at its next regular meeting scheduled at least three
calendar days after submission of the appeal. 



      (3)   Upon submission of the appeal request, the licensee may
continue to operate under the license until the decision of the City Manager
or the Board is rendered unless the basis for the suspension or revocation is
an immediate risk or hazard to public safety or continued disturbance of
public tranquility.



      (4)   When considering a revocation appeal, the Board may
uphold the revocation, reverse the revocation, or modify the revocation to a
suspension with reinstatement conditioned upon any terms and conditions the
Board determines to be reasonably necessary for the safe and lawful continued
utilization of the OPS, including but not limited to referral to the Planning
Commission if the Board determines that a required nuisance mitigation plan
should be reviewed for potential revision.



   (D)   Ongoing violations of this division may also subject the
licensee and/or property owner to the remedial and enforcement provisions set
forth in § 11-141 of the city code.



(Ord. No. 450, § 1, 12-20-16)



ARTICLE III.  HOTELS AND MOTELS



12-51.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the “Hotel, Motel and Tourist Home
License and Regulation Ordinance.”



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-52.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   In the interest of assisting the City of Sterling Heights with
information to help provide more adequate police and fire protection and in
the interest of preventing unsanitary living conditions, the use or sale of
drugs by transients, prostitution, loitering and unsupervised juvenile
activity in or near places designed to provide lodging for transient guests
in the city, this article is established in order to regulate the operation
of hotels, motels and tourist homes which are engaged in the business of
providing rooms for lodging or sleeping purposes to transient guests and to
provide an orderly and nondiscriminatory procedure for the review and
approval by the city of any and all requests for hotel, motel or tourist home
licenses or any matter relating thereto. Each person, firm or corporation who
desires the license, approval or renewal of the same shall comply with the
provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-53.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCOMMODATION(S). The room or other space provided to transient guests
for lodging or sleeping, including furnishings and other accessories therein.
ACCOMMODATIONS does not mean food or beverages.



   APPLICANT. The person, corporation, partnership or other entity filing
an application for a license under this article, including all officers,
partners and other persons listed by name on the license application.



   FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DEVICE. Any of the following:



      (i)   An electronic funds transfer card;



      (ii)   A credit card;



      (iii)   A debit card; or



      (iv)   A point-of-sale card.



   HOTEL and/or MOTEL. A building or group of buildings containing units
(a bedroom, closet and a bathroom) or rooms, which provides accommodations
for transient persons for compensation. Every building or structure kept,
used or maintained as or advertised or held out to the public to be an inn,
hotel, family hotel, apartment hotel, lodging house, dormitory or place where
sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished for hire or rent, whether
with or without meals, shall be included within the definitions of hotel and
motel, with the exception of tourist homes.



   LICENSEE. A person, corporation, partnership or other entity which was
granted a license under this article.



   RESIDENT AGENT. A person who resides within Michigan and who is
designated by the applicant to be contacted by city officials for purposes of
addressing ordinance violations, compliance problems or any other issues
reasonably related to the provisions of this chapter and who is granted the
authority by the applicant or licensee to take action on his, her or its
behalf to ensure compliance with this chapter and to accept service on behalf
of the applicant and/or licensee.



   TOURIST HOME. Any building in which there are less than ten rooms or
rental units, other than rooms which are occupied by the family of the owner
or lessee, which provides accommodations for transient persons for
compensation.



   TRANSIENT MEANS. A person lodging in and/or providing compensation for
the use of any hotel, motel or tourist home facilities.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-54.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall operate a hotel,
motel or tourist home within the City of Sterling Heights without having
first obtained a license for that purpose. A license shall expire December 31
two years following the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
The city may impose reasonable conditions upon the issuance of any license.
All persons, firms, corporations or other entities operating a hotel, motel
or tourist home within the city at the time this article is adopted shall be
permitted to continue the operation for 120 days, by which time a properly
completed application for a license shall be submitted as required by this
article and shall be permitted to continue such operation during the
consideration of the application.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-55.  LICENSE REVIEW; TERM.



   The City Clerk may undertake a review of any license at any time to
determine whether or not the license should be renewed. Each license granted
under this article shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of
issuance, and expiration shall occur on December 31 thereafter.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-56.  APPLICATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Every applicant for a license to operate a hotel, motel or
tourist home shall submit a current and fully completed "City of Sterling
Heights Hotel/Motel Application," as prepared and furnished by the City
Clerk, to the City Clerk’s office and pay a nonrefundable application fee.
The fee shall be set by the City Council in the annual appropriations
ordinance in an amount to cover the cost of investigation, review and
inspection by the City of Sterling Heights of the application . The
application shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, residence address and telephone number of a
resident agent;



      (2)   The name, residence address and telephone number of each
applicant:



         a.   If the applicant is a corporation, the name,
residence address and telephone number of each of the officers and directors
of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock
of the corporation if that individual is or will be involved in the
management and/or operation of the hotel, motel or tourist home and the
address of the corporation itself. The applicant shall also provide
documentation that the corporation is in good standing in the state of
incorporation;



         b.   If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
partnership and the name, residence address and telephone number of each of
the partners having at least a 10% ownership interest, as well as any
individual who is or will be involved in the management and/or operation of
the hotel, motel or tourist home;



         c.   If the applicant owns stock or has a financial
interest in any other hotel, motel or tourist home, the name, address and
telephone number of the corporation and the name, address and telephone
number of each hotel, motel or tourist home;



      (2)   The address and legal description of the property where
the license is to be located;



      (3)   A site plan showing the relationship of the structure to
the surrounding property and uses and photographs or drawings of each of the
sides of the structure in which the license shall be utilized;



      (4)   The history of the applicant in the operation of a
hotel, motel or tourist home, or similar business or occupation, including
but not limited to whether or not such person or business has previously
operated under license in the city or another municipality or state and
whether such person has had such license revoked or suspended, including the
reason for such suspension;



      (5)   The social security number, driver’s license number
(if any) and date of birth of all applicants;



      (6)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant(s)
for the three years immediately preceding the date of application, including
the name, address and telephone number of any and all employers;



      (7)   All criminal convictions of any applicant in the
preceding ten years, including the dates of convictions, nature of the crime
and place convicted;



      (8)   Authorization for the City of Sterling Heights, its
agents and employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into
the truth of the statements set forth in the application. The applicant shall
give such additional information and identification necessary to discover the
truth of the matters required to be set forth in the application;



      (9)   A statement concerning the proposed rates to be charged
by the establishment; and



      (10)   The application shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant.



   (B)   Every licensee in good standing desiring to renew his, her or
its license under this article shall submit a "Request for Renewal of
License" form, as prepared and furnished by the City Clerk, to the City
Clerk’s office. A nonrefundable renewal fee shall be paid to the City
Clerk’s office, such fee to be established by  the annual appropriations
ordinance to cover the costs to the city of investigating and processing
renewal requests. The renewal form shall contain any and all changes and
updates to the information in the licensee’s original application and shall
be signed and sworn to by the applicant. The renewal process shall be subject
to the same investigation process as the original application at the
discretion of the City Clerk. Renewal shall be automatically granted by the
City Clerk unless the City Clerk shall discover a lack of suitable character
or other basis for denying an application under this article. Renewal forms
must be submitted to the City Clerk’s office by October 31 of the year in
which the license will expire.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 388, §§  8 - 9, 1-3-07)



12-57.  INVESTIGATION.



   Upon receipt of the fully completed application, fees and such other
information as may be required or requested by the city, the City Clerk shall
refer the application as follows:



   (A)   To the Chief of Police, who shall investigate and determine
whether the applicant for such license is of suitable character to conduct or
maintain such a business in the City of Sterling Heights. The Chief of Police
shall forward to the City Clerk the results of such investigation along with
a recommendation concerning whether or not the license should be granted.



      (1)   The phrase OF SUITABLE CHARACTER, as used in this
article for the purpose of licensing, shall be construed to mean the
propensity on the part of the applicant to serve the public in the licensed
area in a fair, lawful and honest manner;



      (2)   In making his/her determination, the Chief of Police
shall consider:



         a.   Penal history. All of the applicant’s convictions
in the preceding ten years, other than traffic violations, the reasons
therefor and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to his or her release;



         b.   License and permit history. The license and permit
history of the applicant, whether such applicant is or was previously
operating in this city or state or in another municipality or state under a
license or permit which is or was revoked or suspended, the reasons therefor
and the demeanor of the applicant subsequent to such action;



         c.   Other information. The Chief of Police may consider
any other information and documentation which he or she considers relevant to
make a determination as to whether the applicant is of suitable character;



      (3)   The Chief of Police shall complete his or her
investigation and determination within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60
days, after being provided with the application;



      (4)   If based upon the report of the Chief of Police the City
Clerk determines that an applicant is unqualified for a license because of
lack of suitable character, or similar criteria, the applicant shall be
furnished by the City Clerk with a statement containing information as to the
basis for this determination.



   (B)   If the investigation by the Chief of Police does not cause the
City Clerk to conclude that the applicant lacks suitable character, the City
Clerk shall refer the application to the Building Official and Fire Chief, or
their designated representatives, who shall cause a thorough inspection of
the premises to be made to ensure that the premises are in compliance with
all pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances. The results of
such inspections shall be returned to the City Clerk within 30 days of the
date the application was referred.



   (C)   The City Clerk shall forward the application to such other
departments as required by the City Manager, which departments shall make
their recommendations prior to grant or denial of the application by the City
Clerk. In making its review, the City Clerk may request from the applicant
other pertinent information.



   (D)   The City Clerk shall issue its decision to grant or deny a
license to an applicant within 120 days of receipt of the properly completed
application.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-58.  LICENSE - REFUSAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR NONRENEWAL.



   A license requested under this article may be refused by the City
Clerk, and any license issued under the provisions of this article may be
suspended, revoked or not renewed by the City Council for cause. The term
CAUSE, as used in this article, shall include the doing or omitting of any
act or permitting any condition to exist on the premises for which a license
is issued, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the health, safety
and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature, is
unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued or is forbidden by
this article or any applicable law. CAUSE shall include but not be limited to:



   (A)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application for
license;



   (B)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the
licensed business;



   (C)   Any material violation of this article or of the regulations
authorized herein;



   (D)   Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which
creates a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the transients or to the
community or brings into question whether the licensee is of suitable
character to operate the business;



   (E)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection
with the licensed premises. For purposes of this article, NUISANCE shall be
given the normal and customary meaning and shall include but not be limited
to the following:



      (1)   Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes;



      (2)   A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in
violation of the law and/or interferes with the health, safety and welfare of
the properties in the area;



      (3)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the
licensed premises, including permitting litter, debris or refuse to exist on
the premises outside of proper repositories or to blow or be deposited upon
adjoining properties;



   (F)   Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the
licensed premises by the city’s agents or employees in connection with the
enforcement of this article;



   (G)   Failure of the licensee to pay personal property taxes, other
city obligations and real property taxes by February 14 of each year arising
from the licensee’s use and occupancy of the property. A licensee who does
not own the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real
property taxes unless a lease or contract requires such payment.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-59.  PROCEDURE FOR NONRENEWAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Before any action is taken concerning nonrenewal, revocation
or suspension of a license, the city shall serve the licensee by first class
mail, mailed at least ten days prior to a hearing with notice of hearing
before the City Council, which notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   Date, time and place of the hearing;



      (2)   Notice of the proposed action;



      (3)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (4)   Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify;



      (5)   A statement that the licensee may be represented by
legal counsel, present evidence and testimony and confront and cross-examine
adverse witnesses;



      (6)   A statement requiring the licensee to notify the
Sterling Heights City Attorney’s office at least three days prior to the
hearing date if he, she or it intends to contest the proposed action and to
provide the names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his,
her or its behalf.



   (B)   Upon completion of the hearing, the City Council shall submit
to the licensee a written statement of findings and determination within 30
days.



   (C)   During the procedure for nonrenewal, revocation or suspension,
the licensee will be permitted to continue to operate until such time as the
statement of findings and determination is served upon the licensee by mail
or otherwise.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-60.  LICENSE REFUSAL; HEARING.



   (A)   Any person whose initial request for a license is refused
shall have a right to a hearing before the City Council, provided a written
request therefor is filed with the City Manager within ten days following
such refusal. The City Council shall have the right to affirm and sustain any
refusal to issue a license or the City Council may grant any license.



   (B)   In addition to the information required in this article, an
applicant whose application for a license under this article was denied by
the City Clerk should be prepared to submit and discuss any additional
information required by the City Council for the appeal hearing.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-61.  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   The following rules, regulations and conditions shall be observed by
each licensee under this article:



   (A)   All accommodations must afford easy and unobstructed access to
a hall or passageway or to the outdoors;



   (B)   In every hotel, motel or tourist home hereafter erected, all
accommodations shall be in compliance with the Building Code as adopted by
the city and all applicable building codes in the city;



   (C)   In every hotel, motel or tourist home, there must be provided
at least one toilet, washing facilities and shower and bathtub for every
eight occupants or less. Hot and cold running water must be provided;



   (D)   The third or higher floor of any building shall not be used
for lodging or sleeping purposes, unless equipped with fire escape facilities
as required by all applicable regulations and codes and unless approved by
the proper authorities designated in those regulations and codes;



   (E)   Rooms must be kept clean and free from dirt, vermin, garbage
and rubbish. The licensee shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises;



   (F)   Clean sheets, pillow cases, blankets and towels must be
provided before a transient guest may occupy a bed previously occupied by
another person;



   (G)   The cooking of food in or upon the premises is prohibited,
other than in a kitchenette facility in compliance with applicable codes and
regulations, and approved by the proper authorities designated in those codes
and regulations. The use of hot plates or similar equipment which can be
utilized to heat or cook food is specifically prohibited, with the exception
of microwave ovens provided by the licensee. A notice to this effect shall be
conspicuously posted in each accommodation, utilizing bold lettering;



   (H)   No guest shall remove any furniture from any of the
licensee’s facilities; nor shall any guest permit any furniture, regardless
of whether it belongs to the licensee, to be placed outside of his or her
room. A licensee, its agent(s) or its employee(s) shall take prompt action to
immediately remove furniture from any area of public egress, whether it be a
porch, driveway, walkway or any similar area;



   (I)   A register shall be provided and maintained on the premises
near the main entrance and its information shall be submitted in printed
form, upon demand, to any official or police officer of the City of Sterling
Heights within a reasonable time, not to exceed one week. Register
information shall be maintained by a licensee for a period of one year. The
register shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of every guest renting a room. The
licensee, or its agent, servant or employee shall request proper photo
identification from all guests who are actually renting the room and who pay
for the room with a means other than a financial transaction device and shall
note in the register whether such request was made and whether such
identification was actually provided;



      (2)   The make, year, model and color of every motor vehicle
parked by a guest on the licensee’s premises;



      (3)   The date and time of arrival and date of departure of
every guest, the number of days each guest has been at the establishment
during the calendar year and the amount paid by the guest for each stay;



      (4)   Where at least two persons occupy the same room, the
total number of occupants that shall be lodging in and/or occupying the room;



   (J)   In addition to the required register information, the licensee
shall also maintain telephone usage records for a period of one year for each
room, accommodation and telephone (with the exception of public "pay"
telephones) on the licensee’s premises. The telephone usage information
shall be submitted in printed form, upon demand, to any police officer of the
City of Sterling Heights within a reasonable time, not to exceed one week.
The information to be maintained should include but is not limited to the
telephone number called, the date and time of the call and the telephone
and/or room from which the call was made;



   (K)   No licensee shall knowingly permit any accommodations and/or
other location on the premises to be used for an unlawful purpose. A licensee
with reasonable cause to believe that the premises are being used for an
unlawful purpose shall be deemed to be "knowing" for purposes of this section;



   (L)   All licensees shall permit free access by building officials,
the fire marshal, the Chief of Police or their representatives at all
reasonable times. All licensees shall exhibit, upon demand, a valid license
issued by the city authorizing the operation of the establishment. Before a
license is issued under this article and bi-annually thereafter prior to
renewal inspection of the premises shall be made by the inspection division
which shall certify that the applicable provisions of the Housing Code have
been complied with. The bi-annual inspection period shall be October 1
through December 31, subsequent to the initial inspection;



   (M)   The right to occupy any accommodation shall not be assigned or
transferred without the express written consent of the licensee. No licensee
shall permit any transient to obtain accommodations for more than 90
consecutive days, except as provided in § 12-63;



   (N)   No pets of any kind shall be permitted in any accommodation or
otherwise on the licensee’s premises, with the exception of leader dogs for
the blind, animals harbored on the premises for security reasons and any such
animals as may be exempt from this section by state or federal law;



   (O)   All licensees shall post in each room and accommodation, in a
prominent and conspicuous place and manner, an accurate egress route to be
followed by the licensee’s guests in the event of fire or other emergency.
This section shall not apply where the room or accommodation has an exit door
that opens directly to the outdoors at ground level;



   (P)   These rules and regulations (§§ 12-61, 12-64 and 12-67 of
this article ) shall be conspicuously displayed with the license at each
registration area.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-62.  APPROVAL CONTINGENCIES.



   (A)   Approval of any license under this article will be contingent
upon the obtaining of any necessary permits as required by the Sterling
Heights Code of Ordinances, the City Manager and the City Council, within six
months from the date of such approval. The construction of new buildings and
alterations of existing buildings shall commence within six months after the
date of approval, with a completion date of no more than one year after the
issuance of the relevant building permits. Extensions for completion of
construction or alteration may be granted by the City Council for good cause.



   (B)   No applicant for a license under this article has a right to
the issuance of such license to him, her or it, and the City Clerk reserves
the right to exercise reasonable discretion to determine who, if anyone,
shall be entitled to the issuance of such licenses, subject to the right of
appeal to the City Council. Upon appeal, the City Council reserves the right
to exercise reasonable discretion to determine whether the City Clerk’s
denial decision shall be overruled.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-63.  LONGER TERM OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS.



   Longer term occupancy of accommodations may be permitted in a hotel,
motel or tourist home, subject to the following limitations.



   (A)   The licensee shall provide a report to the city on a quarterly
basis (January 1, April 1, July 1, October 1 of each calendar year) of the
number of accommodations being utilized in excess of 90 consecutive days. The
quarterly report shall include:



      (1)   The correct name and address of every guest renting,
occupying or residing at the licensee’s establishment for a period in
excess of 90 days, including but not limited to non-paying minors and/or
dependents;



      (2)   The date and time of arrival and date and time of
departure of every guest who has utilized an accommodation in excess of 90
consecutive days;



      (3)   A description of the specific accommodation, including
the dimensions of the accommodation, the existence of a kitchenette and
available appliances, the existence of a bathroom, the number of beds and a
description of any other appliances or facilities available in the specific
accommodation.



   (B)   Any room occupied in excess of 90 days shall be considered to
be a residence and open for inspection, as provided by law, for compliance
with state and local laws and codes by personnel of the Police Department,
Fire Department, Building Department and any other department of the city. A
fee, set by the annual appropriations ordinance, may be assessed to recoup
the costs of the inspection.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98; Ord. No. 388, § 10, 1-3-07)



12-64.  REPORTING FALSE INFORMATION.



   It shall be a violation of the article for any person to inscribe in
any hotel, motel or tourist home register or to give for the purpose of being
inscribed in such register or for a quarterly report any false information.
Knowing or having reasonable cause to believe such information to be false,
the licensee or its employee shall notify the Police Department of such fact
and failure to do so shall be grounds for revocation of the license.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-65.  SMOKING IN BED PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any transient guest to smoke while in bed or
for any licensee to permit smoking in bed. A conspicuous notice to this
effect shall be posted in each room.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98) Penalty, see § 1-9



12-66.  REPORTING OF FIRES.



   Each licensee under this article shall cause the Fire Department of the
City of Sterling Heights to be immediately notified when a fire occurs within
its establishment. Any person therein who discovers such a fire shall
immediately notify the person in charge in the place of registration.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-67.  NO ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE.



   No license granted pursuant to this article may be assigned,
transferred or otherwise utilized by any other person or entity other than
the licensee.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-68.  MAINTAINING OF A PUBLIC DISORDER.



   A licensee shall be guilty of maintaining a public disorder when the
licensee or any of the licensee’s employees knowingly permit prostitution,
pimping, gambling or the unlawful sale of narcotics or controlled substances
to be conducted upon the premises or immediately adjacent to the premises by
any person or persons letting a room or rooms from said licensee.



   A licensee shall be held to be guilty of maintaining a public disorder
when the licensee or any employee of the licensee through the exercise of
ordinary care and diligence under such circumstances that a reasonable person
would infer that prostitution, pimping, gambling or unlawful sale of
narcotics or controlled substances is being conducted upon the premises or
immediately adjacent to the premises by any person or persons letting a room
or rooms from the licensee fails to discover the fact.



   However, no licensee shall be punished for maintaining a public
disorder if the licensee notifies the police of suspicions that the aforesaid
conduct is occurring on the premises and/or the licensee terminates the
letting of the room or rooms immediately upon learning that the aforesaid
conduct is occurring on or adjacent to the licensee’s premises. No employee
of the licensee shall be punished for maintaining a public disorder if the
employee makes the notification required herein or notifies the licensee of
the existence of the prohibited conduct for the licensee’s action
immediately upon learning that the conduct is occurring on or immediately
adjacent to the premises.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-69.  INVESTIGATION.



   Whenever the police are called or have occasion to be on the
licensee’s premises for the purposes of making a police report relative to
criminal conduct or an arrest, the Chief of Police shall cause to be
conducted an investigation as to whether the "Maintaining of a Public
Disorder" is occurring as defined herein and prepare a written report of the
investigation and his or her findings and recommendation. The report shall be
transmitted within a reasonable time, not to exceed 72 hours, to the City
Attorney and to the City Manager’s office for further actions as warranted.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-70.  PENALTIES.



   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $500 or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding 90
days, or be both so fined and/or imprisoned, in the discretion of the court.
Any entity violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an
amount not exceeding $500 and shall be subject to the revocation procedures
set forth in this article.



(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 9-15-98)



12-71 - 12-80.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  PAWNBROKERS



12-81.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights "Pawnbrokers Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-82.  INTENT.



   The City Council hereby finds that the public health, safety, and
welfare are best served by the adoption of an ordinance providing for the
licensing and regulation of pawnbrokers operating within the city. The
purpose of this article is to insure the protection of the public health and
safety through the establishment of certain licensing and regulatory
standards pertaining to pawnbrokers within the city. The holding of any
pawnbroker related license is hereby declared to be a privilege, and not a
right. The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to grant any rights
or privileges to operate as a pawnbroker in areas of the city that are not
zoned for such a use.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-83.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   PAWNBROKER.  A person, corporation, or member, or members of a
co-partnership or firm, who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence
of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Definition, see M.C.L. § 446.203(e)



12-84.  COMPLIANCE WITH ARTICLE.



   All persons licensed under this article shall conduct business in
conformity with the rules, regulations, and conditions set forth in this
article. A license shall not be deemed to be a property right, but instead
shall be deemed a privilege that may only be maintained by complying all
applicable laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations applicable not only to
the licensee and the establishment, but also to the licensee and its
employees as individuals. The violation of any laws, ordinances, rules, or
regulations shall be grounds for denial of a pending license application,
suspension or revocation of an existing license, or the refusal to renew a
license. Every licensee, by virtue of accepting a license under this article,
shall be held to have faithfully covenanted with the city to operate and
maintain its business in conformity with this article. The licensee shall
comply with all other city ordinances and regulations, except that to the
extent that any real or perceived conflicts exist, the provisions of this
article shall control.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-85.  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION OF ARTICLE.



   Engaging in the business of a pawnbroker in violation of the provisions
of this article is declared to be a nuisance per se and, in addition to the
penalties set forth herein and in state law, such operation may be enjoined
and abated by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-86.  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES AND BOND; NO EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No person shall carry on the business of a pawnbroker in the
city without first having obtained a license issued by the City Clerk,
authorizing such person to carry on such business subject to the provisions
of this article. The fee for a pawnbroker's license, and for renewal of such
license, shall be in the amount established by the annual appropriations
ordinance, but not more than the limit established by state law. The licensee
shall provide a bond to the city in the penal sum established by the annual
appropriations ordinance and state law, with at least two sureties,
conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties and obligations
pertaining to the conduct of the business, and for the payment of all costs
and damages incurred by any violation of state law or local ordinance.



   (B)   Licensure under either or both of the following acts, or
related city ordinance, does not exempt a person or business from obtaining a
license under this article:



      (1)    The precious metal and gem dealer act.



      (2)    The secondhand dealers and junk dealers act.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   License required, see M.C.L. § 446.201(1)



   Fees, bonds, and sureties, see M.C.L. § 446.202(4)



   No exemptions, see M.C.L. § 446.201(2)



12-87.  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to engage in the business of a pawnbroker in the
city shall make application in writing to the City Clerk and shall furnish
the following and such other information as may be required by the city to
consider such application:



   (A)   Full name and address of applicant or applicants. If an
association, give the full name. If a corporation, give the full name and the
official address thereof with the date and state of incorporation, the full
name and address of the resident agent, and attach to the application a copy
of the certificate from the state of incorporation indicating that the
corporation is in good standing. If a limited liability company, give the
full name and the official address thereof with the date and state of
organization, the full name and address of the members and of the resident
agent, and attach to the application a copy of the certificate from the state
of organization indicating that the company is in good standing;



   (B)   Full name and address of all other owners, copartners,
officers, and directors, and, if a closely held corporation, all
shareholders, or, if a limited liability company, all managers and members. A
closely held corporation shall include any corporation having complete stock
ownership in 20 or less persons;



   (C)   Fingerprints of applicant and other persons mentioned in
division (B) above;



   (D)   The location of the place(s) of business where the applicant
proposes to engage in the business of a pawnbroker;



   (E)   Full names and addresses of all persons to be employed in the
operation of the business;



   (F)   Individual affidavits of each of the persons mentioned in
divisions (B) and (E) above indicating that each person has not been
convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to a felony or any moral turpitude
offense within ten years prior to the date of the application, has not been
convicted of any other criminal acts within five years prior to the date of
the application, has never been convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to
a violation of state or local law relating to pawnbroker businesses or the
services performed therein, and has never had a license or permit to operate
a pawnbroker business denied, suspended, or revoked.



   (G)   A sworn statement as to the truth of the statements in the
application.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-88.  INVESTIGATIONS BY POLICE CHIEF; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a pawnbroker's license, the
City Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who shall
conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal
and criminal history. The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion,
require a personal interview of the applicant and such further information,
identification, and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the
investigation.



   (B)   Upon the referral of an application for a pawnbroker's license
by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police shall also cause to be conducted an
investigation of the premises where the pawnbroker business is to be carried
on for the purpose of ensuring that such premises comply with all of the
requirements set forth in this article and with ordinances of the city
related to public health, safety and welfare.



   (C)   An applicant for a pawnbroker license, or renewals thereof,
shall submit to lawful inspections by the Building Department, Police
Department, Fire Department, and such other departments as may be necessary
to ensure that the proposed business and applicant comply with all applicable
ordinances and regulations of the city. The Chief of Police may refuse to
submit any report of his or her investigations until he or she has a report
from any department that he or she feels is necessary to make an inspection
stating that the applicant or proposed premises comply with all ordinances
and regulations.



   (D)   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license under this
article, the Chief of Police shall first submit to the City Clerk within 90
days of the receipt of an application, a report of his or her investigations
and inspection and his or her recommendation.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-89.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Chief
of Police required under this article, the City Clerk shall transmit the
application to the City Manager, who shall consider the same within a
reasonable time, either granting or denying the license.



   (B)   The City Manager shall deny a license or renewal of the
license whenever it appears that:



      (1)   The correct license fee has not been tendered to the
city, or, in the case of a check or bank draft, such check or draft has not
been honored with payment upon presentation.



      (2)   The pawnbroker business, as proposed by the applicant,
if permitted would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, the city's building, fire, and zoning ordinances, or if the
business fails to comply with any of the terms of this article.



      (3)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the
applicant's employees or personnel; any of the stockholders holding more than
10% of the stock, any officer and any director, if a corporation; any member
or manager, if a limited liability company; and the manager or other person
involved in the operation of the business, has pled guilty or no contest to,
or has been convicted of, any felony or any crime of moral turpitude,
including but not limited to theft, gambling, extortion, or fraud, unless
such plea or conviction occurred at least ten years prior to the date of the
application, or has pled to or been convicted of any other crime during the
five years prior to the date of application, or has pled to or been convicted
of any crime relating to the business of a pawnbroker.



      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document
required by the city.



      (5)   The applicant has had a similar business license, or
other similar permit or license, denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or
any other state or local agency within ten years prior to the date of the
application. 



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-90.  EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFER.



   (A)   All licenses shall be valid for one year except the first year
of issuance, because all such licenses shall expire on December 31 of the
year of issuance unless revoked for cause. Licenses shall be renewable upon
application to the City Clerk, who shall submit the application to the City
Manager for review and recommendation.



   (B)   Licenses are not transferable. The license shall designate the
particular place in the city where the licensee shall conduct the business. A
person, corporation, or firm receiving a license shall not conduct the
business in any other place than the place designated in the license. In the
event of a sale or transfer of the business, the new owner shall apply for
and obtain a license pursuant to this article before entering into the
operation of a pawnbroker.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Valid for one year and not transferable, see M.C.L. § 446.202(3)



12-91.  RECORD OF PROPERTY RECEIVED; INSPECTION.



   (A)   A pawnbroker shall keep a record in English, at the time the
pawnbroker receives any article of personal property or other valuable thing
by way of pawn, that includes a description of the article, a sequential
transaction number, any amount of money loaned on the article, the name,
residence, general description, and driver license number, official state
personal identification card number, or government identification number of
the person from whom the article was received, and the day and hour when the
article was received. The record, the place where the business is carried on,
and all articles of property in that place of business are subject to
examination at any time by the city attorney, the police department, code
enforcement officers, the Macomb County Prosecuting Attorney, or the
department of state police.



   (B)   Upon the receipt of any article of personal property or other
valuable thing by way of pawn, the pawnbroker shall make a permanent record
of the transaction on a form provided by the pawnbroker that substantially
complies with the form described in state law. Each record of transaction
shall be completed in duplicate by the pawnbroker, legibly in the English
language, and shall contain all applicable information required to complete
the record of transaction form. This subsection does not prohibit the use and
transmission of the information required in the record of the transaction by
means of computer or other electronic media as permitted by the police
department.



   (C)   The pawnbroker shall retain a record of each transaction and,
every Monday unless requested by the Chief of Police that it be sent more
expeditiously, shall send one copy of the record of transaction to the police
department.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Recordkeeping, see M.C.L. § 446.205



12-92.  STATEMENT TO POLICE OF PROPERTY RECEIVED; CONTENTS; IDENTIFICATION
AND THUMB PRINT OF PERSON FROM WHOM PROPERTY RECEIVED.



   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall make a sworn statement of his
transactions to the Chief of Police of the city every Monday, unless
requested more expeditiously by the police department, describing the
articles received, and the name, residence, and description of the person
from whom the articles were received.



   (B)   When a pawnbroker receives any item of personal property, or
other valuable thing, by way of pledge or pawn, except new items, wares, or
merchandise purchased from wholesale distributors or jobbers for retail sales
to customers; motor vehicles; old rags; waste paper; books; magazines;
tapestries; antiques; and household furniture; he or she shall take in
duplicate the legible imprint of the right thumb of the person from whom the
property was received, or if not possible, of the left thumb of such person.
A copy of the imprint shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police with the
sworn statement of transactions.



   (C)   Every pawnbroker shall also cause to be made a facsimile copy
of the driver's license or, if unavailable, another form of picture
identification, of the person from whom the pawned property is received. A
copy of the license or picture identification shall be forwarded to the Chief
of Police, together with the sworn statement of transactions and thumb print.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Sworn statement, see M.C.L. § 446.206



12-93  PURCHASER'S MEMORANDUM OF PAWN; CONTENTS; INTEREST ON CERTAIN LOANS.



   A pawnbroker, at the time of a loan, shall deliver to the person
pawning or pledging any article a memorandum or note signed by him or her,
containing the substance of the entry required to be made by him or her in
his or her record of transactions under this article and state law. A charge
shall not be made or received by the pawnbroker for the entry, memorandum, or
note. The memorandum or note shall be consecutively numbered and upon its
back shall be printed in English in 12-point type the following: "If interest
or charges in excess of 3% per month, plus storage charges provided in this
document, are asked or received, this loan is void and of no effect; and the
borrower cannot be made to pay back the money loaned, any interest on the
loan, or any charges or any part of the charges, and the pawnbroker loses all
right to the possession of the goods, article, or thing pawned, and shall
surrender the item to the borrower or pawner upon due demand for the item."



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Purchaser's note, see M.C.L. § 446.208



12-94.  INTEREST ON LOANS; RATE, STORAGE CHARGE, TIME OF PAYMENT,
COMPUTATION.



   (A)   Unless state law provides otherwise, a licensed pawnbroker may
charge upon any loan a rate of interest not to exceed 3% per month and is not
required to accept any interest less than 50 cents on a single loan. A
pawnbroker may also charge $1.00 per month or fraction of a month for the
storage of property under any single pledge or pawn.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may charge $1.00 per month or fraction of a month
for a usage fee for unencumbered personal property pawned or pledged and used
by the pawner during the term of the pawn or pledge. A usage fee charged
under this section is not considered interest.



   (C)   A pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's agent or employee shall not
charge or receive interest on the loan in excess of the amounts provided for
under state law.



   (D)   Interest on any loan is not payable in advance and shall be
computed on unpaid monthly balances without compounding.



   (E)   A pawnbroker is not entitled to any examination fee and shall
not make any charge in excess of the amounts provided for under state law.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Interest and charges, see M.C.L. § 446.209



12-95.  SALE OF PAWNED PROPERTY AT PUBLIC AUCTION; TIME, PLACE, NOTICE,
AFFIDAVIT OF PUBLICATION OF NOTICE.



   (A)   Title to the item pledged or pawned vests in the pawnbroker
upon the expiration of three months or of any period beyond three months
agreed upon by the parties if the borrower has not paid the debt, interest,
and charges on the item pledged or pawned.



   (B)   A pawnbroker shall not sell any pawn or pledge until the item
has remained in his or her possession for at least three months.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Title and sales, see M.C.L. § 446.210



12-96.  TENDER OF DEBT AND COSTS BEFORE SALE; EFFECT OF RIGHT TO PROPERTY.



   (A)   If at any time before the sale of the item pledged or pawned
the borrower pays or tenders to the pawnbroker the debt and interest and
charges on the item, that payment or tender reinvests the pawner with the
title and right of possession to the property pledged.



   (B)   A pawnbroker may agree in writing, after pledged or pawned
unencumbered personal property has been deposited with the pawnbroker, to
allow the pawner to maintain possession and use of the pledged or pawned
unencumbered personal property during the term of the pawn or pledge
transaction. The agreement may also include the payment of a usage fee under
this article. A pawnbroker may take possession of the pledged or pawned
property pursuant to Section 9609 of the Uniform Commercial Code, 1962 PA
174, M.C.L. 440.9609.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Redemption, see M.C.L. § 446.211



12-97.  PAWNED PROPERTY; DESTRUCTION OR DEFACING UNLAWFUL.



   (A)   A pawnbroker shall not deface, scratch, obliterate, melt,
separate, or break into parts any article or thing received by him or her in
pawn, or otherwise or in any manner do, cause, or suffer to be done by
others, anything that destroys or tends to destroy the identity of the
article or thing, or tends to render the identification of the thing or
article more difficult.



   (B)   A pawnbroker shall not accept by way of pledge, pawn,
purchase, or exchange any article or thing that customarily bears a
manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia unless the number
or insignia is plainly visible on the article or thing.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Defacing pawned property, see M.C.L. § 446.213



12-98.  PAWNED PROPERTY; ACCEPTANCE FROM SUSPICIOUS PERSON OR MINOR UNLAWFUL.



   A pawnbroker shall not receive for pawn any article from any person
under 18 years of age or a person the pawnbroker suspects as having stolen
the article to be pawned.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Identical provision, see M.C.L. § 446.213



12-99.  TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS ON SUNDAY UNLAWFUL.



   A pawnbroker shall not conduct any business on Sundays.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Identical provision, see M.C.L. § 446.217



12-100.  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who shall violate or permit a violation of any of
the provisions of this article, whether as an owner, or as clerk, agent,
servant or employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of the city code.



   (B)   Upon the conviction of any person doing business as a
pawnbroker under the provisions of this article, or upon conviction of any
clerk, agent, servant or employee of any such person, the pawnbroker's
license shall be revoked forthwith by the City Clerk, and no part of the
license fee shall be returned. In addition, the pawnbroker shall not be
eligible to apply for another pawnbroker license for a period of five years
from the date of revocation.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Minimum penalties and revocation period, see M.C.L. §§ 446.218,
446.219



12-101.  APPEAL.



   (A)   Within ten days of receipt of notification of suspension,
revocation, or denial of a license under this article, an applicant may
request, in the form of a written application to the City Manager, a
reconsideration hearing before the Ordinance Board of Appeals. Such
application may request either reconsideration of the suspension, revocation,
or denial, or a variance of any of the provisions or requirements of any law,
ordinance, code, or regulation the violations of which constituted grounds
for the suspension, revocation, or denial, or both.



   (B)   The appeal must state specifically the applicant's reasons for
believing the actions of the applicable city official were erroneous, and a
copy of the decision or notice complained of should be attached to the appeal.



   (C)   The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. At the hearing, the
appellant and the appellant's attorney may present a statement and evidence
showing:



      (1)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applying to the proposed pawnshop referred to in
the appeal application submitted to the City Manager, which circumstances or
conditions do not apply generally to any proposed pawnshop; and/or



      (2)   That the granting of pawnshop license will not, under
the circumstances of the particular case, have a material adverse effect upon
the health, safety, or welfare of the persons residing or working in the
neighborhood or attending the pawnshop, and will not, under the circumstances
of the particular case, be materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to the immediate neighborhood or the city at large.



   (D)   In all cases where the Ordinance Board of Appeals reverses or
modifies an administrative decision to suspend, revoke, or deny, the
Ordinance Board of Appeals shall condition its order in any manner it deems
necessary or desirable and which will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this article, and which will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



   (E)   In no event shall the Ordinance Board of Appeals grant a
variance or relax or overturn an administrative decision where the
suspension, revocation, or denial is based upon the occurrence of criminal
acts, fraud, dishonesty, or other acts of moral turpitude, if established at
the hearing by a simple preponderance of the evidence.



   (F)   The Ordinance Board of Appeals shall not have any authority to
grant a variance for any regulations in the city's zoning ordinance that
affect pawnshops.



(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 10-21-08)



12-102 - 12-119.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  BODY ART FACILITIES



12-120.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights "Body Art Facilities Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-121.  INTENT.



   The City Council hereby finds that the public health, safety, and
welfare are best served by the adoption of an ordinance governing the
establishment and maintenance of body art facilities within the community. 
However, because body art facilities are now a regulated industry under state
law, the City Council has limited this article to local regulations and
concerns not addressed by the Michigan Legislature.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-122.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   BODY ART FACILITY.  A location at which an individual does one or more
of the following for compensation:



      (1)   Performs tattooing.



      (2)   Performs branding.



      (3)   Performs body-piercing.



   BODY-PIERCING. The perforation of human tissue other than an ear for a
nonmedical purpose.



   BRANDING. A permanent mark made on human tissue by burning with a hot
iron or other instrument.



   TATTOO. One or more of the following:



      (1)   An indelible mark made upon the body of another
individual by the insertion of a pigment under the skin.



      (2)   An indelible design made upon the body of another
individual by production of scars other than by branding.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Definitions, see M.C.L. § 333.13101(1)



12-123.  LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All body art facilities must be licensed by the Department of
Community Health as required by state law.  Inspections will be conducted by
the Macomb County Health Department unless designated otherwise by the county.



   (B)   All body art facilities shall also obtain a permit issued by
the City Clerk.  The fee for a body art facility permit, and for renewal of
such permit, shall be in the amount established by the annual appropriations
ordinance, but not more than the fees for a statutory license.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   State law allowing local permits, see M.C.L. § 333.13111



12-124.  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to engage in the business of a body art facility in
the city shall make application in writing to the City Clerk and shall
furnish the following and such other information as may be required by the
city to consider such application:



   (A)   Full name and address of applicant or applicants.  If an
association, give the full name.  If a corporation, give the full name and
the official address thereof with the date and state of incorporation, the
full name and address of the resident agent, and attach to the application a
copy of the certificate from the state of incorporation indicating that the
corporation is in good standing.  If a limited liability company, give the
full name and the official address thereof with the date and state of
organization, the full name and address of the members and of the resident
agent, and attach to the application a copy of the certificate from the state
of organization indicating that the company is in good standing;



   (B)   Full name and address of all other owners, copartners,
officers, and directors, and, if a closely held corporation, all
shareholders, or, if a limited liability company, all managers and members. 
A closely held corporation shall include any corporation having complete
stock ownership in 20 or less persons;



   (C)   Fingerprints of applicant and other persons mentioned in
division (B) above;



   (D)   The location of the place(s) of business where the applicant
proposes to engage in the business of a body art facility;



   (E)   Full names and addresses of all persons to be employed in the
operation of the business;



   (F)   Individual affidavits of each of the persons mentioned in
divisions (B) and (E) above indicating that each person has not been
convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to a felony or any moral turpitude
offense within ten years prior to the date of the application, has not been
convicted of any other criminal acts within five years prior to the date of
the application, has never been convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to
a violation of state or local law relating to body art facilities or the
services performed therein, and has never had a license or permit to operate
a body art facility denied, suspended, or revoked.



   (G)   A sworn statement as to the truth of the statements in the
application.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-125.  INVESTIGATIONS BY POLICE CHIEF; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receiving an application for a body art facility permit,
the City Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who shall
conduct an investigation into the applicant's moral character and personal
and criminal history. The Chief of Police may, in his or her discretion,
require a personal interview of the applicant and such further information,
identification, and physical examination of the person as shall bear on the
investigation.



   (B)   Upon the referral of an application for a body art facility
permit by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police shall also cause to be
conducted an investigation of the premises where the body art facility's
business is to be carried on for the purpose of ensuring that such premises
comply with all of the requirements set forth in this article and with
ordinances of the city related to public health, safety, and welfare.



   (C)   An applicant for a body art facility permit, including
renewals, shall submit to lawful inspections by the Building Department,
Police Department, Fire Department, and such other departments as may be
necessary to ensure that the proposed business and applicant comply with all
applicable ordinances and regulations of the city.  The Chief of Police may
refuse to submit any report of his or her investigations until he or she has
a report from any department that he or she feels is necessary to make an
inspection stating that the applicant or proposed premises comply with all
ordinances and regulations.



   (D)   Before the City Clerk shall issue any permit under this
article, the Chief of Police shall first submit to the City Clerk within 90
days of the receipt of an application, a report of his or her investigations
and inspection and his or her recommendation.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-126.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; APPEAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the report and recommendation from the Chief
of Police required under this article, the City Clerk shall either grant or
deny the permit. 



   (B)   The City Clerk shall deny a permit or renewal of the permit
whenever it appears that:



      (1)   The correct application fee has not been tendered to the
city, or, in the case of a check or bank draft, such check or draft has not
been honored with payment upon presentation.



      (2)   The body art facility, as proposed by the applicant, if
permitted would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, the city's building, fire, and zoning ordinances, or if the body
art facility fails to comply with any of the terms of this article.



      (3)   The applicant, if an individual, or the applicant's
employees or personnel; any of the stockholders holding more than 10% of the
stock, any officer and any director, if a corporation; any member or manager,
if a limited liability company; and the manager or other person involved in
the operation of the business, has pled guilty or no contest to, or has been
convicted of, any felony or any crime of moral turpitude, including but not
limited to theft, gambling, extortion, or fraud, unless such plea or
conviction occurred at least ten years prior to the date of the application,
or has pled to or been convicted of any other crime during the five  years
prior to the date of application, or has pled to or been convicted of a crime
relating to the operation of a body art facility.



      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement of fact in the license application or in any document
required by the city.



      (5)   The applicant has had a similar business permit or
license denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local
agency at any time prior to the date of the application. 



      (6)   An applicant whose application for a permit has been
denied or whose permit has been suspended or revoked may appeal the decision
by following the appeal provisions set forth for pawnbroker licenses in
Article IV of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-127.  EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFER.



   (A)   All permits shall be valid for one  year except the first
year of issuance, because all such permits shall expire on December 31 of the
year of issuance unless revoked for cause. Permits shall be renewable upon
application to the City Clerk.



   (B)   Permits are not transferable. The permit shall designate the
particular place in the city where the permittee shall conduct the
business.  A person, corporation, or firm receiving a permit shall not
conduct the business in any other place than the place designated in the
permit.  In the event of a sale or transfer of the business, the new owner
shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article before entering
into the operation of a body art facility.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



12-128.  MINORS; ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   An individual shall not tattoo, brand, or perform
body-piercing on a minor unless the individual obtains the prior written
informed consent of the minor's parent or legal guardian. The minor's parent
or legal guardian shall execute the written, informed consent required under
this subsection in the presence of the individual performing the tattooing,
branding, or body-piercing on the minor or in the presence of an employee or
agent of that individual.



   (B)   An individual shall not tattoo, brand, or perform
body-piercing on another individual if the other individual is under the
influence, however minor it may be, of any alcoholic liquor and/or any
controlled substance.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 333.13102



12-129.  DUTIES OF OWNER OR OPERATOR; HOURS OF OPERATION.



   (A)   A person who owns or operates a body art facility shall do all
of the following:



      (1)   Display the license and permit issued under this article
in a conspicuous place within the customer service area of the body art
facility.



      (2)   Comply with and ensure that the body art facility is in
compliance with state law, this article, and all administrative rules
promulgated under state law.



      (3)   Ensure that the body art facility as a whole and any
individual engaged in tattooing, cleaning tattooing instruments, performing
branding or body-piercing, or cleaning branding or body-piercing instruments
comply with the bloodborne pathogen safety standards under the Code of
Federal Regulations.



      (4)   Ensure that tattooing, branding, or body-piercing is
performed in a sterile field with sterile needles and only single-use ink.



      (5)   Maintain a confidential record of each individual who
has been tattooed or branded or who has had body-piercing performed at the
body art facility and make the records available for inspection by a local
health department. The record shall include, at a minimum, the individual's
name, address, age, and signature; the date; the design and location of the
tattooing, branding, or body-piercing; the name of the individual performing
the tattooing, branding, or body-piercing; and any known complications the
individual has with any tattooing, branding, or body-piercing done at that
body art facility. The owner, operator, manager, or person having control of
the body art facility shall provide a copy of the record to the individual at
the time he or she is tattooed, is branded, or has body-piercing performed.



      (6)   Prohibit smoking within the body art facility.



      (7)   Provide each customer with a written information sheet
distributed or approved by the Department of Community Health that provides
at least all of the following:



         (a)   Instructions on the care of a tattoo site, brand
site, or body-piercing site.



         (b)   A recommendation that an individual seek medical
attention if the tattoo site, brand site, or body-piercing site becomes
infected or painful or if the person develops a fever soon after being
tattooed, branded, or having body-piercing performed.



         (c)   Notice that the individual may be allowed to
donate blood within the standard deferral period if the individual presents a
copy of the record required under subdivision (A)(5) to the blood donor
facility.



      (8)   Maintain on file on the premises of the body art
facility and have available for inspection by a local health department all
of the following:



         (a)   All of the following regarding each technician
employed by or who performs tattooing, branding, or body piercing at the body
art facility:



            1.   His or her full legal name.



            2.   His or her exact duties at the facility.



            3.    His or her date of birth.



            4.   His or her gender.



            5.   His or her home address.



            6.   His or her home and work telephone numbers.



            7.   His or her prior or other current places of
employment as a technician, if known.



            8.   His or her training and experience.



            9.   An identification photo.



            10.   Documentation of compliance with the
educational, training, or experience requirements of the department under
this part.



            11.   Documentation of HBV vaccination status or
other vaccination status requirements of the department under this part.



         (b)   Full legal name of the body art facility.



         (c)   The hours of operation of the body art facility.



         (d)   All of the following regarding each owner and
operator of the body art facility:



            1.   His or her full legal name.



            2.   His or her home address.



            3.   His or her home and work telephone numbers.



         (e)   A complete description of all tattooing, branding,
or body piercing performed at the body art facility.



         (f)   A complete inventory of all instruments, body
jewelry, sharps, and inks used for the tattooing, branding, or body piercing
performed at the body art facility. The inventory shall include the name of
the item's manufacturer and serial or lot number, if applicable. The body art
facility may provide invoices or orders to satisfy this requirement if
determined appropriate by the Department of Community Health or the local
health department.



         (g)   A copy of the applicable state law and rules
promulgated thereunder.



      (B)   A body art facility shall not operate between the hours
of 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 333.13107



12-130.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   A person who violates this article is subject to the penalties
prescribed in Chapter 1 of the code of ordinances, except that the maximum
fine for such violation shall not be more than $100 or a higher amount if a
maximum fine is set by state law for a particular violation.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Applicable penalties, see M.C.L. § 333.13109



12-131.  AUTHORIZATION.



   This article shall not be construed to conflict with the corresponding
or applicable state law, but state law shall not relieve a body art facility
applicant from the responsibility for securing a local permit or complying
with the regulations of this article.



(Ord. No. 398, § 2, 10-21-08)



Statutory reference:



   Local ordinances authorized, see M.C.L. § 333.13111



12-132 - 12-149.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  FILMING PERMITS



12-150.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights “Film Permit Ordinance.”



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-151.  PURPOSE.



   The commercial production of films, television programming, and
commercials is expected to become an important part of the economy of the
city and the state.  In order to further those activities within the city,
this article sets forth rules and regulations to govern and authorize
individuals and film companies to conduct filming activities in the city
without unreasonably impacting the peace and comfort of the residents of the
community; to assure that such activities are consistent with considerations
of the public health, safety, and general welfare; to ensure the protection
of property; and to provide a streamlined process for issuing film permits. 
The requirements provided in this article shall be separate and in addition
to those provisions of ordinances of the city, and/or other codes adopted by
reference, regarding business regulation and licensing.  Any and all fees
provided in this article are intended to cover the cost of investigation and
processing permits for filming, as specified herein, and shall be in addition
to all other applicable licenses and/or permits.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-152.  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, it is unlawful for any
person to engage in the business or activity of filming at any place within
the city, other than at or in an established motion picture or television
studio or entirely within an enclosed structure or building (with no outside
storage of filming equipment) without a film permit from the city.  Any
person interested in filming within the city shall complete in full a film
permit application that shall be submitted to the Film Office of the city. 
A film permit does not constitute or grant permission to use or occupy
property not owned, leased, or controlled by the city.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-153.  EXEMPTIONS.



   The provisions of this article shall not apply to:



   (A)   The creation of a personal film;



   (B)   The creation of news media;



   (C)   The filming or video recording of motion pictures for use in a
criminal investigation, civil proceeding, or emergencies such as fires,
floods, or police actions;



   (D)   The filming or video recording of motion pictures and
activities associated therewith which occur upon property which is owned or
leased for more than six months by the enterprise or individual conducting
the filming or video recording and none of the activities are open to view by
the general public.  However, this exemption shall not be construed to
authorize the use of residential properties for commercial enterprises that
violate any laws, the city code, or the city's zoning ordinance;



   (E)   Education, government, and public access and local origination
programs for cable television systems franchised within the city;



   (F)   The filming or video recording of motion pictures by the city,
including, but not limited to, video recording of a sewer line or preparation
of promotional videos;



   (G)   The filming of competitive athletic events, parades, or other
similar events of a public nature, when in attendance as a member of the
public and a spectator;



   (H)   The creation of a student film, unless the filming activities
utilize or adversely impact public ways or are conducted outdoors in
residential areas;



   (I)   Local commercials (video or still photography) produced
entirely on private property for purposes of advertising local businesses and
merchants, so long as the equipment, personnel, and subject connected with
the commercials do not interfere in any way with the public right-of-way or
impact neighboring private property;



   (J)   Still photographers, who are photographing in a public area,
and who do not encroach upon the public right-of-way with equipment or
personnel;



   (K)   Films produced entirely for training of employees or personnel
that are produced within the employer's property and do not utilize or
adversely impact any public ways and are not produced outdoors in residential
areas; and



   (L)   Any other activity deemed to be in the public interest by the
City Manager.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-154.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   CHARITABLE FILMS.  Commercials, motion pictures, television, video
recordings, or other photography produced by a nonprofit organization which
qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a
charitable organization.  No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a
profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the
films, recordings, or photos.



   FILMING.  The act(s) of undertaking, producing, or creating a video
recording or motion picture film.  The term also includes the setup and
dismantling of all related equipment.



   FILM OFFICE.  The film production office designated by the Community
Relations Department of the City of Sterling Heights.



   NEWS MEDIA.  The filming or video recording for the purpose of
spontaneous, unplanned, or "on scene" television news broadcasting by
reporters, photographers, or camera operators, but not including magazine or
documentary programs filmed, edited, and prepared for commercial purposes.



   PERSONAL FILM.  A video recording or film for private or family use,
including but not limited to family event videos or a recording of security
footage.



   STUDENT FILM.  A motion picture film or video recording production by
a student of a public or private school or college where the production is
for school or college credit and from which no profit is taken.



   VIDEO RECORDING.  The creation of a motion picture or film, whether by
the act of filming, undertaking a video recording production, or otherwise.



   VIDEO RECORDING PRODUCTION.  The use of video recording equipment to
capture motion picture images, whether by videotape, digital media, or any
other means.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-155.  APPLICATION.



   Any person desiring to conduct video recording production activities
shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the Film Office. 
The form must be signed and accompanied by the required processing fee,
deposit, hold harmless agreement, and insurance certificate before it will be
processed.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-156.  APPLICATION INFORMATION AND FEES.



   The applicant for a permit required by this article shall supply the
following information on the application:



   (A)   Name, permanent street address, and telephone number of the
applicant.  If an association, the applicant shall provide its full name. 
If a corporation, the applicant shall provide the full name and the official
address thereof with the date and state of incorporation, the full name and
address of the resident agent, and attach to the application a copy of the
certificate from the state of incorporation indicating that the corporation
is in good standing.  If a limited liability company, the applicant shall
provide the full name and the official address thereof with the date and
state of organization, the full name and address of the members and of the
resident agent, and attach to the application a copy of the certificate from
the state of organization indicating that the company is in good standing;



   (B)   Name, address, and telephone number of the person in charge of
the location and responsible for the applicant's and applicant's employees'
conduct.  The Film Office may also require that the applicant provide the
names and related information of association members, corporate directors,
partners, or others in a position of responsibility with the applying entity;



   (C)   If the filming is conducted by a non-profit organization which
qualifies under the Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3) or Michigan law
as a charitable organization, and no person, directly or indirectly, receives
a profit from the marketing or production of the film or tape or from showing
the film, tape, or photos, the applicant must sign under penalty of perjury
to this information on the application form;



   (D)   Name, address, and 24-hour telephone number of at least two
persons to be contacted in the event of emergency situations which might
alter the conditions of the film permit;



   (E)   Name (or working title) of the film or project, and the nature
of the proposed motion picture, television, or photographic production;



   (F)   Location(s), date(s), time(s), and activities of the proposed
filming, and an estimate of the maximum number of attendees expected at the
filming during each day or time.  If the proposed filming involves the use
of private property, the full name and address of the property owner where
the filming is to occur and a signed affidavit from the property owner
granting permission for the proposed use of the property in question shall be
provided.  If, in the discretion of the Film Office, it appears that the
peace and tranquility of neighboring property owners may be disturbed by the
filming, the Film Office may require affidavits from neighboring property
owners indicating their concurrence with the proposed use of the property in
question.  However, if a residential area is to be used, the applicant must
file a copy of notice to residents who are within a 300-foot radius of
filming site and a signed affidavit as proof of such notice with application
prior to actual filming;



   (G)   Approximate number of individuals in the cast and crew;



   (H)   List of types and number of vehicles and other equipment;



   (I)   If applicable, a statement that overnight parking and
locations are needed;



   (J)   Requests for special assistance at the location, including but
not limited to street closure, traffic control, and emergency services;



   (K)   Special conditions or requests by the applicant;



   (L)   If the applicant intends to use either wild animals,
chemicals, explosives, or fire, or intends to engage in any other hazardous
activity, a statement to that effect and a description of such activities
with specificity;



   (M)   A list of prior filming projects, references, experience, and
credentials relating to the individuals primarily responsible for the
proposed filming activity and production;



   (N)   A sworn statement as to the truth of the statements in the
application.  If the applicant is a corporation or business, the application
shall be signed by one principal officer of the corporation or business; and



   (O)   In addition to the requirements of this article, any applicant
who or which will engage in any activity that requires compliance with any
federal, state, or local regulations, including additional licenses or
permits, shall present evidence of satisfactory compliance with such
regulations. 



   (P)   Each application shall be accompanied by a fee as follows:



      (1)   A processing fee in an amount established by the City
Council's annual appropriations ordinance to reimburse the city for the staff
time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of
approval.



      (2)   After the application has been reviewed and it is
determined that city property will likely be utilized during filming
activities, the applicant shall pay to the city a daily property use fee in
an amount calculated by the Finance Director to compensate the city for the
use of public property and its lack of availability for ordinary and usual
purposes resulting from the filming activity.



      (3)   After the application has been reviewed and it is
determined that city personnel will be utilized during filming activities,
the applicant shall pay to the city a monitoring fee to reimburse the city
for staff time required to monitor the filming activity, and for reasonable
costs for other city services or equipment approved for use during such
activities, in an amount determined by the Finance Director based upon the
actual costs to the city and for the city's administrative oversight during
the process. Staff time may include, but shall not be limited to, the time
expended by law enforcement personnel, traffic control personnel, fire safety
personnel, trash haulers, and review by the city attorney.



      (4)   In lieu of providing three distinct fee payments, the
Finance Director may authorize the payment of one sum to be held as a deposit
by the city to ensure the payment of all of the fees required by this
section.  Any amounts not used at the end of the project shall be refunded
by the city to the applicant.  In the event the actual costs exceed the
deposit, the city may retain the deposit and the applicant will be invoiced
by the city and shall pay for the excess.  No permit shall be issued to an
applicant who owes the city money for a prior permit.



      (5)   The processing fee shall be waived for the following if,
in the discretion of the City Manager, the city will benefit by doing so:



         (a)   Productions conducted by a cable television
company operating under a franchise granted by the city which are not
conducted on public property, do not interfere with public rights-of-way, and
which involve fewer than two motor vehicles; and



         (b)   Productions for wholly charitable or educational
purposes and from which no profit is derived, either directly or indirectly,
other than funds to further the charitable or educational mission of the
producer.



      (6)   In the event that weather conditions or other
circumstances beyond the control of the permittee require that the date(s) or
time(s) of the proposed filming or taping need to be altered, no additional
processing fees shall be required because of such alteration of the date(s)
or time(s) so long as the Film Office is given at least one (1) business day
notice of the alteration; however, an additional fee will be charged if
changes, additions, deletions, and extensions to the original filming permit
are requested which are not beyond the control of the permittee.  The
additional fee shall be established by the City Council's annual
appropriations ordinance.  A change, addition, deletion, or extension to the
original filming permit request must be filed with the Film Office.  Only
one such request per permit will be allowed.



      (7)   If the Film Office, in coordination with the City
Manager, Police Chief, and Fire Chief, determines that any potential danger
to the public's health, safety or general welfare, or property would be
eliminated by the presence of police or fire protection at the site of the
filming or videotaping, the Film Office may grant the film permit with the
condition that the permittee pay in advance to the city the anticipated costs
of such police or fire protection or presence.



      (8)   For filming permits that require the city to provide
services to the permittee in addition to police or fire protection, service
charges shall be imposed for same.  Such charges will be determined by the
Finance Director for the services provided and shall be based on the actual
cost incurred by the city in providing such services.  Such service charges
shall include, but shall not be limited to, charges for labor, supervision,
overhead, administration, and the use of any and all city equipment,
supplies, etc.  Additional charges may be imposed to cover the cost of
extraordinary film permit investigation and/or staff costs, if the City
Manager deems the collection of such costs to be necessary to prevent
absorption of any costs by the taxpayers.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-157.  PLANS.



   Each application for a permit required by this article shall be
accompanied by a detailed explanation, including drawings and diagrams where
applicable, of the prospective permittee's plans to provide for the following:



   (A)   The size or area of the property to be used, including a
sketch of the filming site showing placement of work trucks and production
vehicles;



   (B)   A sketch of the "base camp," if any, showing any off-street
locations for crew parking, honeywagon, catering, and non-essential
production vehicles;



   (C)   A traffic control plan of the exact filming location, listing
roads or lanes to be closed, if any;



   (D)   A description of the duration of the proposed activities and
daily hours of operation;



   (E)   The facilities for cleanup and waste disposal;



   (F)   A letter of notification of, and signatures from,
businesses/neighborhoods impacted by filming or related activities, if
required by the Film Office; and



   (G)   Insurance and bonding arrangements.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-158.  LIABILITY PROVISIONS.



   The requirements of this section are applicable whenever a permittee's
operations will utilize or impact city facilities or property as determined
by the Film Office.



   (A)   Liability Insurance; Indemnity and Faithful Performance
Bond.  Before a permit is issued a certificate of insurance must be
submitted evidencing insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars
per occurrence for comprehensive or commercial general liability and one
million dollars per occurrence for automobile liability.  In the event the
use of pyrotechnics or any other potentially hazardous activity is
contemplated, the permittee will be required to submit evidence of insurance
which will cover said use or activity in an amount and form acceptable to the
Risk Manager and Fire Marshal.  An endorsement to said liability policies
shall be submitted naming the city, its officers, employees, agents,
representatives, and volunteers as additional insureds.  The Risk Manager is
authorized to modify the insurance requirements above if it is deemed to be
in the best interests of the city.



   (B)   Hold Harmless and Indemnity Agreement.  An applicant shall
execute a hold harmless and indemnity agreement as provided by the city prior
to the issuance of a permit under this article.



   (C)   Faithful Performance Bond.  To ensure cleanup and restoration
of the site, an applicant may be required to post a refundable cash deposit
or faithful performance bond (amount to be determined by the Finance
Director) upon submittal of the application.  Upon completion of filming,
cleanup, and restoration of the site by the permittee, and inspection of the
site by the city with a satisfactory conclusion, the bond shall be returned
to the permittee.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-159.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt by the Film Office, copies of the application for
a permit required by this article shall be forwarded to the Police Chief,
Fire Chief, City Development Director, Public Works Director, City Planner,
and to such other appropriate public officials or departments as the City
Manager deems necessary.  Such officers, departments, and officials shall
review and investigate matters relevant to the application and within four
business days of receipt thereof shall report their findings and
recommendations to the Film Office or his/her designee.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall investigate each application for a
filming permit.  If, during the course of such investigation, the Chief of
Police desires additional information to assist with determining whether or
not such a permit should be issued, the Chief of Police is authorized to
require the applicant to furnish such additional information.



   (C)   The applicant and permittee shall allow for site inspections
by the city as requested by the city for purposes of ensuring compliance with
this article, all conditions of the permit, and all applicable fire and
building codes and ordinances.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-160.  SPECIFIC CIRCUMSTANCES.



   In addition to the criteria listed in this article, the city shall also
investigate the application with respect to the following special
circumstances and may impose conditions if warranted:



   (A)   Noise.  Filming activities which produce unusual noise such
as gunfire, sirens, public address systems, bull horns, or any other loud
noises may be restricted to mitigate the effects of the activity.



   (B)   Aircraft.  Helicopter landings or filming from the air are
not permitted without explicit written permission from the Film Office.  The
written authorization shall be filed with the application.



   (C)   Public safety personnel.  Police and/or fire personnel
requirements shall be determined by those departments and any personnel
required shall be at the permittee's expense.  Additional public safety
employees may be requested by the applicant at the time of application at the
applicant's expense.  The Chief of Police may approve the use of additional
public safety personnel or may require the applicant instead to contract with
a private security firm.  Additional public safety employees approved by the
Chief of Police shall enforce all city regulations and shall remain employees
of the city at all times.  The city's employees shall not be employees of
the permittee and shall not act at the direction of the permittee unless
doing so will ensure enforcement of applicable laws and regulations.



   (D)   Roads and streets.  If the permittee must park equipment,
trucks, and/or cars in zones that do not permit parking, the permittee must
post the street as required by the Public Works Director. The applicant must
also obtain permission to string cable across sidewalks or from a generator
to a service point.



   (E)   Traffic control.  For any filming that would impair traffic
flow in any manner or for any duration, the applicant shall comply with all
traffic control requirements deemed necessary by local police or private
security personnel for traffic control, subject to the approval of the Chief
of Police or the use of local law enforcement personnel.  The use of local
law enforcement personnel shall be dependent on the location of filming (for
example, filming within a County park would fall under the jurisdiction of
the County Sheriff rather than local law enforcement) and must be approved
and funded as described in division (C) above.  All interruptions of normal
pedestrian or vehicular traffic must be authorized on the permit, with the
traffic control plan and staffing approved by the Chief of Police prior to
permit issuance.  Any proposed detour plan or parking shall be submitted for
the review and approval of the City Engineer.  The permittee shall also
obtain all necessary permits and approvals from the Michigan Department of
Transportation and/or Macomb County Road Commission prior to filming on a
state or county roadway. 



   (F)   Adult entertainment.  No filming shall be conducted within
the city which depicts nudity, sexual intercourse, simulated sex acts, or
other displays prohibited by state law or city ordinance which could be
observed by a member of the general public.  Films which have as their
primary purpose the display of such acts for distribution to an adult
entertainment market or video provider shall not be granted a permit for
filming.  A permit issued under this article does not authorize the
production of a film that in any manner requires the use of property owned by
or under the control of the city in violation of Public Act 84 of 2008, which
prohibits the production of a film that includes obscene matter or an obscene
performance, or that requires that individually identifiable records be
created and maintained for every performer provided in 18 U.S.C. 2557.



   (G)   Pyrotechnics and special effects. The applicant shall obtain a
permit from the Fire Department for any pyrotechnics or similar special
effects.



   (H)   Vegetation.  The Film Office may impose restrictions on
filming in native vegetation, natural areas, wetlands, and similar locations.



   (I)   Crew size.  The Film Office may impose requirements for
filming operations involving more than 50 cast and crew at a filming location.



   (J)   Refueling.  The Film Office may impose restrictions on
refueling operations in excess of ten gallons.



   (K)   Boundaries.  The Film Office may impose requirements
concerning the posting of the outer boundaries of the filming.



   (L)   Uniforms.  The Film Office may impose restrictions concerning
the covering of police, fire, and other uniforms worn by actors when they are
not being filmed.



   (M)   Insignia.  The Film Office may impose restrictions on the use
of city and other public agencies' logos, insignias, badges, or decals for
filming purposes.



   (N)   Extras.  The Film Office may request that city residents be
afforded a higher priority than others, for example, exclusive access to the
first day of auditions, when the permittee seeks or requires "extras" for
certain portions of the filming. 



   (O)   Acknowledgment.  The Film Office shall require that the
permittee properly acknowledge the assistance of the city in the final film
credits.



   (P)   Access.  The Film Office may request access to behind the
scenes production of any filming activities for purposes of creating
promotional videos for the city.  However, the Film Office will honor all
conditions of the production company regarding material that may be disclosed
to the public prior to release of the final film or production.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-161.  GRANTING OR DENIAL OF PERMIT; ADMINISTRATIVE POLICIES.



   (A)   If, after his investigation, the Chief of Police finds that
the conduct of the activity regulated by this article or the proposed
location of such will not comport with the public welfare or that it will
tend to create a nuisance or that the character or reputation of the
applicant, its officers, or employees as to truthfulness, decency, or of
order is poor, the Film Office shall deny such application.



   (B)   The City Manager may promulgate administrative policies and
procedures governing the form, time, and location of any filming activity
within the city.  Such policies and procedures shall be on file with the
City Clerk's office for review by the public and they shall have the force
and effect of law as if fully set forth in this article.  In addition to the
City Manager's policies and procedures, if any, all decisions concerning the
issuance of any film permit and/or the conditions imposed thereon shall be
made after consideration of the following factors:



      (1)   The health and safety of the public;



      (2)   Disruption of activities of businesses or persons within
the affected area;



      (3)   The safety of property within the city; and



      (4)   Traffic congestion at particular locations within the
city.



   (C)   Otherwise, a permit shall be issued, or issued subject to
conditions, unless it is determined that the activity contemplated in the
permit will adversely affect city operations, city businesses or residents,
or city personnel resources, or if the proposed activity has the potential to
damage public or private property.



   (D)   A permit may only be issued for a maximum of 30 calendar days
before the first day of filming activities.  A permit is void 30 days after
it is issued unless the permit contains a more specific expiration date.



   (E)   A permit may not be assigned and must be posted in public view
at the filming location at all times.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-162.  APPLICATION PROCESSING TIME.



   If the application satisfies the criteria of this article, the permit
shall be issued within ten business days of submission; or within 12 business
days of submission if the activity requires traffic control measures, outdoor
stunts, or special effects; or within 15 business days of submission if the
filming requires road closures.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-163.  APPEAL.



   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Film Office shall have the
right to appeal the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the
application to the City Manager or his/her designee in writing.  The appeal
shall be taken within five business days after notice of the decision is
mailed or transmitted to the applicant.  The City Manager shall decide the
appeal within ten business days.  The City Manager's decision shall be final.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-164.  RESTORATION.



   A permittee shall conduct operations in an orderly fashion with
continuous attention to the storage of equipment not in use, maintenance of
the area, and the cleanup of trash and debris.  The area used shall be
cleaned of trash and debris within two hours of the completion of the
activity or within such other time established in the permit to the city's
satisfaction.  The applicant shall be responsible for restoring any area
damaged or disrupted before leaving the site. If the site is not repaired or
restored to the city's satisfaction, the City Manager or his/her designee
shall have the necessary restoration and/or repairs performed and the
applicant shall reimburse the city for such work within ten days of
completing filming.  In the event the applicant fails to reimburse the city,
the city may secure its reimbursement from any deposit or bond that was
posted by the permittee during the application process.  The amount of any
bond shall in no way limit the permittee's liability or responsibility for
the costs of repairs or restoration in the event these costs exceed the bond
amount.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-165.  FILMING HOURS.



   (A)   Permitted hours.  It is prohibited for any person to commence
or conduct, or permit the commencement or conducting of, any filming in
residentially-zoned neighborhoods, and any other neighborhoods within a 300
foot radius of a residential zone, except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m., Monday through Friday; 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Saturday; and
9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.,  Sunday and city-specified holidays.



   (B)   Exception - Extended hours.  Filming activity in
residentially-zoned neighborhoods, and other neighborhoods located within a
300 foot radius of a residential zone, shall be permitted beyond those hours
set forth in this section if the permittee submits signatures of approval
from one adult resident of at least 70% of the dwelling units located within
a 300 foot radius of the filming, at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled
start time of the filming.  However, this signature requirement may be
waived by the Film Office if it determines that the filming will not have any
adverse effect upon the owners or occupants of such dwelling units.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-166.  PARKING AND STREET CLOSURES.



   (A)   No person shall close any city street or alley, unless first
authorized by the city.



   (B)   No person shall park a vehicle or place equipment associated
with filming on any street or alley, except where parking is lawfully
permitted.



   (C)   The permittee shall post "No Parking" signs, as required by
the Film Office, at least  24 hours prior to the scheduled start time of the
filming.



   (D)   Before a street or alley closure can occur, the permittee
shall submit to the Film Office, at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled
start time of the filming activity, signatures of approval from one adult
resident of at least 70% of the dwelling units and businesses adjacent to or
serviced by the street or alley proposed to be closed.



   (E)   If a permittee wets the roadway for filming purposes, the
permittee shall not strike the set until the roadway is dry to the city's
satisfaction.  A professional lane closure company shall be hired to install
the lane closure area for the wet-down and shall maintain such closure until
the roadway is dry.  “Wet Pavement” signs are required at both ends of
the wet-down.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-167.  VIOLATION; REVOCATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any film permit may be revoked under the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any of the terms or conditions of the
film permit;



      (2)   Where it has been determined that the permittee has
violated or has failed to comply with any ordinances, resolutions, or
applicable regulations;



      (3)   Where it has been determined that the film permit was
granted pursuant to false or fraudulent information contained in the film
permit application or verbally provided to city officials;



      (4)   Where it has subsequently been determined that filming
activity will fail to meet the criteria enumerated in this article for
granting a film permit; or



      (5)   Where it has been determined that the preservation of
the public health, safety, and general welfare demand revocation of the film
permit.



   (B)   A notice of revocation shall be mailed to the permittee, by
certified mail, stating the grounds for revocation and advising the permittee
of the appeal rights afforded by this article.



   (C)   City officials with the authority to revoke a permit include
the Community Relations Director, Police Chief or designee, Fire Chief or
designee, Development Director, Public Works Director, and the City Manager. 



   (D)   Revocation of a film permit shall be effective for a period of
one year.  No permits shall be issued to any individual or entity found to
be in violation of this article for the subsequent one (1) year period of
time.  Thereafter, film permits may be granted on a restricted or
conditional basis to ensure that the offender does not violate this article
again.



   (E)   Violation of any of the provisions of this article or any of
the terms and conditions of a film permit shall be punishable as set forth in
Chapter One of the city code.  In addition, it shall be a misdemeanor to:



      (1)   Provide false or fraudulent information to the city
during the permit application process;



      (2)   Provide any false or fraudulent information after the
permit has been issued, including but not limited to the possession or
existence of consent or permission from property owners when required; or



      (3)   Fail or refuse to cease any film activities when ordered
to do so by a city official due to violations of any code, ordinance, or this
article.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-168.  NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.



   Any filming, video recording, or related activity conducted contrary to
the provisions of this chapter shall be and is hereby declared to be an
unlawful action and a public nuisance.  The City Council may authorize the
commencement of an action at law or in equity in the name of the city in any
court of competent jurisdiction against the permittee to ensure compliance
with the terms of this article.  All remedies prescribed herein will be
cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar
the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of
this article, nor shall the city's delay or failure to exercise any remedy
result in a waiver of same.



(Ord. No. 401, § 1 (part), 3-2-09)



12-169 - 12-199.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VII.  CLOSE-OUT SALES



12-200.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights "Close-Out Sale and Auction Ordinance."



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-201.  INTENT.



   The City Council finds that the public health, safety, and welfare are
best served by the adoption of an ordinance providing for the licensing and
regulation of persons conducting close-out sales within the City of Sterling
Heights pursuant to Public Act No. 39 of 1961, as amended. The purpose of
this article will insure the protection of the public health and safety
through the establishment of certain licensing and regulatory standards
pertaining to the conduct of close-out sales within the city.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-202.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   CASUALTY SALE.  A sale of goods which have been damaged by fire,
smoke, flood, water, or other casualty.



   CLOSE-OUT SALE.  Any going-out-of-business sale, removal sale,
casualty sale, or sale of goods by any person, insurance company, bankruptcy
trustee, mortgage company, creditor, assignee, personal representative,
trustee, or receiver.  Close-out sales do not include such sales of real
property, estate sales by personal representatives or trustees, or other
sales of personal property which are not subject to the Michigan personal
property tax.



   GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE.  Any sale, whether described by such name
or by any other name such as, but not limited to, "closing out sales,"
"liquidation sales," "lost our lease sales," "forced to vacate sales," held
in such a manner as to indicate a belief that upon disposal of the stock of
goods on hand, the business will cease and discontinue at the premises where
the sale is conducted.  A going-out-of-business sale includes an offering of
the stock of goods on hand in such manner whether or not any sales of goods
are made.



   GOODS.  All goods, wares, merchandise, and other personal property,
except money or rights to recover possession of property or money.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, association, or two or more persons having
a joint or common interest in a business or business pursuit.



   REMOVAL SALE.  Any sale held in such a manner as to induce a belief
that upon disposal of the stock of goods on hand, the business will cease and
discontinue at the premises where the sale is conducted, and thereafter will
be moved to and operated at another location.  A removal sale includes an
offering of the stock of goods on hand in such manner whether or not any
sales of goods are made.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 1, 11-17-09)



12-203.  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to
advertise, promote, or conduct a close-out sale within the city without first
having obtained a license from the City Clerk.



   (B)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to sheriffs,
constables, or other public or court officers, or to any other person or
persons acting under the license, direction, or authority of any state or
federal court, or pursuant to the Michigan General Property Tax Act which are
selling goods, wares, or merchandise in the course of their official duties.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-204.  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any applicant for a license to conduct a close-out sale shall
file an application with the City Clerk under oath on a form provided by the
City Clerk. The application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant who must be
the owner of the goods to be sold at the close-out sale, and whether the
applicant is an individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, or association, and the name and the
position of the individual filing such application.



      (2)   The name and style in which such sale will be conducted,
and the address of the location where the sale will be conducted.



      (3)   The dates and time periods during which the sale will be
conducted.



      (4)   The name and address of the person who will be in charge
and responsible for the conduct of the sale.



      (5)   A full explanation of the circumstances, conditions, or
necessity which give rise to the desire to conduct the sale, including a
statement of the descriptive name of the sale and the reasons why the name
accurately describes the sale. If the application is for a license to conduct
a going-out-of-business sale, it shall also contain a statement that the
business will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be
conducted upon termination of the sale. If the application is for a license
to conduct a removal sale, it shall contain a statement that the business
will be discontinued at the premises where the sale is to be conducted upon
termination of the sale, along with the address of the premises to which the
business will be moved. If the application is for a license to conduct a
casualty sale, it shall also contain a statement as to the time, location,
and cause of the damage to the goods.



      (6)    A full, detailed, and complete inventory of the goods
that are to be sold, which inventory shall:



         (a)   Itemize the goods to be sold and contain
sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand name,
if any, to clearly identify it.



         (b)   List separately any goods purchased during a
60-day period immediately prior to the date of making application for the
license.



         (c)   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory
together with the name and address of the seller of the items to the
applicant, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of each item to
the applicant, and the total value of the inventory at cost.



         (d)   A statement that no goods will be added to the
inventory after the application is made or during the sale, and that the
inventory contains no goods received on consignment.



      (7)   A written disclosure of any convictions for any felonies
or any crimes involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit. 



   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by the following items:



      (1)   A non-refundable application fee in an amount set by the
city's annual appropriations ordinance.



      (2)   If applicable, proof that an assumed name certificate
has been filed with the Macomb County Clerk or the State of Michigan.



      (3)   If applicable, the articles of incorporation or
organization, partnership agreement, and a certificate of good standing
issued by the State of Michigan.



      (4)   A statement from the City Treasurer that all personal
property taxes relating to the business for the current calendar year have
either been paid or an escrow arrangement satisfactory to the City Treasurer
has been established to ensure their payment from the close-out sale proceeds
at the conclusion of the sale.



      (5)   A statement from the County Treasurer that all personal
property taxes relating to the business for current and prior calendar years
have either been paid or an escrow arrangement satisfactory to the County
Treasurer has been established to ensure their payment from the close-out
sale proceeds at the conclusion of the sale.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any
false, fraudulent, or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any
way knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any fictitious
name in applying for a license under this article. Any license obtained by
violation of this subsection shall be void.



      The City Clerk may waive requirements relating to details
pertaining to the goods where such information is not available after a good
faith search based upon an affidavit of the applicant.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-205.  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES;
RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a fully completed, accurate, and sworn
application for a license, accompanied by the fee required by Section 12-204
(B) (1), the City Clerk may issue a license to the applicant authorizing the
applicant to advertise, promote, and sell the particular goods inventoried at
the time and place stated in the application if the City Clerk determines
that all of the requirements of this article have been satisfied.



   (B)   The license shall apply only to the premises specified in the
application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a licensee under
this article is engaged in business in other locations, advertising or
offering of goods on behalf of such location shall not represent or imply any
participation in or cooperation with the sale on the premises specified in
the license, nor shall any advertising or other offering of goods on behalf
of the premises where the licensed sale is being conducted represent or imply
any participation in or cooperation with such sale at other locations.



   (C)   The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear a
number and date of its expiration.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Clerk shall notify the
Chief of Police, the Building Official, the Fire Marshal, the City Planner,
the City Assessor, and the City Manager.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall deny an application for a license under
this article for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or
pled no contest to any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit.



      (2)   The applicant has made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact or omission in the license application or any
document required by the city in connection with the processing of the
application of the license, has failed to submit all the required
information, or pay the required fee.



      (3)   The applicant has had a similar license or permit
denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency.



      (4)   The applicant has conducted a sale under the trade name
or style of a person in whose goods the applicant for the license has
acquired a right or title within six months prior to the time of making
application for such a license.



      (5)   The applicant has requested a license to continue or has
continued a sale in the name of a licensee under this article in whose goods
such person acquired a right or title while such a sale is in progress.



      (6)   The applicant has conducted a sale, other than an
insurance sale, a salvage sale, or a sale of damaged goods, on the same
premises within one year of the conclusion of a prior sale of the nature
covered by this article.



      (7)   The restrictions on issuance of a license to a person
described in divisions (4), (5), and (6) do not apply to any person who has
acquired a right, title, or interest in goods as an heir, devisee, or legatee
or pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 2, 11-17-09)



12-206.  RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISEMENT OF BANKRUPTCY, PERSONAL
REPRESENTATIVE, RECEIVER, OR TRUSTEE SALES, ASSIGNEE AND INSOLVENT SALES.



   No person shall advertise, promote, or otherwise represent for sale, or
sell, any goods as a bankruptcy, personal representative, receiver, or
trustee sale except pursuant to and in compliance with federal or state
statutory authority or judicial process, or as an assignee's or insolvent
sale except where there is a bona fide assignment for the benefit of
creditors.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-207.  LICENSES; TERMS; RENEWALS; FEES.



   (A)   A license to conduct a sale issued under this article shall
not be issued or valid for a period of more than 30 days from the start of
the sale, and the sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in
the license.



   (B)   A license to conduct a sale issued under this article may be
renewed not more than twice, for a period not to exceed 30 days for each
renewal. A person requesting a renewal under this subsection must provide an
affidavit of the licensee that the goods listed in the inventory have not
been disposed of and that no new goods have been or will be added to the
inventory previously filed pursuant to this article, by purchase, acquisition
on consignment, or otherwise. The application for renewal of the license
shall be made not more than 13 days before the time of the expiration of the
license and shall contain a new inventory of goods remaining on hand at the
time the application for renewal is made, prepared, and furnished in the same
manner and form as the original inventory. A renewal shall not be granted if
any goods have been added to the stock listed in the inventory since the date
of the issuance of the license.



   (C)   A renewal fee in the amount set forth by the city's annual
appropriations ordinance shall accompany an application for the renewal of a
license.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-208.  LICENSES; APPLICATION, INVENTORY, POSTING; ADVERTISEMENT,
ANNOUNCEMENT; CONTENTS.



   A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this
article, including the filed inventory, shall be posted in a conspicuous
place where the inventoried goods are to be sold, so that the public may be
informed of the facts relating to the goods before purchasing them, but the
copy need not show their purchase price. A duplicate copy of a license shall
be attached to the front door of the premises where the sale is conducted in
such a manner that it is clearly visible from outside the premises. Any
advertisement or announcement published in connection with the sale shall
conspicuously show on its face the number of the license and its expiration
date.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-209.  LICENSES; APPLICATION; CITY CLERK'S RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall indicate on the application the date it was
received and shall keep a written record of it in the City Clerk's office
that contains the name of the applicant, the nature of the proposed sale, the
place where the sale is to be conducted, the proposed duration of the sale,
the inventory of the goods to be sold, a general statement as to the source
of the goods, and whether the license was approved or denied, along with the
date of such issuance or denial.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-210.  LICENSES; SCOPE; GOODS, REMOVAL; EFFECT.



   Any license issued under this article shall be valid only for a sale of
the goods inventoried and described in the application for such license, in
the manner and at the time and place set forth in the application. Any
removal of the goods so inventoried and described in the application from the
place of sale mentioned in the application shall cause the goods to lose
their identity as goods to be sold pursuant to a close-out sale in accordance
with this article, and no license shall be issued for the conduct of a sale
of any of such goods removed from the place described in the application
under the provisions of this article at any other place or places.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-211.  CONDUCT OF SALES; PURCHASE OF GOODS PRIOR TO SALE PROHIBITED;
EVIDENCE.



   No person who is contemplating holding a close-out sale under a license
as provided in this article shall order any goods for the purpose of selling
and disposing of the same at such sale. Any unusual purchase and additions to
the stock of goods within 60 days prior to the filing of the application for
license to conduct the sale shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases
and additions to stock were made in contemplation of the sale and for the
purpose of selling the same at the sale.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-212.  CONDUCT OF SALES; ADDITION OF GOODS DURING SALE; FALSE DESCRIPTION
OR INVENTORY PROHIBITED.



   No person carrying on or conducting a close-out sale shall add, during
the continuance of the sale, any goods to the stock of goods described and
inventoried in its original application for the license. No goods shall be
sold at or during the sale, except the goods described and inventoried in the
original application.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-213.  EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE.



   Every addition of goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried
in the application and each sale of goods not inventoried and described in
the application (except for goods ordered more than 60 days prior to the
filing of the application for a license but delivered after the beginning of
the sale) shall constitute a separate offense under this article and shall
void any license issued to conduct a sale under this article.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-214.  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates or permits a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, whether as an owner, agent, servant, employee,
advertiser, or promoter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (B)   The license of any person who is convicted for any violation
of the provisions of this article shall be immediately revoked by the City
Clerk, and no part of the license fee shall be returned.



12-215. - 12-229.  Reserved.



ARTICLE VIII.  AUCTIONS AND AUCTIONEERS. 



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



12-230.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights "Auctions and Auctioneers Ordinance."



(Ord. 405, § 2 (part), 7-07-09)



12-231.  INTENT.



   The City Council finds that the public health, safety, and welfare are
best served by the adoption of an ordinance providing for the licensing and
regulation of persons conducting auction sales and auctions within the City
of Sterling Heights. The purpose of this article will insure the protection
of the public health and safety through the establishment of certain
licensing and regulatory standards pertaining to conduct of auction sales
within the city.



(Ord. 405, § 2 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 3, 11-17-09)



12-232.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   AUCTION SALE.  The offering for sale or the selling of personal
property to the highest bidder, or offering for sale or selling of personal
property at a high price and then offering the same at successive lower
prices until a buyer is secured. Auction sales do not include auctions of
real property, charitable auctions, estate auctions by personal
representatives or trustees, or other auctions of personal property which are
not subject to the Michigan personal property tax, auction sales of livestock
or farm produce, used homestead goods, or other items commonly sold at farm
or homestead sales, auction sales under a mortgage foreclosure, under the
direction of a court or court officer or such sales as may be required by
law, or auctions conducted by or for the benefit of a municipal, state, or
federal governmental agency.



   AUCTIONEER.  A person offering personal property for sale by means of
an auction sale.



   CHARITABLE AUCTION.  An auction conducted by a charitable organization
or religious organization.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  A benevolent, educational, philanthropic,
humane, patriotic, or eleemosynary organization of persons which solicits or
obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes as
defined under Michigan law.



   GOODS.  All goods, wares, merchandise, and other personal property,
except money or rights to recover possession of property or money.



   NEW MERCHANDISE.  All goods or merchandise not previously sold at
retail.



   PERSON.  An individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, association, or 2 or more persons having a
joint or common interest in a business or business pursuit.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION.  A church, ecclesiastical corporation, or
group, not organized for pecuniary profit, that gathers for mutual support
and edification in piety or worship of a supreme deity as defined under
Michigan law.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 4, 11-17-09)



DIVISION 2.  LICENSING OF AUCTION SALES



12-233.  LICENSE REQUIRED; EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to
advertise, promote, or conduct an auction sale within the city without first
having obtained a license from the City Clerk.



   (B)   This provision of this article shall not apply to charitable
auctions, auction sales of livestock, farm machinery or farm produce, used
homestead goods or other items commonly sold at farm or homestead sales, to
auction sales of real property, or to auction sales under a mortgage
foreclosure, under the direction of a court or court officer of such sales as
may be required by law, or auctions conducted by or for the benefit a
municipal, state, or federal governmental agency.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-234.  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   (A)   Any applicant for a license to conduct an auction sale shall
file at least 10 days prior to the proposed auction sale an application with
the City Clerk under oath on a form provided by the City Clerk. The
application shall include the following information:



      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant, and whether
the applicant is an individual, firm, corporation, limited liability company,
partnership, limited partnership, or association, and the name and the
position of the individual filing such application.



      (2)   The name, residence, and post office address of the
licensed auctioneer who will conduct the auction sale.



      (3)   The dates and time periods during which the sale will be
conducted.



      (4)    The location where the auction is proposed to be held.



      (5)   A full, detailed, and complete inventory of the goods or
equipment that are to be sold, which inventory shall:



         (a)   Itemize the goods or equipment to be sold and
contain sufficient information concerning each item, including make and brand
name, if any, to clearly identify it.



         (b)   Show the cost price of each item in the inventory
together with the name and address of the seller of the items to the
applicant, if known, the date of the purchase, the date of the delivery of
each item to the applicant, and the total value of the inventory at cost.



      (6)   A statement as to whether or not the auction will be
with or without reservation.



      (7)   A written disclosure of any convictions of felonies or
any crimes involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit.



   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by the following items:



      (1)   A non-refundable license application fee in an amount
set by the city's annual appropriations ordinance.



      (2)   A copy of the auctioneer's surety bond filed with the
application for city auctioneer's license as required by Section 12-253 of
the City Code.



      (3)   If applicable, proof than an assumed name certificate
has been filed with the Macomb County Clerk or the State of Michigan.



      (4)   If applicable, the articles of incorporation or
organization and a certificate of good standing issued by the State of
Michigan.



      (5)   A statement from the City Treasurer that all personal
property taxes relating to the business for the current calendar year have
either been paid or an escrow arrangement satisfactory to the City Treasurer
has been established to ensure their payment from the auction proceeds at the
conclusion of the sale.



      (6)   A statement from the County Treasurer that all personal
property taxes relating to the business for the current and prior calendar
years have either been paid or an escrow arrangement satisfactory to the
County Treasurer has been established to ensure their payment from the
auction sale proceeds at the conclusion of the sale.



   (C)   An applicant for an auction license may authorize the
auctioneer in writing to file and process the auction license application on
the applicant's behalf.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any
false, fraudulent, or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any
way knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any fictitious
name in applying for a license under this article. Any license obtained by
violation of this subsection shall be void.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 5, 11-17-09)



12-235.  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR AUCTION
LICENSES; RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a fully completed, accurate application for a
license under oath, accompanied by the fee required by Section 12-234 (B)(1),
the City Clerk may issue a license to the applicant authorizing the applicant
to advertise, promote, and sell the particular goods or equipment inventoried
at an auction to be held at the time and place stated in the application if
the City Clerk determines that all of the requirements of this article have
been satisfied.



   (B)   The license shall apply only to the proposed auction location
specified in the application, and it may not be transferred or assigned. If a
licensee under this article is engaged in business in other locations,
advertising or offering of goods on behalf of such location shall not
represent or imply any participation in or cooperation with the sale on the
premises specified in the license, nor shall any advertising or other
offering or goods or equipment on behalf of the premises where the licensed
sale is being conducted represent or imply any participation in or
cooperation with such sale at other locations.



   (C)   The license shall be issued in duplicate and shall bear a
number and date of its expiration.



   (D)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Clerk shall notify the
Chief of Police, the Building Official, the Fire Marshal, the City Planner,
and the City Manager.



   (E)   The City Clerk shall deny an application for a license under
this article for any of the following reasons:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty to,
any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit.



      (2)   The applicant has made a false, misleading, or
fraudulent statement of fact or omission in the license application or any
document required by the city in connection with the processing of the
application of the license or has failed to submit all the required
information or pay the required fee.



      (3)   The applicant has had a similar license or permit
denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 6, 11-17-09)



12-236.  LICENSES; TERMS; RENEWALS; FEES.



   (A)   A license to conduct a sale issued under this article shall
not be issued or valid for longer than the time period specified on the
license, and the sale may be conducted only during the period set forth in
the license.



   (B)   A license to conduct a sale issued under this article may be
renewed not more than twice, for a period not to exceed five days for each
renewal. A person requesting a renewal under this subsection must provide an
affidavit of the licensee that the goods or equipment listed in the inventory
have not been disposed of and that no new goods or equipment have been or
will be added to the inventory previously filed pursuant to this article, by
purchase, acquisition on consignment, or otherwise. The application for
renewal of the license shall contain a new inventory of goods remaining on
hand at the time the application for renewal is made, prepared and furnished
in the same manner and form as the original inventory. A renewal shall not be
granted if any goods or equipment have been added to the items listed in the
inventory since the date of the issuance of the license.



   (C)   A renewal fee in the amount set forth by the city's annual
appropriations ordinance shall accompany an application for the renewal of a
license.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-237.  LICENSES; APPLICATION, INVENTORY, POSTING; ADVERTISEMENT,
ANNOUNCEMENT; CONTENTS.



   A copy of the application for a license to conduct a sale under this
article, including the filed inventory, shall be posted in a conspicuous
place where the inventoried goods or equipment are to be sold, so that the
public may be informed of the facts relating to the goods or equipment before
purchasing them, but the copy need not show their purchase price. A duplicate
copy of a license shall be attached to the front door of the premises where
the sale is conducted in such a manner that it is clearly visible from
outside the premises. Any advertisement or announcement published in
connection with the sale shall conspicuously show on its face the number of
the license and its expiration date.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-238.  LICENSES; APPLICATION; CITY CLERK'S RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall indicate on the application the date it was
received and shall keep a written record of it in the City Clerk's office
that contains the name of the applicant, the name of the auctioneer who will
conduct the auction sale, the place where the auction sale is to be
conducted, the proposed duration of the auction sale, the inventory of the
goods or equipment to be sold, a general statement as to the source of the
items, and whether the license was approved or denied, along with the date of
such issuance or denial.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-239.  LICENSES; SCOPE; MERCHANDISE, REMOVAL; EFFECT.



   Any license issued under this article shall be valid only for a sale of
the goods or equipment inventoried and described in the application for such
license, in the manner and at the time and place set forth in the
application. Any removal of the goods or equipment so inventoried and
described in the application from the place of the proposed auction sale
mentioned in the application shall cause such items to lose their identity as
items to be sold pursuant to an auction sale in accordance with this article,
and no license shall be issued for the conduct of a sale of any of such items
removed from the proposed auction sale location described in the application
under the provisions of this article to any other place or places.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-240.  CONDUCT OF SALES; PURCHASE OF MERCHANDISE PRIOR TO SALE PROHIBITED;
EVIDENCE.



   No person in contemplation of conducting an auction sale under a
license as provided in this article shall order any additional goods or
equipment for the purpose of selling and disposing of the same at such sale.
Any unusual purchase and additions to the inventory within 60 days prior to
the filing of the application for license to conduct the auction sale shall
be presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions to inventory were
made in contemplation of the auction sale and for the purpose of selling the
same at the auction sale.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-241.  CONDUCT OF SALES; ADDITION OF GOODS DURING SALE; FALSE DESCRIPTION
OR INVENTORY PROHIBITED.



   No person carrying on or conducting an auction sale shall add, during
the continuance of the auction, any goods or equipment to the inventory
described in its original application for the license. No goods or equipment
shall be sold at or during the sale, except for inventory itemized in the
original application.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-242. - 12-249.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 3.  LICENSING OF AUCTIONEERS



12-250.  COMPLIANCE WITH DIVISION.



   All persons licensed as an auctioneer under this article shall conduct
business in conformity with the rules, regulations, and conditions set forth
in Divisions 2 and 3 of Article VIII of Chapter 12. A license shall not be
deemed to be a property right, but instead shall be deemed a privilege that
may only be maintained by complying with all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules, and regulations applicable not only to the licensee and the
establishment, but also to the licensee and its employees as individuals. The
violation of any laws, ordinances, rules, or regulations shall be grounds for
denial of a pending license application, suspension or revocation of an
existing license, or the refusal to renew a license. Every licensee, by
virtue of accepting a license under this division, shall be held to have
faithfully covenanted with the city to operate and maintain its business in
conformity with this article. The licensee shall comply with all other city
ordinances and regulations, except that to the extent that any real or
perceived conflicts exist, the provisions of this Division shall control.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-251.  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION OF DIVISION.



   Engaging in the business of an auctioneer in violation of the
provisions of this division is declared to be a nuisance per se and, in
addition to the penalties set forth in this division and in state law, such
operation may be enjoined and abated by a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-252.  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES AND BOND; NO EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)    No person shall carry on the business of an auctioneer in the
city without first having obtained a license issued by the City Clerk,
authorizing such person to carry on such business subject to the provisions
of Divisions 2 and 3 and having filed the surety bond required by Section
12-253. The fee for an auctioneer's license, and for renewal of such license,
shall be in the amount established by the annual appropriations ordinance.



   (B)   Licensure under any or all of the following acts, or related
city ordinance, does not create an exemption from obtaining a license under
this article:



      (1)   The precious metal and gem dealer act.



      (2)   The secondhand dealers and junk dealers act.



      (3)   Division 2 of article VIII of Chapter 12 of the City
Code.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 7, 11-17-09)



12-253.  APPLICATION FOR AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the business of an auctioneer
in the city shall make application in writing under oath to the City Clerk
and shall furnish the following and such other information as may be required
by the city to consider such application:



      (1)   The full name and address of the applicant or
applicants. If an association, give the full name. If a corporation, give the
full name and the official address thereof with the date and state of
incorporation, the full name and address of the resident agent, and attach to
the application a copy of the certificate from the state of incorporation
indicating that the corporation is in good standing. If a limited liability
company, give the full name and the official address thereof with the date
and state of organization, the full name and address of the members and of
the resident agent, and attach to the application a copy of the certificate
from the state of organization indicating that the company is in good
standing.



      (2)   The full name and address of all other owners,
co-partners, officers, and directors, and, if a closely held corporation, all
shareholders, or, if a limited liability company, all managers and members. A
closely held corporation shall include any corporation having complete stock
ownership in 20 or less persons.



      (3)   The location of the place(s) where the applicant
proposes to engage in the business of an auctioneer.



      (4)   Individual affidavits of each of the persons mentioned
in subsection (2) above indicating that each person has not been convicted of
or pled guilty or no contest to a felony or any moral turpitude offense
within 10 years prior to the date of the application, has not been convicted
of any other criminal acts within five years prior to the date of the
application, has never been convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to a
violation of state or local law relating to auctioneer businesses or the
services performed therein, and has never had a license or permit to operate
an auctioneer business denied, suspended, or revoked.



      (5)   A surety bond with a surety company approved by the city
in the penal sum of $2,500 running to the City of Sterling Heights, the State
of Michigan and other lawful taxing authorities conditioned on the payment by
the auctioneer of (a) all taxes that may be payable by, or due from the party
for which the applicant is conducting any auction, to the City of Sterling
Heights, State of Michigan, or any department or subdivision of it or any
lawful taxing authority, and (b) any fines that may be assessed by any court
against such party or the auctioneer for violation of any of the provisions
of this Article, provided, however, that the aggregate liability of the
surety for all such taxes or fines shall not exceed the sum of such bond.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. 408, § 8, 11-17-09)



12-254.  REVIEW BY POLICE CHIEF; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Upon receiving an application for an auctioneer's license, the
City Clerk shall refer such application to the Chief of Police, who shall
determine whether the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or
pled no contest to any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit.



   (B)   Upon the referral of an application for an auctioneer's
license by the City Clerk, the Chief of Police may also cause to have the
premises inspected for the purpose of determining whether criminal activities
are occurring on the premises where the auction sale is proposed to be
conducted.



   (C)   An applicant for an auctioneer license, or renewals of them,
shall submit to lawful inspections by the Police Chief or others designated
by him or her to determine compliance with the provisions of this division
and other applicable ordinances and regulations of the city.



   (D)   Before the City Clerk shall issue any license under this
article, the City Clerk shall review the information obtained by the Chief of
Police as to whether the applicant has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or
pled no contest to any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit and
whether there are criminal activities going on at the premises where the
auction is proposed to be conducted.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-255.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF AUCTIONEER'S LICENSE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the information from the Chief of Police
required under this division, the City Clerk shall consider the same within a
reasonable time, either granting or denying the license. The City Clerk shall
deny a license or renewal of the license if:



      (1)   The correct license fee and bond have not been tendered
to the city, or, in the case of a check or bank draft, such check or draft
has not been honored with payment upon presentation.



      (2)   There are ongoing criminal activities at the location
where the proposed auction sale is to be conducted. 



      (3)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the
applicant's employees or personnel; any of the stockholders holding more than
10 percent of the stock, any officer and any director, if a corporation; any
member or manager, if a limited liability company; and the manager or other
person involved in the operation of the business, has pled guilty or no
contest to, or has been convicted of, any felony or any crime of moral
turpitude, including but not limited to theft, gambling, extortion,
dishonesty, fraud or deceit, unless such plea or conviction occurred at least
10 years prior to the date of the application, or has pled to or been
convicted of any other crime during the five years prior to the date of
application, or has pled to or been convicted of any crime relating to the
business of an auctioneer.



      (4)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading,
or fraudulent statement(s) of fact in the license application or in any
document required by the city.



      (5)   The applicant has had a similar business license, or
other similar permit or license, denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or
any other state or local agency within 10 years prior to the date of the
application. 



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-256.  EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFER.



   (A)   All licenses shall be valid for one year except the first year
of issuance, because all such licenses shall expire on December 31 of the
year of issuance unless revoked for cause. Licenses shall be renewable upon
application to the City Clerk.



   (B)   Licenses are not transferable. The license shall designate the
particular location in the city where the auctioneer intends to conduct an
auction sale. A person, corporation, or firm receiving a license shall not
conduct an auction sale at any other location than the place designated in
the license. In the event of a sale or transfer of the auctioneer business,
the new owner shall apply for and obtain a license pursuant to this division
before conducting any auction sales in the city.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-257.  LICENSES; APPLICATION; CITY CLERK'S RECORDS.



   The City Clerk shall indicate on the application for auctioneer's
license the date it was received and shall keep a written record of it in the
City Clerk's office that contains the name of the applicant, and whether the
license was approved or denied, along with the date of such issuance or
denial.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-258.  VIOLATION; PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person who violates or permits a violation of any of the
provisions of this article, whether as an owner, agent, servant, employee,
advertiser, or promoter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (B)   The license of any person who is convicted for any violation
of the provisions of this Article shall be immediately revoked by the City
Clerk, and no part of the license fee shall be returned.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09)



12-259.  APPEAL OF DENIAL, SUSPENSION, OR REVOCATION OF LICENSES FOR
CLOSE-OUT SALES, AUCTIONEERS AND AUCTION SALES.



   (A)   Within 10 days of receipt of notification of suspension,
revocation, or denial of a license under this Article IX or, an applicant may
file a written appeal of such action to the Board of Ordinance Appeals. Such
appeal may request reconsideration of the suspension, revocation, or denial.



   (B)   The appeal must state specifically the reasons for believing
the City Clerk's decision relating to suspension, revocation, or denial of a
license was erroneous, and a copy of the decision or notice complained of
must be attached to the appeal.



   (C)   The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. At the hearing, the
appellant and the appellant's attorney may present a statement and evidence
showing:



      (1)   That the decision of the City Clerk with respect to
denial of an application for a license is not supported by the facts set
forth in the record of the application for a license.



      (2)    That the decision of the City Clerk with respect to
suspension or revocation of a license is not supported by competent, material
evidence of the facts which form the basis for the suspension or revocation.



      (3)   That the decision of the City Clerk is contrary to law. 



   (D)   The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall not reverse the City
Clerk's decision where the denial, suspension, or revocation is based upon
the occurrence of criminal acts, fraud, dishonesty, or other acts of moral
turpitude, if established at the hearing by a simple preponderance of the
evidence.



(Ord. 405, § 1 (part), 7-07-09; Ord. No. 454, § 1, 7-18-17)



12-260. - 12-269.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IX. BANQUET AND EVENT FACILITIES AND ACCESSORY USES.



12-270.  PURPOSE.



   Banquet halls, reception halls, catering halls, event facilities, and
other establishments offering banquet services provide places for patrons to
congregate for a variety of purposes, such as dining, drinking, socializing,
and enjoying some form of entertainment.  At times, the use of such
facilities can result in disturbances to surrounding neighbors and tenants,
noise or other nuisance violations, and illicit or criminal activities within
the building or on the property. This article establishes licensing
requirements designed to minimize the adverse secondary effects of such uses.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-271.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ACCESSORY BANQUET OR EVENT USE.  A building or facility, or part of a
building or facility, which offers, provides, or allows catering of food and
beverage services in its event facilities or within separate indoor event
rooms or areas which are available for use by individuals or groups as an
accessory use to a principal use allowed under the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Sterling Heights.  The term "ACCESSORY BANQUET OR EVENT USE"
specifically excludes (a) banquet and event facilities as defined below, (b)
establishments which do not permit their event facilities or event rooms to
be used by patrons beyond 11:00 p.m., or (c) events offering, providing, or
allowing food or beverage services which are regulated as temporary uses
under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.  The term "ACCESSORY BANQUET
OR EVENT USE" does not include any building or part of a building which is
used as a "banquet and event facility" as defined in this section.



   BANQUET AND EVENT FACILITY.  A freestanding building with one or more
rentable separate event rooms or areas which is principally used for the
holding of (a) private events or gatherings which are not open to the general
public, or (b) public events offered by the proprietor of the banquet
facility which are open to the public, where food or beverage services are
offered, provided, or catered by such proprietor.  The term "BANQUET AND
EVENT FACILITY" does not include any building or part of a building which is
used as an "accessory banquet or event use" as defined in this section.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-272.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a banquet and event facility
within the city without obtaining a banquet and event facility license as
required by this article.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate an accessory banquet or event
use within the city without obtaining an accessory banquet or event use
license as required by this article.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-273.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   A banquet and event facility, and any accessory banquet or
event use, lawfully operating prior to July 19, 2017 shall have until January
5, 2018 to file a license application in order to continue operating
thereafter, and if timely filed, it may continue such operations if it is
otherwise in compliance with the requirements of this article, and until a
final decision on issuance or denial is made by the City Clerk.  A banquet
and event facility, and any accessory banquet or event use, not lawfully
operating prior to July 19, 2017, including any expansions or modifications
of an otherwise lawful use, shall file an application and await issuance of a
license prior to beginning any new, expanded, or modified operations
regulated by this article.  Applications shall be filed with the City Clerk,
under oath, on a form provided by the City Clerk, and shall include the
following information:



      (1)   The full name of the applicant and whether the applicant
is an individual or a corporation, partnership, or other business entity;



      (2)   The name under which the business is or will be
operated, and a copy of the current business registration, if any, and any
applicable business licenses;



      (3)   The business address and all telephone numbers for the
business;



      (4)   A copy of the signed lease for the business property and
written consent of the owner to utilize the property as a banquet and event
facility or an accessory banquet or event use, if the property is not owned
by the applicant;



      (5)   The site plan or special approval land use number, and
the date of the meeting at which the site plan or special land use for the
banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use (or facility to
which the accessory banquet or event use is accessory if such use was
approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance) was approved by the
Planning Commission (if applicable) or Planning Department (if site plan
approval was granted administratively), including a layout plan of the
banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use showing:



         a.   The overall design and placement of the facility on
a scaled site plan, with "to scale" floor plans of the banquet facility
layout or of the accessory banquet or event use rooms or areas;



         b.   The location of all facilities, areas, separate
rooms available for banquet or event rental or use, areas for outdoor
congregation, and kitchen and bar areas used for the preparation of food
and/or beverages;   



         c.   Any speakers, amplifiers, televisions, display
screens, stages or performance areas, and similar installations designed to
facilitate entertainment;    



      (6)   The full name, address, and phone number of each
individual who manages or is principally in charge of the operation of the
business, with such information to be updated immediately with any new or
changed information not found on the initial list;



      (7)   A detailed summary or description of the nature and type
of services to be provided within the banquet and event facility or accessory
banquet or event use, including the square footage and occupant load of the
facility and of each room available for rental or use for a banquet or other
event use;



      (8)   For existing banquet and event facilities or accessory
banquet or event uses, (i) the date that a certificate of occupancy was
issued for an approved banquet and event facility, (ii) the date that use
approval was granted for an approved accessory banquet or event use, or if
neither of the above was obtained, then (iii) the date the banquet and event
facility or accessory banquet or event use proposes to open for business if
it is a new banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use;



      (9)   The days and hours of operation that the banquet and
event facility or accessory banquet or event use is or will be available for
use by patrons, including times used for setup, preparation, cleanup, and/or
teardown after events;



      (10)   A release and authorization for the city, through its
agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into
the truth of the statements set forth on the application and the
qualifications of the applicant for the license;



      (11)   Additional business facilities with similar activities
or operations that have been owned, operated, or managed by the applicant, in
whole or in part, within the past ten years;



      (12)   Such other information as may be required by the City
Clerk, Police Department, Fire Department, or City Development Department;



      (13)   A written declaration by the applicant, given under
oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained
in and attached to the application is true and correct.



   (B)   All applications shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee in an amount set by the city's annual appropriations
ordinance.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1
of the city code, for any person to knowingly make any false, fraudulent, or
untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any way knowingly to
conceal any material fact or to give or use any fictitious name in applying
for a license under this article. Any license obtained in violation of this
subsection shall be void.



   (D)   Each application shall also be accompanied by: 



      (1)   A fully executed maintenance agreement acceptable to the
City Attorney, assuring the upkeep and maintenance of, and the prevention of
nuisances created by operation of, the banquet and event facility or
accessory banquet or event use.  The agreement shall remain in effect for as
long as the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use is
operated and properly licensed, and shall include the applicant's agreement
to cease operating the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or
event use until the operation is in full compliance with the requirements of
the maintenance agreement.  Any modifications to the banquet and event
facility or accessory banquet or event use may require an amended maintenance
agreement.   



      (2)   A public liability and property damage insurance policy
insuring the facility and its personnel against any liability arising out of
its utilization of a banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event
use on the property.  No person or entity shall maintain, utilize, or allow
to be utilized any banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event
use unless the insurance required by this section is in force at the time of
such operation.   



      (3)   A fully executed indemnity agreement, approved by the
City Attorney, whereby the applicant and property owner agree to indemnify
and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from any
claim arising or resulting in any manner from the operation of the banquet
and event facility or accessory banquet or event use.



      (4)   The applicant shall submit such additional information
that the City Clerk, Police Department, Fire Department, or City Development
Department determines during the review process to be reasonably necessary to
complete its review of the license request.



      (5)   The applicant shall promptly advise the City Clerk of
any changes it makes to the operation of a licensed banquet and event
facility or accessory banquet or event use so that the City Clerk may
determine whether such changes impact the validity of the license.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-274.  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR BANQUET
FACILITY LICENSES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a properly and fully completed application for
a license, the City Clerk shall provide a copy of the application materials
to the City Manager or his or her designee and shall forward a copy of the
application materials to the following for their review, investigation, and
recommendation:



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner; and



      (5)   City Development Director.



   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D), upon receipt of
favorable recommendations from each of the investigating officials listed in
subsection (A), the City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.



   (C)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Clerk shall notify each
of the following of the issuance:



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner;



      (5)   City Development Director; and



      (6)   Office of City Management.



   (D)   Denial.  The City Clerk shall deny an application for any of
the following reasons:



      (1)   The banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or
event use, as proposed in the application, would not comply with all
applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city's building, fire,
zoning, and health ordinances.



      (2)   The business is not registered with the City Clerk
and/or does not have a proper certificate of occupancy for the building or
property upon which the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or
event use is operating or proposed to operate.



      (3)   The applicant made a false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact or omission in the license application or any document
required by the city in conjunction therewith, or has failed to submit all
required information or the required fee.



      (4)   The applicant has had a similar permit or license
denied, revoked, or suspended by the city or any other state or local agency.



      (5)   The applicant has not provided all of the information
required to be submitted with an application pursuant to this article.



      (6)   The applicant or operator of the banquet and event
facility or the accessory banquet or event use (a) has received two or more
combined violations of city code, liquor control, nuisance, and/or property
maintenance regulations within the 12 months preceding submission of the
application, or has pending litigation with the city, or has pending
ordinance violations in court issued by the City of Sterling Heights Police
Department, Fire Department, or other city officials or officers authorized
to issue citations or ordinance complaints, in any way relating to or arising
from the operation of such banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or
event use, and such violations or litigation has not been resolved in court
or administratively, or (b) has had two or more incidents of illicit or
criminal activity occurring  upon the property where the banquet and event
facility or the accessory banquet or event use is located within the 12
months preceding submission of the application.  Notwithstanding the
preceding sentence, the City Clerk may approve a license for a banquet and
event facility or an accessory banquet or event use for an applicant with
previous nuisance and/or ordinance violations relating to nuisances or
disturbances if the applicant has obtained approval of a nuisance mitigation
plan (or amendment to a previous plan) from the Planning Commission and is
complying with the terms of such plan. 



      (7)   The banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or
event use is not in compliance with approved plans or other approvals on file
with the city.



   (E)   If the City Clerk denies an application, he or she shall
notify the applicant by regular mail addressed to the applicant at the
address shown on the application.  Such notice shall specify the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed denial.



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed denial.



      (3)   A statement that the individual or entity has the right
to appeal the denial to the Board of Ordinance Appeals by submitting a
written application to the City Clerk or his or her designee within 14
calendar days.



   (F)   The City Clerk shall grant or deny a license application under
this article within 60 days of receipt of the application (or as soon
thereafter as reasonably practical with respect to the initial group of
applications received after this article is enacted), except that the City
Clerk may extend that deadline upon request of an applicant in order for the
applicant to attempt to remedy any correctable violations that would require
denial if left uncorrected.  The applicant may extend the deadline as often
and for as long as it believes it will need, except that upon the expiration
of one year from receipt of the application, the City Clerk shall issue a
final grant or denial decision and close the matter.  Thereafter, a new
application from the applicant shall not be accepted by the City Clerk for a
period of six months unless accompanied by documentation of a material change
in circumstances, including but not limited to a correction or elimination of
any previously outstanding violations or other reasons for denial.  Banquet
and event facilities or accessory banquet or event uses that are or have
previously been lawfully in use prior to July 19, 2017 may continue to be
utilized as banquet and event facilities or accessory banquet or event uses
while the license application is pending, unless the city identifies an
immediate risk or hazard to public safety requiring closure, so long as the
application is properly completed and submitted to the City Clerk prior to
January 5, 2018.



   (G)   Each license issued under this article shall be valid for a
period of two years from the date it was issued.  The expiration date shall
be designated by the City Clerk on the license.  A renewal form and any
applicable fee established by the city's annual appropriations ordinance must
be submitted to the City Clerk prior to expiration of the license in order
for the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use to
continue.  Upon receipt of a properly completed renewal form and any fee
established by the city's annual appropriations ordinance, the license will
be deemed renewed until and unless the City Clerk denies the renewal due to
inaccurate or incomplete information, changed information, or for any other
reason that a license may be suspended or revoked under this article.



   (H)   A party aggrieved, including but not limited to the applicant
or an adjoining property owner or tenant, may appeal any decision under this
section to the Board of Ordinance Appeals within 14 calendar days after the
contested decision.  An appeal must be made in writing and submitted to the
City Clerk or his or her designee and shall contain the reasons supporting
the appeal and any evidence that supports it.  The person appealing may
review the evidence that is the basis of any grant, inaction, or denial
during the city's normal business hours.  The city shall send notice of the
meeting at which the appeal will be heard to all addresses within 300 feet of
the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event use.  The scope
of the Board's review shall be limited to verifying the facts supporting a
written decision to grant, not act upon, or deny a license.  If the Board
finds that the facts supporting the decision are correct, the grant,
inaction, or denial shall not be disturbed.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-275.  DISPLAY AND USE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed upon a wall within plain view of patrons entering the banquet and
event facility or accessory banquet or event use area, along with the
approved layout of the facilities, except that the layout is not required if
the license is issued with a QR code that enables city personnel to scan the
license and review the approved layout plans electronically.  All licenses
shall be made available, upon request, for inspection by any patron, police
officer, or city official in order to confirm the information contained in
the licenses.  Within 72 hours of any change in fact, policy, or method
which would alter the information provided in a license application, or on
the license itself, the applicant/licensee shall notify the City Clerk of
such change(s) in writing.



   (B)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to fraudulently make
use of, to his or her own or another's benefit, a license issued to him, her,
or another in accordance with this article.



   (C)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to counterfeit or
forge the license required by this article or to deface or otherwise alter a
license issued under the provisions of this article.



   (D)   A license issued under this article is not transferable,
separable, or divisible, and the authority conferred shall be conferred only
upon the individuals named on the license.  Upon sale, transfer, or
relocation of the facility, the license previously issued for the facility
shall be null and void unless pre-approved by the City Clerk.  It shall be
the duty of all owners or licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer,
or relocation of the facility to immediately report such sale, transfer, or
relocation to the City Clerk's office.  The failure to do so shall result in
an immediate suspension of the license. An application for transfer shall be
in writing, shall contain the same information as required by this article
for an initial application for a new license, and shall be accompanied by the
same fee as required for an application for a new license.



   (E)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person operating a facility
licensed under this article to permit or allow an employee or any person
whatsoever to violate any of the terms of this article while on the property
of the facility, and it shall be a misdemeanor for any person at a licensed
facility to condone or allow any unlawful activity to occur on the licensed
property, whether indoors or outside.



   (F)   A licensee shall be guilty of a misdemeanor if the banquet and
event facility or the accessory banquet or event use is operated between the
hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless the licensee has obtained a valid
after hours permit from the Michigan Liquor Control Commission allowing a
later closing time.



   (G)   Every applicant and licensee shall notify the City Clerk in
writing of any changes or modifications to (i) the information submitted in
the application (whether such changes occur before or after the license has
been reviewed or approved and issued), or (ii) the operational components of
a nuisance mitigation plan.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-276.  REGULAR INSPECTIONS AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All property used by a licensee under this article shall be
periodically inspected by the Police Chief, Building Official, Fire Marshal,
City Development Director, and City Planner, or their authorized
representatives, for the safety of the licensed facility and compliance with
all applicable laws, codes, ordinances, and any conditions imposed by any
board or commission.  A search warrant shall not be required for such
inspections, in accordance with the opinion of the Michigan Supreme Court in
Gora v City of Ferndale, 456 Mich 704 (1998).  It is unlawful for any
licensee to deny or refuse access to the property or to hinder the official
in any manner in the performance of his or her responsibilities under this
article, and such refusal shall constitute sufficient grounds for immediate
revocation of a license granted under the provisions of this article.  The
following minimum standards shall be maintained:



      (1)   A licensed facility must comply with all applicable
construction, building, and fire codes and all other governmental laws and
regulations, including all technical codes, as well as the conditions of any
permits, licenses, or other approvals issued for, or governing, the use of
the facility.



      (2)   The Planning Department may require that a licensed
facility be shielded and screened through the use of walls, fencing, trees,
shrubbery, and/or other materials designed to mitigate sound and light
emanating from the facility or the property upon which it is located.



      (3)   The Planning Department may require a licensed facility
to submit additional information regarding how the licensee plans to mitigate
any potential nuisance caused by the congregation of patrons and/or the use
of speakers, amplified music, televisions, displays, lighting, performances,
or other forms of entertainment.



      (4)   If required by the Planning Department due to proximity
of the licensed facility to nearby properties that may be residential or
otherwise adversely affected by such use, a licensed facility shall post
conspicuous signage visible to users of the facility advising patrons to
respect neighboring properties by not yelling, screaming, littering, singing,
or otherwise engaging in activities that could disturb a neighboring
property, and to leave the property courteously and expediently, without
loitering in the parking areas or outside of the facility.



      (5)   A licensed facility shall employ sufficient staff to
ensure that noise levels within the facility are not disturbing any nearby
residents, establishments, and/or properties, minimizing traffic congestion
in parking areas, and complying with all applicable city codes and
Ordinances,  The facility shall also maintain staff to continuously patrol
and monitor the exterior of the property to address any noise and/or nuisance
issues and facilitate the dispersal of individuals loitering on the site but
outside of the facility.



      (6)   Unless an alternative is specifically approved by the
City Planner or a city board or commission, the ingress and egress points to
and from a licensed facility shall be designed to muffle, mask, or prevent
lights, vibration, and/or sound from inside the principal structure that
could impact neighboring properties by installation of a vestibule,
transition room, or hallway with a sound muffling door at each access point,
or by installing a sound-muffling revolving door.  All ingress and egress
doors shall remain closed unless being utilized for immediate ingress or
egress, or unless the business is closed to the public and employees are
utilizing the doors during daylight hours solely for cleaning, stocking, and
similar business purposes.



      (7)   A licensed facility shall be regularly maintained in a
safe, clean, litter-free, and orderly condition.



      (8)   If applicable, the maximum occupancy permitted in each
separate area or room of a licensed facility shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at the inside entrance to that individual area or room.  The licensee
shall ensure that the number of occupants in the area or room does not exceed
the posted limit at any time.  A server or other person employed by the
licensee who briefly enters and exits an area or room in connection with
serving patrons shall not be considered an occupant for the purposes of this
subsection.



      (9)    All required city, county, and state permits, licenses,
and approvals shall be secured prior to any banquet and event facility or
accessory banquet or event use license becoming effective.



   (B)   Banquet and event facilities or accessory banquet or event
uses (i) that have not been lawfully operating for at least 12 consecutive
months preceding the date of their license application, or (ii) that have
been lawfully operating for at least 12 consecutive months preceding the date
of their license or renewal application but have committed more than 1
violation during that time period involving noise, nuisance, or illicit or
criminal activities, shall be subject to the following additional nuisance
mitigation regulations if located upon property that adjoins any property
zoned for, utilized for, or depicted on the city's master plan for future
residential purposes:



      (1)   The applicant or licensee shall prepare a nuisance
mitigation plan, which shall address the actions that will be taken and
maintained to mitigate noise, nuisances, and disturbances on or originating
from the property of the banquet facility or accessory banquet or event use.



      (2)   The nuisance mitigation plan must be submitted by the
applicant with the license application.  The nuisance mitigation plan will
be presented by the City Planner to the Planning Commission for review under
the standards set forth in the Zoning Ordinance.



      (3)   Failure to comply with the nuisance mitigation plan as
approved by the Planning Commission shall be grounds for the Planning
Commission to revise or revoke the nuisance mitigation plan.  Ongoing or
recurring instances of noncompliance shall be submitted by the City Planner
to the Planning Commission for review.  A license issued under this article
shall be suspended by the City Clerk in the event that the Planning
Commission revokes an approved nuisance mitigation plan.  The license shall
be reinstated if the Planning Commission later approves a new or revised
nuisance mitigation plan or if the City Planner determines that the
noncompliance is otherwise corrected.



      (4)   Ongoing instances of unforeseen or unintended
consequences adverse to other properties or which extend beyond the property
line shall be submitted by the City Planner to the Planning Commission for
review and consideration of potential amendments to the terms and conditions
of the nuisance mitigation plan of the banquet and event facility or
accessory banquet or event use.



   Exception:   Where the adjacent residentially zoned or used property
(i) is developed with non-residential use(s) permitted in residential zoning
districts that do not contain any one family or multiple family residential
dwellings (such as places of group worship; schools; public facilities;
recreational facilities; public utilities; private clubs, fraternal
organizations, and cultural centers; child or adult day care facilities,
etc.); or (ii) is separated from the banquet and event facility or accessory
banquet or event use by a public thoroughfare of at least 86 feet in width,
no nuisance mitigation plan is required if this section would otherwise
require such a plan due solely to the banquet and event facility or accessory
banquet or event use being located adjacent to residentially zoned or used
property.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-277.  VIOLATIONS AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, any violation of the provisions of
this article shall result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction
citation carrying a fine of $500.  A second or subsequent violation of the
same provision within any consecutive 12-month period shall be deemed a
misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the city code.  Any and
all entities, owners, managers, and operators may be issued a citation for
any violation of this article if deemed to be jointly responsible for the
same violation. 



   (B)   Any second violation of the same provision of this article,
and/or any third violation of any provision of this article, within any
consecutive 12-month period shall cause the City Clerk to suspend the license
for 30 days.  Any fourth violation of this article within any consecutive
12-month period shall cause the City Clerk to review the license for
revocation.  The City Clerk shall solicit a review of the operation of the
banquet and event facilities or accessory banquet or event uses from the
Police Chief, Fire Chief, Building Official, City Development Director, and
City Planner.  The review shall be limited to determining whether the
license should be revoked, either for (1) ongoing nuisance conditions, noise,
or illicit or criminal activities on the property, (2) continued violations
of the original city approvals relating to the banquet and event facility or
accessory banquet or event use application, and/or (3) other law, ordinance,
or code violations arising out of the use and/or maintenance of the banquet
and event facility or accessory banquet or event use and reasonably related
to the public health, safety, and welfare of the facility's patrons or
employees, or owners, occupants, tenants, or individuals in the surrounding
neighborhood.  In the event that any of the reviewing city officials
recommends revocation, the City Clerk shall issue notice to the licensee that
the license is revoked. 



   (C)   The licensee may submit a written request to appeal any
suspension or revocation pursuant to the appeal provisions set forth in this
article. 



      (1)   All suspension appeals shall be reviewed by the City
Manager or his/her designee.  Review is limited to (1) finding error in the
conclusion of the City Clerk regarding the number and/or nature of
violations, (2) finding that the licensee has satisfactorily demonstrated
that one or more of the underlying violations was due to causes outside of
its control, or (3) the licensee has implemented significant remedies to
prevent future violations.  A written decision shall be provided to the
licensee within 14 calendar days. 



      (2)   All revocation appeals shall be heard by the Board of
Ordinance Appeals at its next regular meeting scheduled at least three
calendar days after submission of the appeal, or at the next regular meeting
thereafter if additional time is requested by the licensee in writing.



      (3)   Upon submission of the appeal request, the licensee may
continue to operate under the license until the decision of the City Manager
or the Board is rendered unless the basis for the suspension or revocation is
an immediate risk or hazard to public safety or continued disturbance of
public tranquility.



      (4)   When considering a revocation appeal, the Board may
uphold the revocation, reverse the revocation, or modify the revocation to a
suspension with reinstatement conditioned upon any terms and conditions the
Board determines to be reasonably necessary for the safe and lawful continued
utilization of the banquet and event facility or accessory banquet or event
use, including but not limited to referral to the Planning Commission if the
Board determines that a required nuisance mitigation plan should be reviewed
for potential revision.



   (C)   Ongoing violations of this article may also subject the
licensee and/or property owner to the remedial and enforcement provisions set
forth in Section 11-141 of the city code.



(Ord. No. 454, § 3, 7-18-17)



12-278. - 12-279.  RESERVED.



CHAPTER 13:  CABLE COMMUNICATIONS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



13-1.  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights Cable
Communications Ordinance" and may be cited as such and will be referred to as
"this chapter."



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-2.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for regulation of cable
communications service in the city in the interest of the public; to promote
and encourage adequate, economical and efficient cable communications service
to the residents of the city; to promote and to encourage harmony between
cable communications companies and their subscribers and to provide for the
furnishing of cable communications system service to the residents of
Sterling Heights without unjust discrimination, undue preferences or
advantages.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the
following meanings, unless otherwise clearly apparent from the context:



   (A)   PERSON or COMPANY. One or more individuals, firms,
corporations, associations, partnerships or organizations of any kind and any
combination;



   (B)   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.



      (1)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video
programming or (ii) other programming service; and



      (2)   Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for
the selection or use of such video programming or other programming services;



   (C)   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video
programming and which is provided to subscribers within the city, but such
term does not include:



      (1)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



      (2)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any
public right-of-way;



      (3)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in
whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of
1934 (the Act), except that such facility shall be considered a cable system
(other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Act) to the extent such
facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to
subscribers unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services;



      (4)   An open video system that complies with Section 653 of
Title VI of the Act;



      (5)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for
operating its electric utility system.



   (D)   FRANCHISE. A nonexclusive contract to transact local business
providing cable service using the right-of-way awarded by ordinance and
accepted in writing by the grantee.



   (E)   GROSS REVENUES. Revenues derived from the operation of the
cable system to provide cable service as more specifically set forth in the
franchise agreement.



   (F)   COUNCIL. The City Council of the city or its designee.



   (G)   CABLE COMMUNICATIONS COMPANY. Any person or company granted a
franchise in accordance with this chapter.



   (H)   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area owned or dedicated by the city
or other governmental agency or entity for public use as a street, sidewalk,
easement, landscape area or other public place.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-4.  FRANCHISE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall construct, install, maintain or operate a
cable communications system in the City of Sterling Heights nor shall any
person provide a cable communications service or acquire ownership or control
of a cable communications company in the city without such person having
first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form of a franchise
agreement between the city and the cable communications company, which
franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance with the
specifications of this chapter, except as otherwise set forth in such
agreement.



   (B)   No person shall use, occupy or traverse the right-of-way or
any extensions thereof or additions thereto, whether on, above or under the
surface of the ground for the purposes of installing, constructing,
maintaining or operating a cable communications system or facilities therefor
or for the purpose of furnishing a cable communications service without such
person having first obtained a franchise therefor from the city in the form
of a franchise agreement between the city and the cable communications
company, which franchise agreement shall include, at a minimum, compliance
with all the specifications of this chapter, except as otherwise set forth in
such agreement.



   (C)   The specifications required by this chapter are minimum
requirements of a franchise agreement. Additional requirements, including but
not limited to rates, charges, deposits, specifications regarding required
interconnections, studios or other signal origination facilities, number of
channels to be equipped and available for immediate use upon initial
construction of the system, use of channels by the city, schools and other
educational institutions, quality of community access, availability of
equipment to users, required establishment and expansion of service area,
other use of channels and other specifications or requirements of a cable
communications company or system may be established in the franchise
agreement.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-5.  FRANCHISE-INITIAL REQUEST; CONTENTS; FEES; TRANSFER.



   (A)   The request for an initial franchise to install, construct,
maintain or operate a cable communications system in the City of Sterling
Heights or to furnish a cable communications service shall be made in writing
to the Council in such form as may be prescribed.



   The request shall be accompanied by a fee of $5,000, which fee shall be
used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in the
preparation of this chapter, amendments to this chapter, development of
proposal solicitation documents and any amendments and reviewing,
investigating and evaluating the proposals submitted.



   (B)   Upon the filing of such a request and the payment of the fee
as prescribed, the Council shall consider the request and may seek such
additional information as it may deem necessary to establish the legal,
financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to provide a
cable communications service in the city.



   (C)   If the Council determines that the applicant possesses the
necessary qualifications, legal, financial, technical and otherwise to
reasonably assure applicant’s ability to satisfactorily install, construct,
maintain and operate a cable communications system or to furnish a cable
communications service to the public in the city, the Council may issue a
nonexclusive franchise therefor in the city. No franchise shall be issued
until the Council has held a public hearing on such request after due notice
of the time and place of such hearing has been given to the public.



   (D)   In determining whether such a franchise shall be issued, the
Council shall take into consideration, among other things, the applicant’s
technical qualifications; financial responsibility and ability to perform
efficiently the service for which the franchise is requested, including the
prior experience, if any, in providing cable communications systems or
furnishing cable communications service; the proposed rate schedule; the
nature and scope of the proposed system; and the timetables for development
of the proposed system.



   (E)   Neither a franchise nor a cable system shall be sold, assigned
or transferred, except in accordance with this section:



      (1)   In the event of a change of control of the cable
communications company, ("change of control" includes a change in ownership
of a majority interest), the parties to the sale or transfer shall make a
written request to the city for its approval of sale or transfer. The written
request shall be accompanied by information required by FCC rules and shall
be presented on a form as prescribed by FCC rules;



      (2)   In accordance with federal law, the city shall have 120
days from receipt of the information referred to in subsection (1) above to
act upon the request for approval. If the city fails to render a final
decision on the request within that time, the request shall be deemed granted
unless the cable communications company and the city agree to an extension of
the time;



      (3)   During the review period described in subsection (2)
above, the city may advise the cable communications company that a public
hearing is deemed necessary. In such event, the cable communications company
shall have written notice of the hearing and the opportunity to participate
fully in it as far in advance as possible and in no event less than 14 days
before the start of the hearing;



      (4)   A decision of the city upon a request pursuant to this
section shall be in writing and subject to review and appeal as provided in
the federal law.



   (F)   In reviewing a request for sale or transfer, the city may
inquire into the technical, legal and financial qualifications of the
prospective controlling party and the cable communications company shall
assist the city in so inquiring. The city shall not unreasonably withhold its
approval. In no event shall a transfer or assignment of ownership or control
be approved without the transferee becoming a signatory to the franchise.



   (G)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, no consent or
approval by the city shall be required for a transfer or assignment to any
person or entity controlling, controlled by or under the same common 
control as the cable communications company or for any sale, transfer or
assignment other than a transfer requiring approval.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-6.  SAME-NONEXCLUSIVE; TERM; FORM.



   Any franchise issued pursuant to this chapter shall be a nonexclusive
franchise for a term of years, not to exceed 15 years, as the Council may
approve and shall be issued in such form as shall be determined by the
Council.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-7.  SAME-FEES; REPORTING, RECORDS.



   (A)   During the term of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, the person granted such franchise shall pay to the city for the use
of its right-of-way as well as the maintenance, improvements and supervision
thereof and for the regulation activities required by virtue of the
franchise, an amount to be determined by agreement between the city and the
person granted such franchise but the amount shall not be less than 5% of the
gross revenues, as defined in § 13-3(e). The fee paid to the city may not be
shown on any bill or invoice rendered to a subscriber unless permitted by
federal or state law or regulation. The city shall be furnished with a
statement with each payment, certified as correct by the cable communications
company, and an annual statement for the entire year. The cable
communications company shall provide to city only those records and reports
which pertain specifically to cable communications company’s system under
this agreement and only the financial records of the revenues earned by the
cable communications company from the operation of its cable system within
the city.



   (B)   The fee shall be paid as provided in the franchise at the
office of the Treasurer of the city during regular business hours. If the
City Treasurer’s office is closed on the due date, then payment may be made
during regular business hours on the next following day on which the office
is open for business.



   (C)   The city shall have the right, at its expense and upon 30 days
written notice, to inspect the cable communications company’s records
showing the gross revenues from which its franchise payments are computed.
The right of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this
franchise shall be always accorded to the city. Except as otherwise provided
by law, no acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a
release of or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city might have for
further or additional sums payable or for any other performance or obligation
of the cable communications company. Acceptance of any payment shall be final
upon completion of any audit. The books and records shall be made available
to the city in the city.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-8.  CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES; RIGHT TO USE RIGHT-OF-WAY; RESTRICTIONS;
DISPOSAL; DUTIES.



   (A)   A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall confer upon
the grantee the nonexclusive right to erect, install, construct, reconstruct,
replace, remove, repair, maintain and operate in or upon, under, above and
across the right-of-way as existing as of the date of the grant of said
franchise and all subsequent extensions thereof and additions thereto, in and
belonging to the city, all necessary towers, poles, wires, cables, coaxial
cables, transformers, amplifiers, underground conduits, manholes and other
television and/or radio conductors, equipment and fixtures for the
installation, construction, maintenance and operation of a cable
communications system (including audio, video and radio signals) or the
furnishing of a cable communications service.



   (B)   Prior to the erection or installation of any towers, poles,
guys, anchors, underground conduits, manholes or fixtures for use in
connection with the installation, construction, maintenance or operation of a
cable communications system under a franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, the cable communications company of a franchise hereunder desiring
to erect or install such facilities for use in connection with its cable
communications system shall first submit to the City Engineer of the city for
review and approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be
erected or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or
required, together with a map indicating the proposed location of such
facilities. No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor,
underground conduit, manhole or fixture for use in a cable communications
system shall be commenced by any person until approval therefor has been
received from the City Engineer.



   (C)   Any person accepting a franchise pursuant to this chapter and
erecting or installing towers or poles located in the public right-of-way or
utility easements shall, upon written request by the city, grant the city
reasonable attachment space or spaces upon such towers or poles without a
rental charge for the attachment of wire or cable owned and used in offering
a noncompetitive service by the city. The city shall pay any costs incurred
by such person in providing attachment space or spaces to said city,
including all necessary costs or rearrangement of such person’s wires,
cables or equipment and tower or pole replacement cost for a larger tower or
pole, if required.



   (D)   Upon the termination or revocation of any franchise granted
pursuant to this chapter, or should any person wish otherwise to dispose of
any tower or pole erected or installed for use in connection with a cable
communications system or any portion of the system, the city retains the
first right and option to purchase in place such towers or poles as it may
require or such portion of the system for the fair market value thereof as
determined by an independent appraiser. The city shall be under no obligation
to purchase all or any part of the system upon termination or revocation for
cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter. Further, upon the
termination or revocation for cause of any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter, should the city determine that it does not desire to purchase the
system or any part thereof, the franchisee shall have a period of 12 months
from the date of termination or revocation to remove its towers, poles,
wires, aerial or nonburied cables, fixtures or other facilities from the
right-of-way; provided, however, that the cable communications company shall
not disturb any underground conduit, manholes or other facilities constructed
underground. At the expiration of such 12 month period, any property not
removed by the cable communications company shall become the property of the
city to do with as it may choose. Any cost to the city removing said property
from the right-of-way shall be reimbursed to the city by the cable
communications company.



   (E)   In areas or portions of the city where transmission or
distribution facilities of public utilities providing telephone service and
electric service are underground, any person granted a franchise pursuant to
this chapter shall likewise install, construct, maintain and operate its
transmission and distribution facilities in like manner underground to the
maximum extent feasible and permitted by existing technology and conditions,
subject to the approval of the City Engineer of the city as provided in
subsection (B) of this section.



   (F)   All construction, installation, maintenance and operation of
any cable communications system or of any facilities employed in connection
therewith shall, except where inconsistent with city ordinances, rules,
regulations, standards and specifications, be in compliance with the
provisions of the National Electrical Safety Code as prepared by the National
Bureau of Standards, the National Electrical Code of the National Board of
Fire Underwriters, any standards issued by the Federal Communications
Commission or other federal or state regulatory agencies in relation thereto
and applicable regulations of public utilities operating in the City of
Sterling Heights. Every cable communications system installed, constructed,
maintained or operated in the city shall be so designed, constructed,
installed, maintained and operated as not to endanger or interfere with the
safety of persons or property in the city.



   (G)   Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage to the
right-of-way by any person in the exercise of any right granted pursuant to
this chapter shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights, signals
and warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such
right-of-way and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner
specified and approved by the City Engineer, at such person’s expense.



   (H)   Any person owning or maintaining a cable communications system
or facilities therefor in or on the right-of-way in the city shall, at its
expense and without reimbursement from the city, upon request of the city,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from the
right-of-way any property of the person when required by reason of traffic
conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction,
change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains,
water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, the construction or change of
the transmission or distribution facilities of any telephone or electric
public utility or other public improvements. Any such person shall also, at
the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the
city, temporarily raise or lower its cable communications transmission or
distribution wires or cables to permit the moving of any building or other
structure, provided that the actual expense of such temporary raising or
lowering shall be paid in full by the party requesting the same.



   (I)   If any person shall fail to commence, pursue or complete any
work required by law or by the provisions of this cable communications
ordinance as set forth in this chapter to be done in any right-of-way as
designated by the engineer of the city, the City Engineer may cause such work
to be done and such person shall pay to the city the cost thereof within 30
days of the receipt of an itemized statement of such cost.



   (J)   Any person operating a cable system shall, in addition to all
other requirements of this chapter, within 30 days of the execution of a
franchise, file with the city a corporate surety bond with a company
authorized to do business in the State of Michigan and reasonably acceptable
to the city in the amount of $2,500,000. The purpose of the corporate surety
bond is to guarantee the timely construction and full activation of the cable
system. The corporate surety bond shall be for the purpose of allowing
recovery by the city of any and all damages, losses or costs suffered by the
city resulting from the failure of the cable communications company to
satisfactorily complete and fully activate the cable system throughout the
city, pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter.



   (K)   When the cable system is completed to the reasonable
satisfaction of the City Council, the corporate surety bond need no longer be
maintained.



   (L)   The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement:



   "It is understood and agreed that this bond may not be canceled by the
surety nor may the intention not to renew be exercised by the surety until 60
days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a written notice of
such intent to cancel or not to renew."



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-9.  STANDARD OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this chapter shall
install, construct, maintain, operate and improve its cable communications
system in accordance with the accepted standards of the industry in
conformity with the standards of operation or maintenance for a cable
communications system which may be lawfully established by the Federal
Communications Commission.



   (B)   Every cable communications system franchised under this
chapter, at a minimum, shall make available the following:



      (1)   At least one specifically designated noncommercial
public access channel for production and programming on this channel which
may be used by the cable communications company for commercial leased access
or such other programming as the cable communications company shall choose
until there is a demand for use of such channel;



      (2)   At least two specifically designated channels for
noncommercial governmental use by the city;



      (3)   One channel for use by the Utica Community Schools
within its boundaries and one channel for use by the Warren Consolidated
Schools within its boundaries. Channel positions used by the schools may be
changed by the company only for good cause and with 90 day advance written
notice to the School Superintendent and City Manager.



   (C)   Every cable communications system franchised under this
chapter shall maintain and have available for public, educational and
governmental use the necessary equipment and facilities for the production of
programming on the access channels specified in this chapter, which equipment
and facilities, at a minimum, shall include one operational studio for the
production of public, educational and governmental access programs and one
mobile studio facility with all necessary equipment needed for the production
of said programming or in lieu thereof make a financial commitment for
public, educational and governmental programming deemed sufficient by the
city under this paragraph.



   (D)   Cable communications company shall install as part of its
cable system and shall operate through the term an Emergency Alert System
(EAS) (or the successor to that system) in accordance with all requirements
imposed from time to time by the Federal Communications Commission,
including, without limitation, the requirements that cable televisions
systems transmit a visual EAS message on at least one channel (47 CFR
11.51(g)(3)) and that cable systems also provide video interruption and an
audit EAS message on all channels, with the audio message further stating
which channel is carrying the visual message (47 CFR 11.51(g)(2)).



   In estimating cable communications company’s EAS system pursuant to
this section, cable communications company shall:



      (1)   Designate a channel (which may be the government
channel) which will be used for emergency broadcasts of both audio and video;



      (2)   Inform customers of the designated emergency channel at
least daily on at least one channel (which may be the government channel) of
the multi-channel system;



      (3)   Maintain all channel video blanking capability able to
be activated remotely by security measures deemed mutually agreeable by the
city and the cable communications company;



      (4)   Test the emergency override system not less than every
three months;



      (5)   Cooperate with the city on the use and operation of the
emergency alert override system; and



      (6)   Maintain the capacity to permit the city in time of
emergency to override by remote control all channels simultaneously
consistent with federal regulations as stated in 47 CFR 11.55.



   (E)   Every cable communications system franchised under this
chapter shall maintain such capacity, capability and technical standards as
will enable it to interconnect with any other cable communications system
located within the city and in any adjacent community.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 222-N, § 1, 11-4-98)



13-10.  RATES; DISCRIMINATION; FILING SCHEDULES; MAXIMUM RATES; INCREASES IN
RATES; PROCEDURES.



   (A)   No rates or charges for cable communications service provided
in the city which the city regulates in accordance with federal law shall be
effective until the rates and charges are filed with the Clerk of the city.



   (B)   The city shall comply with rules of the Federal Communications
Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable
Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal
Regulation regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic
service and associated equipment, as amended.



   (C)   If subject to rate regulations, after a company submits for
review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment
costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the Clerk shall publish a public
notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the
company, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be
available in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection and copying
during normal business hours.



   (D)   The city shall comply with procedures set forth in 47 CFR
0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by the company in
a rate regulation proceeding.



   (E)   If subject to rate regulations, a company which willfully or
repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed
specifically at the company shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture of up
to $25,000 per day and $100,000 for any single act as determined by the City
Council under 47 USC 503.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-11.  INDEMNITY; PROOF OF INSURANCE; EFFECTIVE DATE OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Every cable communications company, prior to the execution of
the franchise agreement, shall file with the city and at all times thereafter
maintain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise, at its
expense, a performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit from a bank
approved by the city, in the amount of $100,000, conditioned upon the
faithful performance by such cable communications company of its obligations
under its franchise, and upon the further condition that if such cable
communications company shall fail to comply with any one or more provision of
this cable communications ordinance, or cable communications agreement with
the city, there shall be recoverable any damages or loss suffered by the city
as a result thereof, including the full amount of any compensation,
indemnification or cost of removal of any property of such cable
communications company as provided in this chapter plus attorney fees and
costs, up to the full amount of the performance bond or letter of credit,
said condition to be a continuing obligation for the duration of any
franchise granted under this chapter and any renewal thereof and thereafter
until such cable communications company has liquidated all of its obligations
with the city which may have arisen under the franchise or from the exercise
of any privilege or right granted. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to excuse faithful performance by any cable communications company or in any
way to limit its liability for damages or otherwise.



   (B)   No franchise hereunder shall be effective until the provisions
of subsection (A) above have been fully complied with and the failure to file
with the Sterling Heights City Clerk within 90 days after tender by the city
of the franchise agreement, the letter of credit, indemnity agreement, proof
of general comprehensive insurance or any other documents and materials as
required by subsection (A) above or any other provisions of this chapter or
the franchise agreement shall render the franchise null and void without
further proceedings.



   (C)   The insurance policies maintained pursuant to a franchise may
have the limits of insurance raised from time to time to reflect changes in
the consumer price index as determined by the Council upon notice to the
cable communications company. The determination by the Council shall be
reasonable and in accordance with its police powers and requirements for
contractors doing business for the city.



All insurance policies maintained and required shall name the city as an
"additional named insured" and shall contain the following endorsement:



   "It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
insurer until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a
written notice of such intention to cancel or not to renew."



   The provisions of this section regarding minimum requirements of
insurance for a cable communications company shall not be construed as
limiting the terms, obligations or liabilities imposed under other sections
of this chapter or agreement between the cable communications company and the
city.



   The letter of credit shall be maintained at the required amount during
the entire term of any franchise awarded even if amounts have to be withdrawn
pursuant to this chapter or franchise.



   The rights reserved to the city with respect to the performance bond or
letter of credit are in addition to all other rights of the city and the
exercise of any such right or remedy by the city shall not release the cable
communications company from its obligations or any liability or affect any
other rights the city may have, except as expressly provided for in a
franchise or as necessary to avoid duplicate recovery from or payments by the
cable communications company to city.



   (D)   The cable communications company and any contractor hired by
the cable communications company to install, maintain, improve, restore or
remove a cable communications system within the city shall not commence work
under this agreement until they have obtained the insurance required within
this section. All insurance coverage shall be with insurance carriers
reasonably acceptable to the city. If any insurance is written with a
deductible or self-insured retention, the cable communications company or
contractor shall be solely responsible for said deductible or self-insured
retention. The purchase of insurance and the furnishing of a certificate of
insurance shall not be a satisfaction of the cable communication company’s
indemnification of the city. The cable communications company is responsible
to meet all MIOSHA requirements for on-the-job safety. The cable
communications company and any contractor hired by the cable communications
company shall procure and maintain during the life of this contract the
following coverage:



      (1)   Worker’s compensation insurance in accordance with all
applicable statutes of the State of Michigan. Coverage shall include
employers liability coverage;



      (2)   Commercial general liability insurance on an
"occurrence" basis with limits of liability not less than $2,000,000 per
occurrence for bodily injury and personal injury and $1,000,000 per
occurrence for property damage. Coverage shall include the following
extensions:



         a.   Contractual liability;



         b.   Products and completed operations;



         c.   Independent contractors coverage;



         d.   Broad form general liability extensions or
equivalent;



         e.   Coverage for X, C and U Hazards;



      (3)   Motor vehicle liability coverage, including Michigan
No-Fault Coverage for all vehicles used in the performance of the contract.
Limits of liability shall not be less than $1,000,000 per occurrence combined
single limit bodily injury and property damage;



      (4)   Commercial general liability insurance and automobile
liability insurance as described above shall include an endorsement stating
the following shall be an additional named insured:



   "The city, including all elected and appointed officials, boards,
commissions, officers and employees."



      (5)   Workers’ compensation insurance, commercial general
liability insurance and motor vehicle liability insurance as described above
shall include an endorsement stating the following:



   "It is understood and agreed that this insurance policy may not be
canceled by the insurer nor the intention not to renew be stated by the
insurer until 30 days after receipt by the city, by registered mail, of a
written notice of such intention to cancel or not renew."



   Said notice shall be sent to:



   City of Sterling Heights



   Attention: City Clerk



   P.O. Box 8009



   40555 Utica Road



   Sterling Heights, Michigan



   48311-8009



   (E)   If so requested by the city, cable communications company and
any contractor hired by cable communications company shall within 60 days of
such request supply a copy of the insurance policy of any of the insurance
coverage required under this section.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-12.  TERMINATION; REVOCATION OR SURRENDER OF FRANCHISE.



   (A)   Any initial franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall
expire without further proceedings ten months after its effective date in the
event the person granted such franchise has not commenced construction of a
cable communications system within such period, unless prior to said date the
person shall have applied to the City Council and the Council shall have, for
good cause shown, granted an extension of the construction periods set forth
in the franchise agreement.



   (B)   If any person granted a franchise pursuant to this cable
communications ordinance fails to provide cable communications service within
and throughout any area as required under the terms of its franchise
agreement, the franchise shall, on the anniversary of the effective date of
such franchise next following the ten month period during which cable
communications service has not been extended as required under the terms of
the franchise agreement, be deemed revoked without the necessity of Council
action, unless prior to said date, the person shall have applied to the City
Council and the Council shall have, for good cause shown, granted an
extension of the construction of service periods set forth in the franchise
agreement.



   (C)   Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter may be
terminated and canceled without further proceedings 120 days after the
appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over and conduct the business of
a cable communications company, whether in receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy or other action or proceedings unless such receivership or
trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of such period;
provided, however, that the receiver or trustee may apply for a transfer or
assignment of such franchise, as provided in § 13-5(e) if duly approved by
the court having jurisdiction in the premises, and provided further, in case
of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the plant, property or facilities
of a cable communications company, with or without the appointment of a
receiver or trustee, including or excluding the franchise granted under this
chapter, such franchise as granted may be terminated and canceled upon 30
days written notice of termination served upon the cable communications
company and the purchaser thereof, unless within the 30 day period, the
purchaser shall apply to the city for a transfer or assignment to it of the
same as hereinbefore provided in § 13-5(e) hereof.



   (D)   Any franchise granted pursuant to this cable communications
ordinance, unless otherwise allowed by law, is revocable prior to its
expiration for cause as provided hereinafter. Any franchise granted pursuant
to this cable communications ordinance is revocable for cause by the City
Council prior to its expiration where the cable communications company has
failed substantially to comply with any material provision or requirement of
this chapter or the provisions of its franchise agreement. The Council shall
give a written notice containing full particulars as to the provision or
requirement with which compliance is claimed deficient and allow such cable
communications company 60 days to comply. At the expiration of the 60 days,
the Council may hold a public hearing upon ten days notice to the person
granted a franchise. The hearing shall be public with the cable
communications company being permitted to fully participate therein,
including the right to introduce testimony and exhibits and to examine and
cross-examine witnesses. The hearing shall be recorded and at the conclusion
thereof the Council, if it reasonably finds that the cable communications
company has not substantially complied with any material provision or
requirement of this chapter or its franchise agreement, may terminate and
revoke the franchise.



   (E)   Any person granted a franchise pursuant to this cable
communications ordinance may surrender it by written notice of intent to
surrender its franchise filed with the City Clerk not less than 60 days prior
to the surrender date. On the surrender date specified in such notice, all
rights, privileges and authority under the franchise shall terminate;
provided however, that the person shall have a period of 12 months thereafter
to remove its towers, poles, wires, aerial or non-buried cables, fixtures or
other facilities from the streets, alleys, public rights-of-way or public
places, subject to the rights of the city as set forth in § 13-8(D) above.
At the expiration of such 12 month period, any property not removed by such
person shall become the property of the city to do with as it may choose. Any
cost to the city in removing the property from the streets, alleys, public
rights-of-way or public places shall be claimed against the person under the
performance bond or irrevocable bank letter of credit required under §
13-11(A).



   (F)   In the event a cable communications company elects to
overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the Council terminates or
revokes or fails to renew this franchise, the cable communications company
shall do everything in its power to insure that all subscribers receive
continuous uninterrupted service. In the event of a change of cable
communications company, the current cable communications company shall
cooperate with the city to operate the system for a reasonable period in
maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-13.  HEARING AND DETERMINATION OF COMPLAINTS; PROCEDURE; LOCAL OFFICE.



   (A)   The City Council, or any person or department designated by
it, shall upon its own motion or upon complaint of any person or subscriber
of a cable communications company, have authority to hear and determine all
complaints concerning the rates, charges, rules, regulations, practices,
quality of service rendered or refused to be rendered, equipment furnished or
refused to be furnished or any other matter relating to the service or
operation of the cable communications system or any person franchised under
the terms of this chapter.



   (B)   Upon the filing of any complaint against any person pursuant
to the preceding subsection, the Council shall give such person at least 20
days notice of the time and place of a hearing to be given such person upon
the matters alleged in the complaint subject to state and federal laws.



   (C)   To aid in the analysis and resolution of any disputed matters
relative to the franchise, the city and cable communications company may, by
mutual agreement (both as to whether to hire and whom to hire), employ the
services of technical, financial or legal consultants, as arbitrators. All
reasonable fees of the consultants shall be borne equally.



   (D)   Every person granted a franchise pursuant to this cable
communications ordinance shall maintain a reasonably convenient customer
service office/bill payment location which shall be open during all usual
business hours have a publicly listed local telephone number or toll-free
number and be so operated to receive subscriber complaints and requests for
repairs or adjustments on a 24 hour basis. The company shall render efficient
service, make repairs promptly and interrupt service only for good cause and
for the shortest time possible. The interruptions, insofar as possible, shall
be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the
system. A written log shall be maintained listing all complaints resulting in
service calls, their disposition and all service interruptions.



   (E)   The company shall maintain a suitable repair force of
technicians in order to respond to subscriber complaints or requests for
service within 24 hours after receipt of the complaint or request. The
company shall establish to the satisfaction of the city a complaint procedure
in order to settle disputes between the company and subscribers.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-14.  PRIORITY OF USE.



   Any right or privilege granted to any person under this cable
communications ordinance to use or occupy any street, alley, public
right-of-way or public place shall be subordinate to any prior lawful
occupancy of such property. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
limiting in any way the city in the lawful exercise of the police power and
the grant of a franchise to any person as provided in this chapter shall
confer no right, privilege or exemption not specifically presented herein.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-15.  SURRENDER OF OTHER FRANCHISES.



   By the application for and acceptance of a franchise pursuant to this
cable communications ordinance, a cable communications company agrees that
upon subsequent additions of areas to the City of Sterling Heights, either by
annexation, consolidation or otherwise, any and all franchises and/or
licenses held by it to provide a cable communications service or to install,
construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system in such areas
shall be surrendered and any rights or privileges in a right-of-way to
install, construct, maintain or operate a cable communications system or to
furnish a cable communications service in such areas as may subsequently be
added to the city by annexation, consolidation or otherwise, shall thereafter
be subject to and authorized by this chapter.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-16.  REPORTS.



   Upon request, every cable communications company shall file annually
with the City Engineer a current map showing the location of the transmission
and distribution facilities and equipment in the city used by it in providing
cable communications service.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-17.  RIGHTS OF CITY.



   (A)   Any franchise granted under this chapter is made subject to
all applicable provisions of law relating to the city and specifically
subject to the rights and powers of the city and limitations upon the cable
communications company holding such franchise as may be set forth in the
statutes of the United States, the State of Michigan and the Charter of the
city.



   (B)   This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with
all applicable federal and state laws. If the Federal Communications
Commission or any other federal or state entity or court of competent
jurisdiction exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of
this chapter, the paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the
exercise of like jurisdiction by the city. Any modification by the body shall
to the extent applicable be considered a part of this chapter as of the
effective date of such modification.



   (C)   In the event that the state or federal government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit
municipal regulatory authority, the city may, if it so elects, adopt rules
and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law, provided that
the rules and regulations shall not apply to any franchise issued pursuant to
this chapter prior to the adoption of the rules and regulations to the extent
they materially adversely affect the cable communications company’s
obligations under the franchise, including, without limitation, rules,
regulations or requirements with respect to system rebuilds, channel
capacity, system design, construction and performance requirements, PEG
access facilities, support for any such facilities, interconnect commitments,
activation of interactive capability or institutional networks.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-18.  RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Cable communications company shall not deny service, deny
access, nor otherwise discriminate against subscribers, channel users or
general citizens on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin or
sex. Cable communications company shall comply at all time with all other
applicable federal, state and local laws.



   (B)   Cable communications company shall not refuse to hire or
employ, nor bar or discharge from employment, nor discriminate against any
person in compensation or in terms, conditions or privileges of employment
because of age, race, creed, color, national origin or sex.



   (C)   Neither the cable communications company, the city nor any
other person shall tap or monitor or arrange for the tapping or monitoring or
permit, either expressly or impliedly, any other person to tap or monitor any
cable, line, signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any
purpose whatsoever, without the express written permission of the subscriber;
provided, however, that the cable communications company shall be entitled to
conduct system-wide or individually addressed "sweeps" for the purpose of
verifying system integrity, controlling return-path transmission or billing
for pay services.



   (D)   A cable communications company, or any of its agents,
affiliates or employees, shall not, without the specific written
authorization of the subscriber involved, sell or otherwise make available to
any party:



      (1)   Lists of the names and addresses of such subscribers; or



      (2)   Any list which identifies the viewing habits of
subscribers, except as the same is necessary for the construction, marketing
and maintenance of a cable communications company’s facilities and services
hereunder and the concomitant billing of subscribers for the services. A
cable communications company shall not provide information concerning the
viewing habits of identifiable individual subscribers to any party for any
purpose whatsoever.



   The cable communications company shall not utilize the two-way
communications capability of the system for unauthorized surveillance of any
kind.



   (E)   Liability for obscenity, defamation or invasion of privacy on
any access channels shall rest with the person, group of persons or any
organization or corporation utilizing said access channels.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-19.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Council shall establish a commission to be known as the
Telecommunication Commission. The Commission shall consist of five residents
of the city appointed by the City Council. Each member shall serve a term of
three years expiring on June 30. Members of the Cable Communications
Commission shall serve as the Telecommunications Commission until their terms
expire and their successors are appointed. Any vacancy in the office shall be
filled by the Council for the remainder of the term. No employee or person
with an interest in a cable television or telecommunications company as
defined by § 2-152 of this Code shall be eligible for membership on the
commission. Members of the Commission may be compensated at a rate to be
established and determined from time to time by the Council.



   (B)   The Council may appoint ex officio members to the Commission,
including but not limited to Council members. The ex officio members shall
have no voting rights on the Commission but shall act in an advisory capacity
to provide information and assistance and shall receive no compensation for
serving on the commission. The ex officio members shall serve an indefinite
term at the pleasure of the Council.



   (C)   The Commission, in addition to the functions and
responsibilities that the Council may delegate to it from time to time, by
resolution, shall have the following functions:



      (1)   Advise the Council on matters which might constitute
grounds for termination of a telecommunications permit or franchise;



      (2)   Recommend to the Council, after hearing, resolutions of
disputes involving grantees as provided by this chapter;



      (3)   Advise the Council on the regulation of rates and
services and make recommendations on changes in rates and services;



      (4)   Recommend to the Council the general policy relating to
cable television, telecommunications, information technology, public,
educational and governmental access channels with a view to maximizing
services to residents;



      (5)   Encourage the use of public access channels, facilities
and equipment by institutions, groups and individuals within the city;



      (6)   Advise the Council on general policy applying to use of
the Internet, civic networks and government access channels;



      (7)   Encourage interconnection among cable television and
telecommunication systems;



      (8)   Review and report to the Council concerning records and
reports which a company is required to submit to the city;



      (9)   The Commission shall annually submit to Council a
proposed budget and shall also prepare an annual report to the Council;



      (10)   Conduct evaluations of cable television and
telecommunication systems at least every three years and make recommendations
to the Council regarding amendments to this chapter.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-20.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.



   Section headings as set forth in the chapter are for convenience only
and shall not be a part of this chapter nor be used to construe any provision
hereof more broadly or narrowly than its text would indicate.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-21.  UNAUTHORIZED TAMPERING PROHIBITED; UNAUTHORIZED DIVERSION;
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FRAUD.



   (A)   No person shall tap, tamper with or cause to be tapped,
tampered with or connected any wire or device, whether physically,
electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, to any wire, cable,
conduit, apparatus or equipment of a cable communications company without
authorization from the cable communications company owning or controlling
said wire, cable, conduit, apparatus or equipment.



   (B)   No officer, shareholder, partner, employee, agent or
independent contractor of a telecommunications service provider shall
knowingly and without authority use or divert telecommunications services for
his or her own benefit or to the benefit of another person, where the total
value of the telecommunications service used or diverted is less than $200.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly obtain or attempt to obtain
telecommunications service with intent to avoid, attempt to avoid or cause
another person to avoid or attempt to avoid any lawful charge for that
telecommunications service by using any of the following, where the total
value of the telecommunications service obtained or attempted to be obtained
is less than $200:



      (1)   A telecommunications access device without the authority
or consent of the subscriber or lawful holder of that telecommunications
access device;



      (2)   A counterfeit telecommunications access device;



      (3)   A fraudulent or deceptive scheme, pretense, method or
conspiracy or any device or other means, including but not limited to any of
the following:



         a.   Using a false, altered or stolen identification;



         b.   The use of a telecommunications access device to
violate this section by a person other than the subscriber or lawful holder
of the telecommunications access device pursuant to an exchange of anything
of value to the subscriber or lawful holder to allow that unlawful use of the
telecommunications access device;



      (4)   A telecommunications device or counterfeit
telecommunications device.



   (D)   A person who violates subsection (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days
or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the total value of the
telecommunications service used or diverted or obtained or attempted to be
obtained, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



   (E)   A person who knowingly or intentionally publishes a
telecommunications access device or counterfeit telecommunications access
device with the intent that it be used or knowing or having reason to know
that it will be used or is likely to be used to violate subsection (C) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-O, § 1, 4-6-99; Ord. No.
350, § 4, § 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 750.219a and M.C.L. § 750.540f



13-22.  CONNECTION OF VIDEO TAPE RECORDERS, VIDEO GAMES AND COMPUTERS.



   The provisions of § 13-21 shall not apply to any connection to a
television or video tape recorders,  video games, computers and other
similar devices in a manner authorized by the cable communications company or
to any other connection made without intent to avoid an installation or
service charge by the cable communications company.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-23.  PRESUMPTIVE EVIDENCE OF UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTION.



   The existence of any unauthorized physical, electronic, acoustic,
inductive or other connection of any wire or device to any wire, cable,
conduit, apparatus or equipment of a cable communications company is
presumptive evidence that the person owning or occupying the premises at
which the wire or device is located has tapped, tampered with or connection
the wire or device.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-24.  PROCEDURE FOR HEARING AND DETERMINATION OF COMPLAINTS NOT APPLICABLE.



   The provisions of § 13-13(A) and (B) shall not apply to any complaints
concerning any matter covered by §§ 13-21, 13-22 or 13-23.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, § 8-7-96)



13-25.  DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE; NOTICE.



   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or any franchise
agreement entered into pursuant to § 13-4(A), a cable communications company
may discontinue service to any person who is violating § 13-21.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-26.  CONTINUING VIOLATIONS.



   A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day during or on
which a violation of § 13-21 occurs or continues.



(Ord. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-27.  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of § 13-21 shall be enforced by the Sterling Heights
Police Department.



(Ord. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



ARTICLE II.  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS



13-28.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS. 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday to Friday and
9:00 a.m. to 12:00 noon on Saturday, excluding holidays.



   NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS. Those service conditions which are within
the control of the company. Those conditions which are not within the control
of the company include but are not limited to natural disasters, civil
disturbances, power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual
weather conditions. Those conditions which are ordinarily within the control
of the company include but are not limited to special promotions,
pay-per-view events, rate increases, regular peak or seasonal demand periods
and maintenance or upgrade of the cable system.



   SERVICE INTERRUPTION. The loss of picture or sound on one or more cable
channels.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-29.  EXCEPTIONS.



   Nothing in this section is intended to prevent or prohibit:



   (A)   The city and a company from agreeing to customer service
requirements that exceed the standards set forth in this chapter;



   (B)   The city from enforcing through the end of the franchise term
pre-existing customer service requirements that exceed the standards set
forth in this article that are contained in current franchise agreements;



   (C)   The city from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection
law; or



   (D)   The establishment or enforcement of any ordinance or
regulation concerning customer service that imposes customer service
requirements that exceed or address matters not addressed by the standards
set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



13-30.  CUSTOMER SERVICE STANDARDS.



   A company is subject to the following customer service standards
certified quarterly by the company:



   (A)   The company will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call
telephone access line which will be available to subscribers 24 hours a day,
seven days a week;



   (B)   Trained company representatives shall be available to respond
to customer telephone inquiries 9:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight seven days a
week. From midnight to 9:00 a.m., the access line may be answered by a
service or an automated response system, including an answering machine.
Inquiries received from midnight to 9:00 a.m. shall be responded to by a
trained company representative on the next business day;



   (C)   Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
company representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30 seconds when
the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time
shall not exceed 30 seconds. These standards shall be met no less than 90% of
the time under normal operating conditions measured on a quarterly basis;



   (D)   Under normal operating conditions, the customers may receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time measured on a quarterly basis;



   (E)   Reasonably convenient customer service center/bill payment
locations will be open at least during normal business hours;



   (F)   Under normal operating conditions, each of the following five
standards must be met no less than 95% of the time measured on a quarterly
basis:



      (1)   Standard installations will be performed seven business
days after an order has been placed. Standard installations are those that
are located not more than 125 feet from the existing distribution system;



      (2)   Excluding conditions beyond the control of the operator,
a company shall begin working on service interruptions promptly and in no
event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known. The company
must begin actions to correct other service problems the next business day
after notification of the service problem;



      (3)   The appointment window for installations, service calls
and other installation activities will be either a specific time or, at
maximum, a four hour block during normal business hours. The operator may
schedule service calls and other installation activities outside of normal
business hours for the express convenience of the customer;



      (4)   A company may not cancel an appointment with a customer
after the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment;



      (5)   If a company representative is running late for an
appointment and will not be able to keep the appointment as scheduled, the
customer will be contacted, the appointment reschedules, as necessary, at a
time which is convenient for the customer;



   (G)   The company shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least annually to
all subscribers, and at any time upon request:



      (1)   Products and services offered;



      (2)   Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other services;



      (3)   Installation and service maintenance policies;



      (4)   Instructions on how to use the cable service;



      (5)   Channel positions of programming carried on the system;
and



      (6)   Billing and complaint procedures, including the business
address and telephone number of the company and of the Office of Community
Relations, 40555 Utica Road, P.O. Box 8009, Sterling Heights, Michigan
48311-8009, Telephone (810) 977-6123, ext. 102;



   (H)   Customers will be notified of any changes in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible by any
reasonable means. Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in
advance of such changes if the change is within the control of the company.
Notice of a change in channel position shall reasonably identify the
programming service affected. In addition, the company shall notify
subscribers 30 days in advance of any significant changes in the other
information required by the preceding paragraph;



   (I)   Bills shall be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must
be fully itemized with itemizations including but not limited to basic and
premium service charges and equipment charges. Bills shall clearly delineate
all activity during the billing period, including operational charges, rates
and credits. In case of a billing dispute, a company must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days;



   (J)   Refund checks shall be issued promptly but not later than:



      (1)   The customer’s next billing cycle following resolution
of the request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or



      (2)   The return of the equipment supplied by the company if
service is terminated by the company;



   (K)   Credits will be issued no later than the customer’s next
billing cycle following the determination that a credit is warranted.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96; Ord. No. 222-N, § 2, 11-4-98)



13-31.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   A company shall file with the City Clerk a notarized statement
signed by an officer or employee certifying compliance with these customer
service standards on a quarterly basis.



   (B)   Failing to file a certificate shall subject a company to pay a
civil fine to the city of up to $500 per day.



   (C)   A company in noncompliance shall on a quarterly basis file a
statement specifying areas of noncompliance along with a remedial plan.
Failing to file a noncompliance statement and remedial plan shall subject the
company to pay a civil fine to the city of up to $500 per day.



(Ord. No. 222-M, § 1, 8-7-96)



CHAPTER 13A:  CARNIVALS



13A-1.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the inspection, licensing
and regulation of carnivals; to insure that licensees are of good moral
character; to insure that the location of such carnivals is in conformance
with the ordinances of the city; to establish fees for the issuance of such
licenses; and to provide penalties for violations.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CARNIVAL. Circuses, fairs, festivals or other traveling enterprises
consisting of such amusements as rides, games of skill, sideshows and devices
or other temporary structures and exhibitions in any number or combination
designed to serve a special purpose or perform special functions.



   GAME OF SKILL. Any amusement whereby a patron is given the opportunity
to obtain a prize, reward or some object of value upon the performance of
some physical act in a specified manner.



   OPERATOR or OWNER. A person who owns or controls or who has the duty to
control the operation of a carnival. This includes individuals, licensees,
managers, lessees, sponsors, partnerships, corporations, societies and
organizations.



   RIDE. A device which carries or conveys passengers along, around or
over a fixed or restricted route or course for the purpose of giving its
passengers amusement, pleasure, thrills or excitement.



   SIDESHOW. A subsidiary exhibition accompanying a carnival in which
patrons are entertained or amused by viewing anomalies of nature or physical
objects from a perspective which tends to make the object viewed or the
viewer appear other than what it is, acts or demonstrations requiring
peculiar expertise or training, performances by persons and animals
displaying acrobatic or gymnastic skills or any other form of entertainment
which a reasonably informed individual of common experience would refer to as
a SIDESHOW.



   SPONSOR. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
religious or fraternal organization or society or any other entity which
undertakes to promote a carnival and provide the premises for the location,
use and occupancy of any carnival within the municipal limits of the City of
Sterling Heights.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-3.  APPROVAL; NOTICE OF INTENT.



   Any sponsor of a carnival shall obtain temporary use approval by the
City Manager and a license from the City Clerk to promote a carnival to be
held within the city. An application for a license to promote a carnival
shall be submitted in writing to the City Clerk not less than 60 days before
the proposed opening date of the carnival.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-4.  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   The application for a license to operate shall state:



   (A)   The name and address of the applicant;



   (B)   The name and address of the person sponsoring the activity, if
any;



   (C)   The proposed location, opening and closing dates and hours of
operation of the carnival;



   (D)   A list of all rides (including their state inspection
numbers), games of skill, sideshows and devices or other temporary structures
designed to serve a special purpose or perform a special function, including
all booths and concessions dispensing food and/or beverages;



   (E)   Proof of insurance;



   (F)   Any other information required by the city.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-5.  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall forward a copy of the application to the
Police Chief and Fire Chief.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall investigate the qualifications and
background of the applicant and furnish a written report to the City Clerk
accompanied by a recommendation as to whether the license should be granted
or refused. As part of the investigation, the Chief of Police shall determine
whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime involving moral
turpitude, gambling, narcotics, sexual offense or has previously violated any
of the provision of this article.



   (C)   The Fire Chief shall inspect the location to determine whether
the proposed location is free from fire hazards and either approve or
disapprove the application.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-6.  FEES.



   When an application is made for a license required under the terms of
this chapter, a fee shall be paid in an amount established in the annual
appropriations ordinance of the city.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-7.  INSURANCE OR BOND.



   A person shall not operate a carnival unless the owner or operator
shall have obtained security against the owner’s or operator’s liability
for injuries suffered by persons attending the carnival or riding amusement
rides by one of the following methods:



   (A)   By obtaining a policy of insurance in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 insuring the owner or operator against liability for injuries
suffered by persons attending the carnival or an amusement ride;



   (B)   By obtaining a bond in an amount not less than $1,000,000 with
the aggregate amount of the surety and the bond not exceeding the face amount
of the bond;



   (C)   The liability limits of subsections (A) and (B) of this
section may be reduced to $50,000 if there is only one amusement ride which
is designed primarily for use by small children.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-8.  RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE AND OPERATION.



   (A)   No license to operate a carnival may be issued to any
owner/operator unless the person is over 18 years of age.



   (B)   No license to operate a carnival may be issued to any
owner/operator or sponsor who intends to sell intoxicating liquor, beer or
wine unless the owner/operator obtains appropriate State Liquor Control
Commission approval.



   (C)   No license to operate a carnival may be issued to any
applicant who has violated or is associated with any carnival which has
violated any provisions of this article or any state statute or who has
previously had a license or approval associated with a carnival revoked or
suspended or violated the condition of such license.



   (D)   All electrical construction and connecting of electrical
conductors shall be supervised by an electrician licensed by the State of
Michigan or the Reciprocal Board.



   (E)   No carnival may be operated except between the hours of 10:00
a.m. to 12:00 midnight daily. All carnival rides shall operate between the
hours of 10:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight.



   (F)   No ride, tent, booth or concession shall be placed or located
within 25 feet from any sidewalk or traffic right-of-way.



   (G)   No license issued under the terms of this article is
transferable.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-9.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be guilty of a civil infraction and upon conviction shall be
subject to a fine not exceeding $500.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-10.  VARIANCE.



   The Ordinance Board of Appeals may grant a variance from the licensing
provisions of this article upon finding that undue hardship or practical
difficulty may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or
requirements.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-11.  REVOCATION.



   The City Manager may revoke a license issued under this chapter upon
submission of a written recommendation by the City Clerk, along with a
written report by the Police Chief, Fire Chief, Planning Official or Building
Official advising of violations of the terms of this article or for a
violation of any rules, regulations, ordinances or laws, subject to appeal to
the Ordinance Board of Appeals.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



13A-12.  ORDER TO CEASE OPERATIONS.



   (A)   The Police Chief shall close down the operation of any
carnival upon the revocation of the license to operate the carnival.



   (B)   The Police Chief may close down the operation of any carnival
ride in the event of a mishap pending inspection by the appropriate agency.



(Ord. No. 318, § 1, 12-6-94)



CHAPTER 14:  ELECTIONS



14-1.  DATE FOR ODD-YEAR PRIMACY ELECTIONS.



   In accordance with Public Act 378 of 1974, all regularly scheduled city
odd-year primary elections shall be held on the Tuesday following the second
Monday in September, effective with the city odd-year primary election to be
held during 1975.



(1978 Code, § 9-1)



Statutory reference:



   The act referred to above is codified as M.S.A. § 6.1644(2); M.C.L. §
168.644(b)



CHAPTER 15:  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT



15-1.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the planning, mitigation,
response, and recovery from natural and human-made disasters within the
city.  Michigan law authorizes a municipality with a population of 25,000 or
more to appoint the Emergency Management Coordinator of the county as its own
Emergency Management Coordinator.  The city intends to avail itself of that
option and to incorporate into the Emergency Operations Plan of Macomb County.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-2.  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be referred to as the "Emergency Management Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Michigan Emergency Management Act, Public Act 390 of 1976,
being M.C.L. §§ 30.401 et seq., as amended.



   ALERT STATUS.  An increased state of preparedness, authorized by the
City Manager and implemented through administrative policies and procedures,
for purposes of responding to a potential or real threat or event.



   ASSISTANT LIAISONS.  The city employees assigned to assist during
declared events and one person from each of the following departments
appointed by that department's director: (i) the Community Relations
Department, (ii) the Public Works Department, (iii) the Fire Department and
(iv) the Police Department. ASSISTANT LIAISONS will serve their department in
routine emergency management matters and report to the Emergency Management
Liaison during events.



   CONSEQUENCE MANAGEMENT.  The responsibilities assigned to the
Emergency Management Coordinator through federal, state and local laws and
ordinances during events to alleviate the damage, loss, hardship, or
suffering caused by such events.  CONSEQUENCE MANAGEMENT includes measures
to protect public health and safety, maintain and restore essential
government services and provide emergency relief to affected governments,
industries, businesses and individuals. Local mission-essential functions are
carried out through the city departments with coordination from the office.



   COUNCIL.  The City Council for the City of Sterling Heights, Michigan.



   COUNTY.  The County of Macomb, Michigan.



   CRISIS MANAGEMENT.  The measures taken to identify, acquire, and plan
the use of resources needed to anticipate, prevent, or resolve a terrorist
threat or incident.



   DAMAGE ASSESSMENT TEAM.  Those employees in the Building Department
specially trained in property damage assessment.



   DISASTER.  An occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made
cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm,
tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility
failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation
accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight,
drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary
action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or
civil disorders, that requires resources beyond the capability of the public
and private sectors of the city.



   DISASTER RELIEF FORCE.  All agencies of the state, county, and city,
private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees, and all other
persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities identified in
the city support emergency operations plan, or those called into duty or
working at the direction of a party identified in the plan to perform a
specific disaster or emergency related task during a state of emergency or
disaster pursuant to the Act or this chapter.



   DISTRICT COORDINATOR.  The Michigan Department of State Police
Emergency Management Division's representative for the city. The DISTRICT
COORDINATOR is the liaison for the Emergency Management Coordinator to the
State of Michigan in matters of emergency management.



   EMERGENCY.  An event less than a disaster which, in the determination
of the Mayor after consultation with the City Manager, requires assistance
outside of the resources of the public and private sectors of the city to
supplement local efforts and capabilities to save lives, protect property and
the public health and safety, or to lessen or avert the threat of a
catastrophe in the city.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.  The Emergency Management
Coordinator for the County of Macomb. 



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT LIAISON.  The individual appointed by the City
Manager to assist the Emergency Management Coordinator in all matters
pertaining to disaster prevention, mitigation, response, and relief and
recovery operations within the city.



   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.  The Macomb County Emergency Management
Program, established to coordinate mitigation, preparedness, response, and
recovery activities for all emergency or disaster situations within the
county and one or more of its political subdivisions.  The city has elected
to be part of this program.



   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS CENTER.  The location to which key staff members
shall respond, as coordinated by the Emergency Management Liaison and the
support emergency operations plan.



   EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.  The county plan developed and maintained
by the county and the political subdivisions included in the Emergency
Management Program according to standards established by the Michigan
Administrative Code for the purpose of responding to all emergency or
disaster situations by identifying and organizing the Disaster Relief Force.



   EMERGENCY SERVICES OPERATIONS GROUP (ESOG).  The city's primary
emergency planning body, which shall also execute response functions during
events, emergencies, and disasters.  The ESOG is comprised of the operations
supervisors and other staff of Police, Fire, and Public Works Departments
assigned by their respective department directors.  The ESOG advises the
municipal security team regarding emergency services.



   EVENT.  Any situation or occurrence of an alert status, local state of
emergency, or disaster which involves the office.



   GOVERNOR.  The Governor of the State of Michigan.



   INCIDENT COMMANDER.  The individual responsible for on-scene
management of the response to an event, emergency, or disaster.



   INCIDENT COMMAND SYSTEM.  The National Fire Academy-approved system
forming a combination of facilities, equipment, personnel, procedures and
communications operating within a common organizational structure, with
responsibility for the management of assigned resources to effectively
accomplish stated objectives pertaining to an event. City departments will
operate within the incident command system during any event.



   MAYOR.  The chief elected official of the City of Sterling Heights, as
defined and described in the City Charter.



   MUNICIPAL SECURITY TEAM.  The City Manager as team leader, Assistant
City Managers, City Attorney, Community Relations Director, Public Works
Director, Fire Chief, Police Chief, Finance and Budget Director, Emergency
Management Liaison, and Emergency Management Coordinator.  The MUNICIPAL
SECURITY TEAM is convened in response to an event or threat of an event to
mitigate the consequences of an event or threat of an event when necessary
and to strategically plan when multiple departments and agencies are needed
in response to actions that can affect the city.  The MUNICIPAL SECURITY
TEAM oversees the emergency services operations group.



   NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).  Developed by the
Secretary of Homeland Security, the NIMS was developed to provide a system
that would help emergency managers and responders from different
jurisdictions and disciplines work together more effectively to handle
emergencies and disasters.  The NIMS provides a set of standardized
organizational structures such as the incident command system and
standardized processes, procedures, and systems.  These processes and
procedures are designed to improve interoperability among jurisdictions and
disciplines in various areas - command and management, resource management,
training, communications.



   STATE OF EMERGENCY.  A declaration or proclamation by the Mayor
pursuant to the Act and this chapter which activates the emergency response
and recovery aspects of the City of Sterling Heights Support Emergency
Operations Plan, authorizes the deployment and use of any municipal forces
and resources to which the Plan applies, and authorizes additional actions
described in this chapter.  Such declaration or proclamation may be made if
an emergency is beyond the control of the city's public and private
resources.  The Mayor may request the County Executive to declare a state of
disaster or state of emergency as defined by, and utilizing the procedures
set forth in, the Act.



   SUPPORT DEPARTMENTS, OFFICES, COMMISSIONS, AND VOLUNTEER GROUPS.  Any
city department, office, or commission, or any volunteer group, empowered
through the city to be available for any event at the request of the
Emergency Management Coordinator or Liaison. The support departments,
offices, commissions, and volunteer groups support the lead department and
the Emergency Management Coordinator or Liaison in bringing the city back to
pre-event conditions.



   SUPPORT EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.  The plan developed by the county
with the city which will become part of and shall be compatible with the
County Emergency Operations Plan.



   UNIFIED COMMAND SYSTEM.  A structure that brings together the incident
commanders of all major departments and organizations involved in responding
to an event, emergency, or disaster. The UNIFIED COMMAND SYSTEM is designed
to coordinate an effective response while at the same time allowing
individual departments and organizations to carry out their own
responsibilities.



   VITAL RECORDS.  Those records that contain information needed for the
continuity of government functions.  All departments and offices of the city
will develop and implement a vital records protection system through their
department and office directors.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-4.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR.



   (A)   Upon approval by resolution of the City Council, Macomb
County's Emergency Management Coordinator shall be appointed as the Emergency
Management Coordinator for the city, as permitted by the Act and pursuant to
a written emergency management agreement between the county and the city.



   (B)   The Emergency Management Coordinator shall comply with the
standards and requirements established by the Department of State Police
Emergency Management Division, under the authority of the Act, in
accomplishing the following:



      (1)   Direct and coordinate the development of the Macomb
County Emergency Operations Plan, in accordance with the policies and plans
established by the appropriate federal and state agencies;



      (2)   Coordinate all emergency management functions pertaining
to disaster prevention, mitigation, relief, and recovery operations within
the city, including maintaining the county emergency operations centers;



      (3)   Coordinate County emergency management activities with
those of other municipalities included in the county's emergency management
program, as well as with other municipalities, the state, and adjacent
counties;



      (4)   File the necessary paperwork required for funding,
filing of flash reports, and developing assistance requests for the city with
the Michigan State Police, Emergency Management/Homeland Security Division;



      (5)   Work with the Emergency Management Liaison when involved
in emergency management activities that involve the city;



      (6)   Assist the Emergency Management Liaison with the
development of the city's support emergency operations plan to assure that it
meets specified requirements and is compatible with the Macomb County
Emergency Operations Plan; and



      (7)   Review the support emergency operations plan with the
city and the County Office of Emergency Management at least once every two
years and, upon deeming it adequate, certify the plan to be current and
adequate for the ensuing two years.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Administrative reference:



   Requirements for local emergency management program, see MI ADC R.
30.51(e)(ii)



15-5.  SUPPORT EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN.



   The support emergency operations plan shall describe the relationship
between the emergency management program and the city; shall identify the
city's response procedures in relation to the county response procedures;
shall be maintained in accordance with the standards of currentness of the
county's emergency operations plan; shall be consistent with the county's
emergency operations plan; and shall contain the signatures of the City
Manager, the Mayor, the Emergency Management Liaison, and the Emergency
Management Coordinator and be forwarded to the county.  The City Manager
shall review the support emergency operations plan with the Emergency
Management Coordinator at least once every two years.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Administrative reference:



   Requirements for support emergency operations plan, see MI ADC R.
30.51(e)(iii)



15-6.  EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT LIAISON.



   (A)   The Emergency Management Liaison shall be appointed by the
City Manager to assist the Emergency Management Coordinator in all matters
pertaining to disaster prevention, mitigation, response, and relief and
recovery operations within the city.  The City Manager shall also appoint
two successors to the position of Emergency Management Liaison who shall, in
the order of succession chosen by the City Manager, assume the role and
duties of the Emergency Management Liaison in the event that the position
becomes vacant or the individual serving in the position becomes unavailable
by reason of incapacitation or inaccessibility.



   (B)   The Emergency Management Liaison shall:



      (1)   Coordinate city emergency management activities with
those of the county and adjacent jurisdictions;



      (2)   Assist the Emergency Management Coordinator with the
development of the support emergency operations plan and the incorporation of
city resources into the plan;



      (3)   Identify city departments and agencies to be included in
the support emergency operations plan as part of the disaster relief force;



      (4)   Identify city resources and forward information to the
Emergency Management Liaison for inclusion in the city resource manual;



      (5)   Coordinate the recruitment, appointment, and utilization
of volunteer resources;



      (6)   Assist the Emergency Management Coordinator with
administering training programs;



      (7)   Coordinate city participation in exercises conducted by
the county;



      (8)   Assist in the development of mutual aid agreements;



      (9)   Assist in educating the population as to actions
necessary for the protection of life and property in an emergency or disaster;



      (10)   Encourage departments/agencies within the city to
identify and implement procedures to mitigate the effects of potential
disasters;



      (11)   Assist in the assessment of the nature and scope of an
emergency or disaster and collect damage assessment information and forward
it to the county;



      (12)   Coordinate the vital records protection program;



      (13)   Develop municipal standard operating procedures for
disaster response which are consistent with the support emergency operations
plan.



   (C)   Whenever this chapter assigns a duty or responsibility to the
Emergency Management Coordinator, the Municipal Emergency Management Liaison
shall act in the place of the Emergency Management Coordinator during
emergency or disaster events that require immediate action if the Emergency
Management Coordinator is unavailable, inaccessible, or delegates
responsibility due to the scope of the emergency or disaster event. 



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-7.  ASSESSMENT OF AN EMERGENCY OR DISASTER IN THE CITY; FINDINGS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS; NOTICE; TEMPORARY ASSISTANCE.



   (A)   When an event occurs that has not been declared to be a state
of emergency by the Governor, and the event is considered by the Mayor to be
beyond the control of the city's and private sector's resources, the
Emergency Management Liaison shall immediately contact the Emergency
Management Coordinator.  The Emergency Management Coordinator will contact
the County Executive and the District Coordinator as required by the Act. 
The district coordinator, in conjunction with the Emergency Management
Coordinator and Emergency Management Liaison, may assess the nature and scope
of the disaster or emergency, and shall recommend the personnel, services,
and equipment that will be required for its prevention, mitigation, or
relief.  The Emergency Management Liaison shall remain the local
coordinating officer throughout the event unless the Emergency Management
Coordinator assumes control.



   (B)   Upon completing the assessment, the District Coordinator will
notify the Director of State Police, who will notify the Governor, and the
Emergency Management Coordinator shall notify the County Executive, Mayor,
and the City Manager of the findings and recommendations and update all with
the nature and scope of the event. 



   (C)   If the Governor determines that immediate action is essential
to the preservation of life and property, the Director of the State Police
may initiate temporary assistance to the affected area as necessary and
compatible with the policies and procedures of the Act.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   District coordinator responsibilities, see M.C.L. § 30.414



15-8.  STATE POLICE ADMINISTRATIVE RULES; PURPOSE, IMPLEMENTED, CITY
RESPONSIBILITY.



   State Police Administrative Rules provide the means through which the
city may apply and receive disaster aid.  To be eligible for disaster aid:



   (1)   The Emergency Management Liaison shall implement the support
emergency operations plan in a timely manner for an alert status and request
the Mayor to declare a local state of emergency when information indicates
this action is necessary; 



   (2)   The Mayor shall declare a local state of emergency in a timely
manner and forward an authorization request through the Emergency Management
Liaison to the Emergency Management Coordinator when information received on
the nature and scope of the event is beyond the city's ability to cope;



   (3)   When resources from the public and private sector in the city
are exhausted, the Mayor shall request that the County Executive declare a
county state of emergency and if necessary seek assistance from the Governor
for the city;



   (4)   The Emergency Management Coordinator or Emergency Management
Liaison will direct the damage assessment team to conduct a damage assessment
immediately after the emergency and provide this information to the county
who will in turn provide this information to the State of Michigan for
consideration of reimbursements for expenditures during the emergency. The
Emergency Management Coordinator or Emergency Management Liaison may direct
the Finance and Budget Director to assist the damage assessment team leader
and assessor in the preparation of information to be provided to the county.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-9.  ASSISTANT LIAISONS; APPOINTMENT, QUALIFICATIONS, RESPONSIBILITIES,
POWERS.



   The Assistant Liaisons will be appointed by their department or office
director. Each department director shall also appoint two people to serve as
successors in the event that the Assistant Liaison is not available or
requires assistance.  The Assistant Liaisons provide assistance to the
Emergency Management Liaison when available.  The Assistant Liaisons may be
directed by the City Manager, with input from the Emergency Management
Coordinator Liaison, to do one or more of the following:



   (1)   Report to the Emergency Management Liaison at the onset of all
events;



   (2)   Identify and provide for the protection of vital records;



   (3)   Attend training relevant to emergency management efforts and
ensure staff is trained so as to be able to implement assigned emergency
functions;



   (4)   Provide the Emergency Management Liaison with a list of
personnel and resources available within the department and provide a list of
those that may be needed during times of emergency;



   (5)   Participate in periodic exercises to enhance the adequacy of
the respective agency's or department's response capability;



   (6)   Implement the directives of the Emergency Management
Coordinator or Liaison, City Manager, and/or Mayor (or their designees)
during a local state of emergency.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-10.  CONTINUITY OF GOVERNMENT AND GOVERNMENT SERVICES; MUNICIPAL
SECURITY; ESOG RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The support emergency operations plan will provide continuity of
government at the legislative and administrative levels that includes, but is
not limited to, guaranteed successors at the executive, administrative, and
operational levels of the city government.  The ESOG shall be responsible
for strategic planning for municipal security, and for critical
infrastructures that include communications, power, electric, gas, oil,
industry, business, water, banking, finance, emergency services, government,
transportation, foreign-represented governments, recreational venues,
resident population, and special classifications, as assigned to the ESOG. 
The ESOG shall also be responsible for developing and maintaining a city
resource manual for use in emergency or disaster response activities.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-11.  COUNCIL.



   The Council will provide legislative responsibilities in matters of
emergency management for the city and will assist in providing continuity of
legislative functions throughout an event. The Council will also perform the
following activities:



   (1)   Approve and authorize the emergency management budget;



   (2)   When a local state of emergency is authorized by the Mayor,
such declaration or proclamation shall not be continued or renewed for a
period in excess of seven days except with the consent of the Council. The
City Manager will provide information to the Council prior to its decision;



   (3)   Oversee the continuity of government and government services;



   (4)   Support the Emergency Management Coordinator and Liaison in
response to events to a point when the city is brought back to pre-event
condition;



   (5)   Support the immediate coordination and utilization of all
public and private resources in the city during an event;



   (6)   Provide a means through which the city may exercise the
authority conferred by this chapter;



   (7)   Adopt a resolution, as required by the Michigan Department of
State Police Emergency Management's Administrative Rules, to assist with the
application for state and federal funding.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-12.  MAYOR.



   The Mayor reports to the Council on matters of emergency management. 
The Mayor Pro Tem will act as the Mayor's successor when the Mayor is not
available.  A member of the Council, as determined by a vote of the Council,
shall act as the Mayor's successor when both the Mayor and Mayor Pro Tem are
not available.  The Mayor may do one or more of the following:



   (1)   Authorize a local state of emergency based upon information
received through the Emergency Management Coordinator or Liaison on the
nature and scope of the emergency;



   (2)   Attend event meetings and briefings for the purpose of
government continuity;



   (3)   Implement quarantine procedures, through the City Manager,
under the direction of the Macomb County Health Department, Michigan
Department of Public Health, or the Center for Disease Control in the
protection of public health from a known or believed biological threat;



   (4)   Authorize a curfew through the City Manager to be enforced by
the Police Department for the protection of public health, safety, and
welfare with power to enact and maintain a curfew for events that are or may
affect the city;



   (5)   Activate mutual aid agreements or compacts with other
municipal entities in order to secure assistance in the form of personnel,
equipment, or other resources that the Mayor deems necessary to assist with
emergency or disaster relief efforts.  The Emergency Management Coordinator
or Liaison shall carry out such agreements or compacts, as required by the
Act.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   Declaring a local state of emergency, see M.C.L. § 30.410(1)(b)



   Mutual aid agreements, see M.C.L. § 30.410(3)



15-13.  CITY MANAGER.



   The City Manager is executive head of the city government and is the
overall administrative authority during all events within the city.  The
City Manager will appoint a minimum of two administrative persons to act as
successors when the City Manager is not available. After an alert status is
authorized with escalation to a declaration of disaster or emergency by the
Governor and/or the President of the United States, the City Manager will
provide direction for media releases coordinating the Community Relations
Director's emergency functions and may take emergency actions to ensure the
city returns to pre-event conditions.  The City Manager may do one or more
of the following:



   (1)   Appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, and obtain and
distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for pre-event and event
purposes;



   (2)   Provide for the health, safety, and welfare of persons and
property, including emergency assistance to the victims during an event;



   (3)   Plan and initiate local multiple departmental response to an
event within the city through the municipal security team;



   (4)   Appoint, employ, remove, or provide, with or without
compensation, rescue teams, auxiliary fire and police personnel, engineering,
emergency management, a hazardous materials team, and other disaster workers;



   (5)   Send emergency personnel to an event outside of the city as
directed by the Governor or Director of the Michigan Department of State
Police under a state or federally declared event, or when deemed appropriate
by the City Manager;



   (6)   Convene the municipal security team and chair the process
during declared events at a location conducive to strategic planning
capabilities;



   (7)   Inform Council on the assessment information provided by the
Emergency Management Coordinator or Liaison regarding the nature and scope of
the emergency or disaster;



   (8)   After authorizing an alert status, the City Manager may order
a safe evacuation process of the public under the direction of the incident
commander at the scene of the event in the city;



   (9)   Request investigation into the cause of any declared emergency
or disaster occurring within the city through the Emergency Management
Liaison;



   (10)   Relieve city employees of normal duties and temporarily
reassign them to other duties during an event or state of emergency or
disaster;



   (11)   Direct the overall disaster or emergency relief effort,
including the disaster relief force, in accordance with the support emergency
operations plan.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-14.  REVIEW.



   (A)   On an annual basis, after soliciting observations and opinions
from the Police Chief and Fire Chief, the City Manager shall review the
performance of the Emergency Management Coordinator and Liaison and make
recommendations to the City Council.



   (B)   With input from the Police Chief and Fire Chief, the City
Manager shall review the effectiveness of the support emergency operations
plan as the plan relates to the city once every two years.  With the
assistance of the Emergency Management Liaison, the City Manager shall make
recommendations to the Emergency Management Coordinator of any changes which
may be needed.  After this review and the incorporation of necessary
changes, the City Manager shall certify the plan to be current and adequate
for the city for the ensuing two years and the Mayor shall sign the plan as
required by the Administrative Code.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-15.  COMMUNITY RELATIONS DIRECTOR; REPORTING STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Community Relations Director is responsible for emergency public
information and the coordination of all media activities during events and
reports to the City Manager. The Community Relations Director will appoint
two persons to act in his or her absence. The Community Relations Director
has authority for releasing emergency public information regarding the event.
The Community Relations Director may do one or more of the following:



   (1)   Ensure all information released to the media has been approved
by the City Manager and released in a timely manner.  All information of
questionable accuracy will be withheld pending verification, unless to do so
would unnecessarily endanger life and property;



   (2)   Develop and maintain appropriate contingency guides for
carrying out the emergency public information essential functions;



   (3)   Contact local media and determine who to contact at the media,
procedures to be utilized by the media, and the willingness of the media to
air/publish news releases;



   (4)   Maintain a list of media to be used during an event making;



   (5)   Ensure that air traffic control authorities are asked to
restrict air space over and near the event;



   (6)   Coordinate with departments of government and emergency
services to familiarize them with the public information system and their
role in it;



   (7)   Employ the Fire Department Safety House when the situation
requires sheltering for staff at the site;



   (8)   Establish staff to operate the emergency public information
system during an event;



   (9)   Keep Council informed of the most immediate actions and plans
of the city in response to an event.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-16.  THE PUBLIC WORKS (PW) DIRECTOR; REPORTING STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY, AND
RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The PW Director is responsible for all public works related activities
in the city and reports to the City Manager and will appoint one person of
the Department of Public Works to act in his or her absence as the Public
Works Director.  The PW Director has authority for handling the following:



   (1)   Severe storm damage and debris removal;



   (2)   Flood fighting efforts;



   (3)   Ecological emergencies;



   (4)   Winter storm response and snow emergencies;



   (5)   Energy emergencies.



   The Department of Public Works is responsible for but not limited to
the following:



   (1)   Maintaining transportation routes;



   (2)   Coordinating activities designed to control the flow of flood
water, including sandbagging, emergency diking, and pumping operations;



   (3)   Implementing travel restrictions and road closures within the
city, as requested by the incident commander;



   (4)   Identifying evacuation routes and posting obvious signing;



   (5)   Providing emergency generators and extraordinary lighting;



   (6)   Assisting with traffic when and where possible;



   (7)   Assisting with access control points;



   (8)   Assisting private and public utilities with shut-down of gas,
electric, and water when directed to do so;



   (9)   Assisting with transportation of essential goods;



   (10)   Reporting damage information to the Emergency Management
Coordinator and Emergency Operations Center during events;



   (11)   As necessary, establishing staging areas for public works
resources;



   (12)   Assisting with damage surveys for the Federal Public
Assistance Grant Program;



   (13)   Providing appropriate personnel and staff for the emergency
operations center when activated.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-17.  FIRE CHIEF; REPORTING STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Fire Chief reports to the City Manager and will appoint one person
to act as the Fire Chief in his or her absence.  The Fire Chief has
authority for handling the following:



   (1)   Fires;



   (2)   Hazardous material events;



   (3)   Evacuations;



   (4)   Multiple casualties;



   (5)   Searches and rescues;



   (6)   Wild fires;



   (7)   Chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear, and explosive
(CBRNE) response;



   (8)   Medical authority for the city.



   The Fire Department is responsible for, but not limited to, the
following:



   (1)   Responding to events and providing an incident commander;



   (2)   Providing personnel to staff the emergency operations center;



   (3)   Mobilizing and coordinating fire response units from the city
and other jurisdictions;



   (4)   Reporting to the City Manager on the nature and scope of the
Fire Department's role in the event;



   (5)   Providing documentation on costs incurred by the Fire
Department during an event for reimbursement purposes.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-18.  POLICE CHIEF, REPORTING STRUCTURE, AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITIES.



   The Police Chief reports to the City Manager and will appoint one
person to act as the Police Chief in his or her absence.  The Police Chief
has authority for handling the following:



   (1)   All law enforcement essential functions and crime scene
response;



   (2)   Public demonstrations and civil disturbances;



   (3)   Cyber security or cybercrime events;



   (4)   CBRNE investigations;



   (5)   Bomb threats;



   (6)   Strikes and demonstration activity;



   (7)   Emergency public warning;



   (8)   Emergency communications;



   (9)   Transportation accidents.



   The Police Department is responsible for the following:



   (1)   Responding to events and providing an incident commander;



   (2)   Providing personnel from the Police Department to staff the
emergency operations center;



   (3)   Reporting to the City Manager on the nature and scope of an
event;



   (4)   Providing direction and control of traffic;



   (5)   Implementing and controlling an event scene perimeter;



   (6)   Providing protection of valuables in multi-casualty events and
protection of property during evacuations;



   (7)   Providing protection of key persons and facilities involved
with the event;



   (8)   Implementing crisis management at the onset of an event and,
in conjunction with federal and state agencies, throughout an escalating
event.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency procedure, see M.C.L. § 30.412



15-19.  RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FIRE MARSHAL; DUTIES WITHIN THE MICHIGAN
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.



   The Fire Marshal will:



   (1)   Coordinate emergency temporary shelter for victims through
volunteer agencies for up to 48 hours from the onset of the event;



   (2)   Provide for the orderly hosting of evacuees from other
jurisdictions that have been or are threatened because of an event in that
jurisdiction;



   (3)   Direct the Police Department to safeguard the evacuated
persons and property which is located within the city limits.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-20.  POWERS, RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT COORDINATOR AND
LIAISON DURING DECLARED EVENTS; EXTREME EMERGENCY MEASURES.



   During an event, the Emergency Management Coordinator and/or Liaison is:



   (1)   Vested with full authority of Council to provide consequence
management and mission-essential functions;



   (2)   Authorized and expected to advise the Mayor and City Manager
on all matters pertaining to the event;



   (3)   Authorized to deploy Assistant Liaisons;



   (4)   Authorized to engage the Finance and Budget Director and the
damage assessment team to initiate the cost recovery process;



   (5)   Authorized to engage other volunteer or professional
individuals or groups considered to be beneficial to mitigate an event;



   (6)   Authorized to coordinate, with the City Manager, the location
from which staff will respond.  The municipal security team and
individuals/entities from volunteer, private sector, and government agencies
may be notified to respond.  The EOC may be activated for the duration of
time necessary to bring the city back to pre-event conditions.  Upon
consultation with the City Manager, the EOC may thereafter be deactivated.



   The Emergency Management Liaison throughout an event will work directly
with the County Coordinator.  To preserve life and property during an event,
the Emergency Management Coordinator or Emergency Management Liaison may take
the following emergency measures:



   (1)   Commandeer any or all city buildings, personnel, equipment,
and other resources of the city in the mitigation of the threat or action;



   (2)   Request the Mayor to implement quarantine procedures when, in
the opinion of experts from the County or State Health Departments or the
Center for Disease Control, a threat to the public health of the city exists
due to a biological or CBRNE event;



   (3)   Request that the City Manager provide for an evacuation order
of person(s) known or believed to be in danger because of a condition
affecting the city;



   (4)   Provide for the hosting of persons from another jurisdiction
that may be in danger from a situation existing in another jurisdiction;



   (5)   In cooperation with the Police Department, provide for the
protection of key individuals and property through those means necessary that
will provide for the continuity of government and government services from
hazards that threaten the city;



   (6)   Request the City Manager to provide additional funds in
handling an event to bring the city back to pre-event conditions;



   (7)   Request assistance from the American Red Cross, Salvation
Army, or other nonprofit volunteer agencies and/or organizations to augment
city personnel and/or relief and recovery programs in the implementation of
emergency activities.  Volunteer individuals shall be part of the disaster
relief force and shall be subject to the rules and regulations and
supervision set forth by their respective nonprofit agency and/or
organization.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



15-21.  CITY REQUEST FOR DECLARATION OF STATE OF DISASTER OR EMERGENCY;
NECESSARY RULES AND ORDINANCES.



   (A)   When an event occurs in the city and is beyond the control of
local public and private agencies to handle by utilizing the procedures set
forth in § 15-7, the Mayor shall advise the Emergency Management
Coordinator, who shall then contact the state police emergency management
division district coordinator and request that the Governor declare that a
state of disaster or state of emergency exists in the city.  The Mayor may
also request assistance from the County Executive and if applicable, ask the
County Executive to declare a county state of emergency.  If the event
becomes beyond the control of county resources, both public and private, the
County Executive may contact the Governor to declare that a state of
emergency exists within the county and the city.  The Mayor and City Manager
shall comply with any orders issued by the County Executive, and the director
of the Department of State Police thereafter, and shall cooperate with the
county and/or director in matters of emergency management.



   (B)   The city, county, or an agency appointed by the Governor may
make, amend, and rescind ordinances or rules necessary for emergency
management purposes and supplementary to a rule, order, or directive issued
by the Governor or agency exercising a power delegated to it by the
Governor.  The ordinance or rule shall be temporary and shall no longer be
in effect upon the Governor's declaration that a state of emergency is
terminated.  Emergency ordinances may be adopted upon convening a quorum of
the Council and may be adopted after a single reading, without notice, and
shall take immediate effect.  In the event that a quorum of the Council
cannot be convened due to the emergency or disaster, the City Manager may
issue administrative orders that shall have the immediate and interim force
and effect of an emergency ordinance adopted pursuant to this section.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   Emergency procedure, see M.C.L. § 30.412



15-22.  EMERGENCY OPERATORS AND PUBLIC WARNING; RESPONSIBILITIES FOR THE
WARNING AND DUTIES TO PERFORM.



   The 9-1-1 center's emergency operators are responsible for warning the
public and key officials during emergencies and disasters.  Severe weather
events planning, emergency management policy, and procedure setting are the
responsibility of the office.  Implementation of policy procedures and
training is the obligation of 9-1-1 center supervision.  Emergency operators
shall provide for response to emergency management policy and procedures and
carry them out as directed through the Emergency Management Liaison.  They
shall do the following:



   (1)   Assume responsibility for the primary activation of the
emergency sirens under public warning;



   (2)   Contribute to the emergency exercise and training programs
offered through the office; and



   (3)   Assume responsibility for notification of EOC staff to report
to the EOC when directed by a member of the municipal security team.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   District coordinator responsibilities, see M.C.L. § 30.414



15-23.  OBSTRUCTING EMERGENCY FIELD FORCES WHILE ENGAGED IN A DECLARED
EMERGENCY OR DISASTER EXERCISE.



   It shall be unlawful for a person(s) to interfere with, hinder, impede,
obstruct, or disrupt in any manner emergency or disaster relief forces
engaged in relief activities during an event,  emergency, disaster, or
emergency exercise within the city.  It shall likewise be unlawful for any
person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or other means of
identification as a member of the disaster relief forces of the city, or to
otherwise represent oneself to another as a member of the disaster relief
forces, unless authority to do so has been granted to that person by city,
state, or federal officials.  Violations of this section shall be punishable
as prescribed in Chapter 1, Section 9 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)  Penalty, see § 1-9



15-24.  LIABILITY.



   (A)   As provided in the Act, personnel of emergency or disaster
relief forces while on duty, if they are employees of a county, municipality,
or other governmental agency, have the powers, duties, privileges, and
immunities of and receive the compensation incidental to their regular
employment.  If they are not employees of a county, municipality, or other
governmental agency, they shall nevertheless have the same rights and
immunities as provided for by law for employees of the state.  The city and
its agents or representatives shall not be liable for personal injury or
property damage sustained by, or caused by, any member of the disaster relief
force, nor is the city liable for the death of or injury to a person or
persons, or for damage to property, as a result of engaging in disaster
relief activity. The employees, agents, or representatives of the state or a
political subdivision of the state and nongovernmental disaster relief force
workers or private or volunteer personnel engaged in disaster relief activity
are immune from tort liability to the extent provided in M.C.L. §
691.1407.  As used in this section, the phrase "disaster relief activity"
includes training for or responding to an actual, impending, mock, or
practice disaster or emergency.  The right of a person to receive benefits
or compensation to which he or she may otherwise be entitled under the
workers compensation law, any pension law, or any act of Congress, will not
be affected as a result of said activity.  All personnel of disaster relief
forces shall, while on duty, be subject to the operational control of the
authority in charge of disaster relief activities in the area in which they
are serving.



   (B)   As provided in the Act, any person owning or controlling real
estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants the
city the right to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts
of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons or for
any other event function during a declared local state of emergency,
declaration of disaster, or an authorized practice emergency exercise, shall
not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about
such real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other
permission or for loss of or damage to the property of such person. 
However, the person owning or controlling the real estate or other premises
is legally obligated to make known any hidden dangers or safety hazards that
are known to the owner or occupant of the real estate or premises that might
possibly result in the death or injury or loss of property to a person using
the real estate or premises.



(Ord. No. 421, § 1, 11-7-12)



Statutory reference:



   Powers, duties, and liabilities of relief forces, see M.C.L. § 30.411.



CHAPTER 16:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 17:  EARTH CHANGES



ARTICLE I.  SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL



17-1.  PURPOSE; DESIGNATION OF MUNICIPAL ENFORCING AGENT.



   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to control soil erosion and the
resulting sedimentation of the waters of the state by ensuring compliance
with Part 91, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control (SESC), of Public Act
451 of 1994, the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA),
as amended, and the Administrative Rules adopted thereunder.  This chapter
has been adopted under the authority granted by Part 91 of the Act, being MCL
324.9101 et seq.



   (B)   The requirements of this chapter, Part 91 of the Act, and
related Administrative Rules shall be enforced by the Office of Engineering,
which is hereby designated as the Municipal Enforcing Agency ("MEA") under
Part 91 of the Act.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference:



   Authority to adopt ordinance, see M.C.L. § 324.9106



   Designation of enforcing agency, see M.C.L. § 324.9106(1)



17-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ACCELERATED SOIL EROSION.   The increased loss of land surface that
occurs as a result of human activities.



   ACT.   The Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (NREPA),
Public Act 451 of 1994  as amended.



   ADJACENT PROPERTY.   Any property, public or private, not contained
within the application, whether or not owned by the applicant.



   AGRICULTURAL PRACTICES.   All land farming operations except the
plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop production or the
harvesting of crops.



   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION.   A signed written statement by the City
Engineer or his or her duly authorized representative that specific
construction has been inspected and found to comply with all plans and
specifications.



   CITY COUNCIL.   The Sterling Heights City Council.



   CITY ENGINEER. The City Engineer or his or her duly authorized
representative.



   EARTH CHANGE. A human made change in the natural cover or topography of
land, including cut and fill activities, which may result in or contribute to
soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the state.  EARTH CHANGE does
not include the practice of plowing and tilling soil for the purpose of crop
production.



   EARTH MATERIALS. Any materials which are normally part of the natural
earth, including topsoil, sand, gravel and clay but not including valuable
minerals, oil and gases.



   EXCAVATION or CUT. Any act by which soil or rock is cut into, dug,
quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced or relocated and shall include the
conditions resulting therefrom.



   FLOODPLAIN. That area which would be inundated by storm runoff or
floodwater equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood of
100 year recurrence frequency.



   GARDENING.   Activities necessary to the growing of plants for
personal use, consumption, or enjoyment.



   GRADING. Any stripping, excavating, filling, balancing, stockpiling, or
any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its excavated or
filled condition.



   LAKE.   The Great Lakes and all natural and artificial inland lakes or
impoundments that have definite banks, a bed, visible evidence of a continued
occurrence of water, and a surface area of water that is equal to, or greater
than, 1 acre.  LAKE does not include sediment basins and basins constructed
for the sole purpose of storm water retention, cooling water, or treating
polluted water.



   LANDFILL. Any disposal area or tract of land, building, unit or
appurtenance or combination thereof that is used to collect, store, handle,
dispose of, bury, cover over or otherwise accept or retain refuse as herein
defined.



   NONEROSIVE VELOCITY.   A speed of water movement that is not conducive
to the development of accelerated soil erosion.



   PERMANENT SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES. Those
control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion
and sedimentation and which are maintained after project completion.



   PERSON. A natural person, firm, corporation, partnership or association.



   SEAWALL MAINTENANCE.   An earth change activity landward of the
seawall.



   SEDIMENT.   Solid particulate matter, including both mineral and
organic matter, that is in suspension in water, is being transported, or has
been removed from its site of origin by the actions of wind, water, or
gravity and has been deposited elsewhere.



   SEDIMENT BASIN.   A naturally occurring or constructed depression used
for the sole purpose of capturing sediment during or after an earth change
activity.



   SOIL EROSION or EROSION.   The wearing away of land by the action of
wind, water, gravity, or a combination of wind, water, or gravity.



   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PERMIT. A permit issued to
authorize work to be performed under this chapter.



   SOIL EXCAVATION. The removal or earth change of any kind or nature from
a site of gravel, clay, sand, soil or other earthen materials.



   STREAM.   A river, creek, or other surface watercourse which may or
may not be serving as a drain as defined in Act No. 40 of the Public Acts of
1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq., and which has definite banks, a
bed, and visible evidence of the continued flow or continued occurrence of
water, including the connecting waters of the Great Lakes.



   STRIPPING. Any activity which removes or significantly disturbs the
vegetative surface cover, including clearing and grubbing operations.



   TEMPORARY SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES. Interim
control measures which are installed or constructed to control soil erosion
and sedimentation until permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control is
effected, and which are not maintained after project completion.



   WATERS OF THE STATE.   The Great Lakes and their connecting waters,
inland lakes and streams as defined in the rules promulgated under Part 91
and wetlands regulated under Part 303, Wetland Protection, of the Act.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-3.  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER PREREQUISITE TO APPROVAL OF SITE PLAN OR PLAT.



   (A)   No site plan, plot plan or plat shall be approved under this
chapter unless said site plan, plot plan, or plat shall include soil erosion
and sediment control measures consistent with the requirements of this
chapter and related land development regulations.  The soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures shall be set forth in a soil erosion and
sedimentation control (SESC) plan designed to effectively reduce accelerated
soil erosion and sedimentation.  The SESC plan must identify factors that
may contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation, or both.  The SESC plan
shall be made available for inspection at all times at the site of the earth
change.



   (B)   The SESC plan shall include, but not be limited to, all of the
following:



      (1)   A map or maps at a scale of not more than 200 feet to
the inch or as otherwise determined by the City Engineer.  A map shall
include a legal description and site location sketch that includes the
proximity of any proposed earth change to lakes or streams, or both;
predominant land features; and contour intervals or slope description.



      (2)   A soils survey or a written description of the soil
types of the exposed land area contemplated for the earth change.



      (3)   Details for proposed earth changes, including all of the
following:



         (a)   A description and the location of the physical
limits of each proposed earth change.



         (b)   A description and the location of all existing and
proposed on-site drainage and dewatering facilities.



         (c)   The timing and sequence of each proposed earth
change.



         (d)   The location and description for installing and
removing all proposed temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures.



         (e)   A description and the location of all proposed
permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.



         (f)   A program proposal for the continued maintenance
of all permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures that remain
after project completion, including the designation of the person responsible
for the maintenance.  Maintenance responsibilities shall become a part of
any sales or exchange agreement for the land on which the permanent soil
erosion and sedimentation control measures are located.



   (C)   The City Engineer, or a designee who is trained in soil
erosion and sedimentation control methods and techniques, shall review and
approve a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.  The Office of
Engineering shall respond within 30 calendar days following receipt of a
properly submitted application for a soil erosion and sedimentation control
permit by approving or disapproving the application, or requiring
modification of the application.  The applicant shall be notified by
first-class mail.  If an application is disapproved, the Office of
Engineering shall advise the applicant by certified mail of the reasons for
disapproval and conditions required for approval.  The Office of Engineering
need not notify an applicant of approval or disapproval by mail if the
applicant is given written approval or disapproval of the application in
person.  A permit given to the applicant either in person or by first-class
mail constitutes approval.  The permit shall be kept readily available at
the site of the earth change for inspection upon request.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Administrative rules: 



   Plan requirements,  see R 323.1703



   Application review, see R 323.1707



17-4.  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER REQUIRED FOR OCCUPANCY.



   No final certificate of occupancy for any building will be issued
unless the applicant for said certificate shall have obtained a certificate
of completion indicating compliance with grading requirements, the soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan, and completion of all permanent soil
erosion and sedimentation control measures.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-5.  SESC PERMITS, SESC APPLICATION/PLANS, AND FEES.



   (A)   Permit requirement. Except as exempted by sections 17-15 of
this chapter, no person shall remove any earth materials, perform or
undertake any grading, operate a soil excavation site or landfill, deposit
land within the City, nor undertake any earth change unless a valid soil
erosion and sedimentation control permit has been issued by the Office of
Engineering.  A landowner or designated agent shall submit an application
for a permit to the Office of Engineering.



   (B)   Permit application. A separate application shall be required
for each soil erosion and sedimentation control permit.  Plans,
specifications, and timing schedules shall be submitted with each application
for a permit.  The plans shall be prepared or approved and signed by a
registered professional engineer or by an architect.  The Office of
Engineering may waive the preparation or approval and signature by the
registered professional engineer or architect when the work entails little
hazard to the adjacent property and does not include the construction of a
fill upon which a structure may be erected.



   (C)   Application procedure.  The written application for a permit
required by this chapter shall be made on forms provided by the Office of
Engineering.  Each application shall contain:



      (1)   Full names and address of all parties with an interest
in the premises, setting forth their legal interest;



      (2)   A full, complete legal description of the premises where
the proposed earth change is to take place.



      (3)   The application shall contain or be accompanied by a
written statement of the extent, development, improvement, and general
purpose of the proposed operations and the program therefor.  This statement
shall list all types of materials to be removed and/or filled and the
specific area of the site where each of the materials or fill is to be
removed or placed, a detailed statement as to the method of operation, the
type of machinery or equipment to be used, and the estimated period of time
that such operation shall cover.  Any details of similar operations carried
on by the applicant shall also be provided.



   (4)   Each application shall be accompanied by a statement by a
registered civil engineer or land surveyor as to the cubic yards of the
material to be removed and/or fillers and a detailed statement as to the
total volume and extent of the earth change.



   (D)   Application data required.  A soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan which meets the requirements of Rule 1703 and Section 17-3(B) of
this chapter must accompany a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit
application.  The plans and specifications accompanying the permit
application shall also contain the following data:



      (1)   A location map at a scale of not less than one inch to
200 feet, indicating the site location as well as the adjacent properties
within 500 feet of the site boundaries;



      (2)   A boundary line survey of the site on which the work is
to be performed;



      (3)   A plan of the site at a scale of one inch to 100 feet,
showing:



         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the owners,
developer, and petitioner;



         (b)   A timing schedule indicating the anticipated
starting and completion dates of the development sequence and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and
sediment control measures;



         (c)   A certified statement of the quantity of
excavation and fill involved;



         (d)   Existing topography at a maximum of two foot
contour intervals;



         (e)   Proposed topography at a maximum of two foot
contour intervals;



         (f)   Location of any structure or natural feature on
the site;



         (g)   Location of any structure or natural feature on
the land adjacent to the site and within 50 feet of the site boundary lines;



         (h)   Adjoining land uses;



         (i)   Location of existing and proposed utilities;



         (j)   Location of borrow and soil storage areas;



         (k)   Location of all public facilities and services;



         (l)   Location of existing and proposed streets,
roadways, parking areas, entrances, and exits;



         (m)   Location of public and private water supplies,
wells, springs, streams, swamps, or other bodies of water within one-quarter
of a mile of the site of the proposed earth change;



         (n)   Location of any proposed additional structures or
development on the site;



         (o)   Elevations, dimensions, location, extent, and the
slope of all proposed grading (including building and driveway grades);



         (p)   The estimated total cost of the required temporary
and permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures;



         (q)   Plans of all drainage provisions, retaining walls,
cribbing, planting, anti-erosion devices or other temporary or permanent soil
erosion and sedimentation control measures to be constructed in connection
with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the
drainage area of land tributary to the site and estimated runoff of the area
served by any drains;



         (r)   Other information or data as may be required by
the Office of Engineering such as a soil investigation report which shall
include but not be limited to: data regarding the nature, distribution, and
supporting ability of existing soils and rock on the site.



   (E)   Fees. When an application is made for a permit as required
under the terms of this chapter, a fee shall be paid by the applicant in an
amount as established by City Council. The City Council may establish fees
for plan review and/or for inspections made to determine compliance with this
chapter, which fees shall be paid prior to commencement of any work regulated
by this chapter.



   (F)   Issuance.  Upon a determination that a permit applicant has
met all of the requirements of Part 91 of the Act, the Administrative Rules,
and this chapter, the Office of Engineering shall issue a permit for the
proposed earth change.  The issuance of the permit shall not constitute an
exemption from any other permits that may be required by federal or state
law, local ordinance, or regulation or rule, relating to the underlying
project for which the earth change will be undertaken.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference:



   Permit required for earth change, see M.C.L. § 324.9112(1)



Administrative rules:



   SESC plan requirements, see R 323.1703



   Application for permit, see R 323.1706



   Issuance, see R 323.1707



17-6.  BOND REQUIREMENT.



    A soil erosion and sedimentation control permit shall not be issued
unless the permittee shall first deposit with the city, in the form of cash,
a cashier's check or irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the
city, whichever the applicant selects, in an amount sufficient to assure the
installation and completion of such protective or corrective measures
required by the Office of Engineering.  The total cost shall be estimated by
a registered professional engineer or architect and shall be subject to
review by the Office of Engineering, except that the Office of Engineering
shall have discretion on a project-by-project basis to offer applicants for
permits involving small-scale projects the option of accepting the Office of
Engineering's own cost estimate.  The deposit shall be made upon the
conditions that the permittee shall comply with all of the provisions of this
chapter and all of the terms and conditions of the permit and shall complete
all of the work contemplated under the permit within the time limit specified
in the permit or, if no time limit is specified, within one year after the
date of the issuance of the permit.  For purposes of this section, the term
"small-scale projects" shall mean projects involving earth changes for which
a soil erosion and sedimentation control permit is required, but for which
the cost of retaining a professional engineer or architect to obtain a cost
estimate would be, in the discretion of the Office of Engineering, cost
prohibitive, impractical, or unduly burdensome due to the nature and scale of
the project.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference: 



   Deposit as condition for issuance of permit, see M.C.L. § 324.9108



17-7.  EXTENSION OF TIME.



   If the permittee is unable to complete the work within the specified
time, he or she may, at least ten days prior to the expiration of the permit,
present in writing to the Office of Engineering a request for an extension of
time setting forth the reasons for the requested extension. In the event such
an extension is warranted, the Office of Engineering may grant additional
time for the completion of the work, but no extension shall release the owner
from the requirements under the preceding section of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-8.  FAILURE TO COMPLETE WORK.



   In the event the permittee fails to complete the work or fails to
comply with all of the requirements, conditions and terms of the permit, this
chapter, Part 91 of the Act, and/or the Administrative Rules, the Office of
Engineering may order such work as is necessary to eliminate any danger to
persons or property or waters of the State and to leave the site in a safe
condition and he or she may authorize completion of all necessary temporary
or permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control measures.  The permittee
or the person issuing the letter of credit or making the cash deposit shall
continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of
all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city
in causing any and all such work to be done.  Any unused portion of the cash
deposit, cashier's check, or amount collected under the irrevocable letter of
credit shall be refunded to the permittee.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-9.  DENIAL OF PERMITS.



   Soil erosion and sedimentation control permits shall not be issued
where:



      (1)   The proposed work would cause hazards to the public
safety and welfare;



      (2)    The work as proposed by the applicant will damage any
public or private property or utilities, or alter or interfere with any
existing drainage in such a manner as to cause damage to any adjacent or
off-site property, or result in the deposit or placement of debris or
sediment off-site, or on any public way, waterway, wetland, waters of the
State, or storm water management system, or create an unreasonable hazard to
person or property;



      (3)   The land area for which an earth change is proposed is
subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of
corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce settlement, slope
instability, or any other such hazard to persons or property; or



      (4)   The land area for which the earth change is proposed may
not lie within the floodplain of any stream or watercourse (not specifically
designated and delineated by the city as an area subject to flood hazard),
unless the application is approved by all appropriate federal, state, and
county agencies, and the application complies with all applicable city
ordinances.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-10.  MODIFICATION OF APPROVED PLANS.



   All modifications of the approved soil erosion and sedimentation
control plans must be submitted and approved by the Office of Engineering. 
All necessary sustaining reports shall be submitted with any proposal to
modify the approved plan.  No earth change work in connection with any
proposed modification shall be permitted without the approval of the Office
of Engineering.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Administrative rules:



   Application review, see R 323.1707



17-11.  RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE.



   During earth change operations, the permittee shall be responsible for:



      (1)   The prevention of damage to any public utilities or
services within the limits of the earth change and along any routes of travel
of the equipment;



      (2)   The prevention of damage to adjacent property.  No
person shall conduct an earth change on land so close to the property line as
to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or any public or
private property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, or other damage which might result;



      (3)   Carrying out the proposed work in accordance with the
approved plans and in compliance with all the requirements of the permit,
this chapter, Part 91 of the Act, and the Administrative Rules;



      (4)   The prompt removal of all soil, miscellaneous debris, or
other materials applied, dumped, or otherwise deposited on public streets,
highways, sidewalks, or other public thoroughfares during transit to and from
the construction where such spillage constitutes a public nuisance or hazard.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-12.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All earth changes shall be conducted in a manner that will
effectively reduce accelerated soil erosion and resulting sedimentation.



   (B)   All persons engaged in earth changes shall design, implement,
and maintain acceptable soil erosion and sedimentation and control measures
in conformance with Part 91 of the Act and the Administrative Rules, as well
as in conformance with all of the provisions of this chapter.



   (C)   Unless the person preparing the soil erosion and sedimentation
control plan shows, to the satisfaction of the Office of Engineering, that
altering the control measures or including other control measures will
prevent accelerated soil erosion and sedimentation during the earth change,
the following soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
incorporated into the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit
application;



      (1)   All earth changes shall be designed, constructed, and
completed in such a manner as to limit the exposed area of any disturbed land
for the shortest possible period of time as determined by the Office of
Engineering.



      (2)   Sediment caused by accelerated soil erosion shall be
removed from runoff water before it leaves the site of the earth change.



      (3)   Temporary or permanent measures shall be designed and
constructed for the conveyance of water around, through, or from the earth
change area to limit the water flow to a nonerosive velocity.



      (4)   Temporary soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be installed before or upon commencement of the earth change
activity and shall be maintained on a daily basis.  The temporary soil
erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be removed after permanent
soil erosion and sedimentation control measures are in place and the area is
graded and stabilized with permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures pursuant to approved standards and specifications as prescribed by
the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality Administrative Rules.



      (5)   Permanent soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures for all slopes, channels, ditches, or any disturbed land area shall
be completed within five calendar days after final grading or the final earth
change has been completed.  If it is not possible to permanently stabilize a
disturbed area after an earth change has been completed or where significant
earth change activity ceases, temporary soil erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be maintained until permanent soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures are in place and the area is stabilized.



      (6)   All temporary and permanent erosion and sedimentation
control measures shall be installed and maintained according to the approved
plan.



      (7)   Control measures shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the standards and specifications of all of the following:



         (a)   The product manufacturer.



         (b)   The Macomb County conservation district.



         (c)   The Department of Environmental Quality.



         (d)   The Michigan Department of Transportation.



         (e)   This chapter.



      (8)   If a conflict exists between the standards and
specifications, then the City Engineer shall determine which specifications
are appropriate for the project.



      (9)   Compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter
shall not relieve the applicant or permittee from complying with all other
applicable ordinances of the city.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Administrative rules: 



   Earth change requirements generally, see R 323.1702



   Earth change requirements, see R 323.1709



   Standards and specifications, see R 323.1710



17-13.  MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.



    A person who owns land on which an earth change has been made that may
result in or contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of the waters of the
state shall implement and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures that will effectively reduce soil erosion or sedimentation from the
land on which the earth change has been made.  Persons carrying out soil
erosion and sediment control measures under this chapter, and all subsequent
owners of property concerning which such measures have been taken, shall
maintain all permanent anti-erosion devices, retaining walls, structures,
plantings and other protective devices.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference:



   Owner's duties, see M.C.L. § 324.9116



17-14.  MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENT.



   All SESC plans and all grading plans and specifications, including
extensions of previously approved plans, shall include provisions for erosion
and sediment control in accordance with but not limited to the standards
contained in the "Standards and Specifications for Soil Erosion and Sediment
Control" published by the Macomb County Soil Conservation District.  Copies
of the standards shall be available for inspection in the office of the City
Clerk and the City Engineer.



17-15.  EXEMPTIONS FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   A permit under the terms of this chapter shall not be required
in the following instances:



      (1)   Earth changes that disturb less than one acre of land or
which are more than 500 feet from the water's edge of a lake, stream, or
river;



      (2)   Normal road and driveway maintenance, such as grading or
leveling, that does not increase the width or length of the road or driveway
and that will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams;



      (3)   An earth change of a minor nature that is stabilized
within 24 hours of the initial earth disturbance and that will not contribute
sediment to lakes or streams;



      (4)   All other activities exempted from the permit
requirements by Section 9115 of Part 91 of the Act and the Administrative
Rules adopted thereunder, including the logging industry, the mining
industry, or the plowing or tilling of land for the purpose of crop
production or the harvesting of crops.  As used in this subsection, the term
"mining" does not include the removal of clay, gravel, sand, peat, or topsoil.



   (B)   The Office of Engineering may grant a permit waiver for an
earth change after receiving a signed affidavit from the landowner stating
that the earth change will disturb less than 225 square feet and that the
earth change will not contribute sediment to lakes or streams.



   (C)   Although operations under this section are exempt from permit
requirements, the operations are not exempt from compliance with, and
enforcement of, Part 91 of the Act and the Administrative Rules, or the
construction and other permit regulations specified in this chapter and
elsewhere in this code of ordinances.



   (D)   A state agency or an agency of a local unit of government
authorized under Section 9110 of Part 91 of the Act to implement soil erosion
and sedimentation control procedures with regard to earth changes undertaken
by it is exempt from obtaining a permit, but shall notify the Office of
Engineering of each proposed earth change.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference:



   Exemptions, see M.C.L. § 324.9115



Administrative rules: 



   Permit requirements,  see R 323.1704



   Permit exemptions and waivers, see R 323.1705, 323.1706



17-16.  SOIL EROSION PERMITS.



   SOIL EROSION.   If a soil erosion permit is required by the Act, no
operation shall take place until a permit has been obtained. There shall be
compliance at all times with the requirements of the soil erosion permit and
this chapter.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-17.  DRIFTING OR BLOWN MATERIAL UNLAWFUL.



   DRIFTED OR BLOWN MATERIAL.   The drifting or airborne transmission
beyond the property line of dust, particles, or debris from any open
stockpile, working areas, or unplanted areas shall be unlawful and may be
summarily caused to be abated.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-18.  INSPECTION.



   (A)   The Office of Engineering shall inspect all work relating to
the requirements of this chapter.  By accepting a permit issued under this
article, the owner and/or operator of any operation shall be presumed to have
consented to regular and routine inspections of the property for compliance
with this chapter. The consent shall be authority to go on to any property
under permit for purposes of any inspection.



   (B)   Upon satisfactory execution of all approved SESC plans and
other requirements, the Office of Engineering shall issue a certificate of
completion.  If the Office of Engineering finds any existing conditions not
as stated in any application, soil erosion and sedimentation control permit,
or approved plan, it may refuse to approve further work until approval of a
revised SESC plan which will conform to the existing conditions.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-19.  ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.



   (A)   The Office of Engineering may issue a cease and desist order
or revoke a permit upon a finding by the Office of Engineering that there is
a violation of Part 91 of the Act, or the Administrative Rules, or this
chapter, or a finding that there is a violation of a permit or an approved
soil erosion and sedimentation control plan.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the existence or pursuit of any other remedy,
the city may maintain an action in its own name in any court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction or other relief against any person to restrain
or prevent violations of this chapter, Part 91 of the Act, or the
Administrative Rules.



   (C)   The City Engineer, or the duly authorized agents of the Office
of Engineering, may enter at all reasonable times in or upon any private or
public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions
and practices which may be a violation of this chapter, Part 91 of the Act,
or the Administrative Rules.



   (D)   If the Office of Engineering determines that soil erosion or
sedimentation of adjacent properties or the waters of the state has or will
reasonably occur from land in violation of Part 91 of the Act, or the
Administrative Rules, or this chapter, the Office of Engineering may seek to
enforce a violation by notifying the person who owns the land, by mail, with
return receipt requested, of the determination.  The notice shall contain a
description of the violation and what must be done to remedy the violation
and shall specify a time to comply.  Within five days after the notice has
been issued, the owner of the land shall implement and maintain soil erosion
and sedimentation control measures that conform with the requirements of this
chapter, Part 91 of the Act, and the Administrative Rules.  After the five
days, if the Office of Engineering determines that the condition of the land
may contribute to soil erosion or sedimentation of adjacent properties or to
the waters of the state, and if proper soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures are not in place in conformance with this chapter, Part 91 of the
Act, and the Administrative Rules, the City Engineer or a designee may enter
upon the land and construct, implement, and maintain proper soil erosion and
sedimentation control measures which are in conformance with this chapter,
Part 91 of the Act, and the Administrative Rules.  However, the cost of the
work, materials, labor, and administration shall not exceed $10,000.00
without prior written notice to the person who owns the land, in the original
notice of violation mailed under this subsection, that the expenditure of
more than $10,000.00 may be made.  If more than $10,000.00 is to be expended
under this subsection, then the work shall not begin until at least 10 days
after the notice of violation has been mailed.



   (E)   All expenses incurred by the city under division (D) to
construct, implement, and maintain soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be reimbursed to the city by the person who owns the land. 
The city shall have a lien for the expenses incurred.  However, with respect
to single-family or multifamily residential property, the lien for such
expenses shall have priority over all liens and encumbrances filed or
recorded after the date of such expenditure.  With respect to all other
property, the lien for such expenses shall be collected and treated in the
same manner as provided for property tax liens under the general property tax
act, also known as Public Act 206 of 1893, codified as MCL 211.1 to 211.157.



   (F)   The City Engineer and his or her designees are hereby
authorized to issue a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of
this chapter, Part 91 of the Act, and the Administrative Rules.  A person
who violates this chapter is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
punishable by a fine in the amount established by Chapter 1 of the code of
ordinances, except that:



      (1)   A person who knowingly violates this chapter or
knowingly makes a false statement in an application for a permit or in a soil
erosion and sedimentation control plan is responsible for the payment of a
civil fine of up to $10,000.00 for each day of violation, as established by
Chapter 1 of the code of ordinances; and



      (2)   A person who knowingly violates this chapter after
receiving a notice of determination under division (D) is responsible for the
payment of a civil fine of not less than $2,500.00 and not more than
$25,000.00 for each day of violation, as established by Chapter 1 of the code
of ordinances.



      (3)   Civil fines collected under this subsection shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer.  A default in payment of a civil fine or
costs ordered under this subsection may be remedied by any means authorized
under the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, also known as Public Act 236 of
1961, codified as MCL 600.101 to 600.9948.  In addition to a fine assessed
under this section, a person who violates this chapter is liable to the state
for damages for injury to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources
resulting from the violation.  The court may order a person who violates
this chapter to restore the area or areas affected by the violation to their
condition as existing immediately prior to the violation.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference:



   Injunction, see M.C.L. § 324.9113(1)



   Entry for inspection, see M.C.L. § 324.9113(2)



   Notice of violation, see M.C.L. § 324.9117



   Time for compliance, see M.C.L. § 324.9118



   Entry to obtain compliance, see M.C.L. § 324.9119



   Reimbursement of expenses, see M.C.L. § 324.9120



   Penalties, see M.C.L. § 324.9121



Administrative rules:



   Cease and desist order, see R 323.1712



17-20.  VARIANCE AND APPEALS.



   Where it is alleged that there is error or misinterpretation in any
order, requirements, decisions, grant, or refusal made by the Office of
Engineering, the Board of Ordinance Appeals established pursuant to Division
11 of Chapter 2 of the code of ordinances shall have the power to hear
specific applications and may amend or change such order, requirements,
decisions, grant, or refusal so that it is in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter.  However, no decision of the Board of
Ordinance Appeals shall be contrary to the requirements of Part 91 of the Act
and the Administrative Rules.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-21.  ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.



   To the extent that they do not conflict with a more restrictive
provision of this chapter, and to the extent that their requirements are not
already set forth within the text of this chapter, the Administrative Rules
promulgated by the Department of Environmental Quality pursuant to Part 91 of
the Act, as amended and as may be amended from time to time and including all
amendments through the effective date of this section, are hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein.  A complete copy of
the Administrative Rules is available to the public at the office of the city
clerk for inspection.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



Statutory reference: 



   Adoption by reference, see M.C.L. § 324.9106(1)



Administrative rules: 



   Full text, see R 323.1701 et seq.



17-22 - 17-49.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  ADDITIONAL EARTH CHANGE REQUIREMENTS



17-50.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   With a permit or without a permit, if one is not required, undertaking
any earth change or the carrying on of any alterations, modifications, or
changes in geographical or geological structures which shall include all soil
excavation and removal and filling of land or the creation or alteration of
waterways, canals, and the like for either immediate use or for filling or
removal at other places, shall comply with the following performance
standards for sound, vibration, and the like.



   (A)   Sound.  The pressure level of sounds shall not exceed the
following decibel levels when adjacent to the following types of uses:



 

Sound Level
 
Adjacent Use
 
Where Measured


75 dBA
 
Residential
 
Common property line


85 dBA
 
Commercial
 
Common property line


90 dBA
 
Industrial and other
 
Common property line



 



   The sound levels shall be measured using a weighted decibel measurement
(referenced to 20 micropascals) and with a type of audio output meter
approved by the U.S. Bureau of Standards. Objectionable noises due to
intermittence, beat, frequency, or shrillness shall be muffled so as not to
become a nuisance to adjacent uses.



   (B)   Vibrations.  All machinery shall be so mounted and operated
as to prevent transmission of ground vibration exceeding a displacement of
three-thousandths of one inch (.003) measured at any property line of its
source.



   (C)   Odors.  The emission of noxious, odorous matter in such
quantities as to be readily detectable at any point along lot lines, when
diluted in the ratio of one volume of odorous air to four or more volumes of
clean air, or as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond lot lines, is
prohibited.



   (D)   Gases.  The escape of or emission of any gas in
concentrations so as to be injurious, destructive, or explosive shall be
unlawful and may be summarily caused to be abated.



   (E)   Glare or heat.  Any operation producing intense glare or heat
shall be performed within an enclosure so as to completely obscure and shield
such operation from direct view from any point along the lot line, except
during the period of construction of the facilities to be used and occupied.



   (F)   Light.  Exterior lighting shall be so installed that the
surface of the source of light shall not be visible from any bedroom window
and shall be so arranged as far as practical to reflect light away from any
residential use and in no case shall more than one footcandle power of light
cross a lot line five feet above the ground in a residential district.



   (G)   Smoke, dust, dirt, and fly ash.  It shall be unlawful to
discharge into the atmosphere from any single source of emission whatsoever
any air contaminates for a period or periods aggregating more than four
minutes in any one-half hour which are:



      (1)   As dark or darker in shade as that designated as No. 2
on the Ringelmann Chart as published by the United States Bureau of Mines
which is made a part of this article by reference.  However, the umbrascope
readings of smoke densities may be used when correlated with the Ringelmann
Chart.



   A Ringelmann Chart shall be on file in the office of the City Engineer.



      (2)   Of such opacity as to obscure an observer's view to a
degree equal to or greater than the smoke described in subsection (1) above,
except when the emission consists only of water vapor.  The quantity of
gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed 20 one-hundredths grains per
cubic foot of the carrying medium at a temperature of 500°F.



   (H)   Roads.  Roads on landfill and soil excavation sites shall be
designed and constructed so that traffic will flow smoothly and will not be
interrupted by inclement weather.  Nonpaved roads between the site and the
nearest paved roads and paved roads off-site within one-quarter mile of the
site entrance which are used by vehicles and/or equipment traveling to or
from the site and all roads on-site shall not be used unless they are treated
by sufficient oil, water, and/or chemical substance, whichever would be
appropriate for the surface and frequently enough so that they are dustfree
whenever used by vehicles and/or equipment.  Roads on-site shall mean roads
designated on approved plans, and such other areas used by vehicles and/or
equipment for travel on a regular basis, other than for travel on an
infrequent basis necessitated by the operation of the landfill such as trucks
and/or equipment going to and from a regular course of travel to the area
which is currently being filled.



   (I)   Mud, dirt, clay, and the like on public roads.  The owner
and/or permit holder of any site where there is soil removal and/or any
filling shall take whatever steps are necessary to avoid any motor vehicle
carrying or tracking onto any public right-of-way from the site any sediment,
mud, dirt, clay, refuse, and the like. If mud, dirt, clay, refuse, and the
like is carried or tracked onto a public right-of-way and it does or might
constitute a nuisance or hazard to public safety, the owner and/or permit
holder shall clean the said right-of-way when and as often as is necessary,
presuming weather conditions permit.  In any case, an owner and/or permit
holder shall not leave any such debris on a public right-of-way after the end
of any working day.  If notified during a working day by the city of a
condition which requires cleaning, the matter shall be taken care of within
one hour, weather permitting.  If a nuisance or hazardous condition is left
after a working day or not cleaned up within the one hour after receiving a
request from the city and weather does not prevent the cleanup, the city may
issue an ordinance complaint for the violation of this section due to the
allowance of the condition to remain on the highway and/or clean the
right-of-way and charge the owner and/or permit holder with the cost thereof,
which may be collected in any court having general jurisdiction.



   (J)   Hours of operation.  Hours of operation shall be 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer.  No operation
shall be permitted on Sundays and legal holidays.  In emergency situations
this time period may be modified by the City Engineer, provided such
emergency order shall not be effective for more than 72 hours.



   (K)   Drainage.  Natural drainage shall not be blocked, diverted,
or altered in such a manner as to cause the natural water flow to back up
onto adjacent property or to flow in a different course or rate of flow upon
leaving the property upon which the blocking, diversion, or alteration
occurs, unless an application is made and a permit is issued by the City
Engineer pursuant to plans which provide for a drainage flow which will not
be detrimental to surrounding properties.  No area designated for, and/or
used as a drainage retention area, shall be altered, filled in, abandoned, or
used for other purposes, unless it is done pursuant to a permit issued under
this subparagraph.  A permit shall be required under this subparagraph
notwithstanding that a permit is not otherwise required by this article. 
Permit requirements and procedure shall be as adopted by the City Council,
from time to time, by resolution.



   (L)   Floodplain, watercourse, and wetlands.  There shall be no
excavation, soil removal, filling, or depositing of materials in any
floodplain, watercourse, and/or wetlands, said terms being defined by the
city zoning ordinance, without a permit, if required.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



17-51.  EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Setbacks.  No cut or excavation shall be closer than 100 feet
from the nearest street, highway or alley right-of-way line, nor from the
nearest perimeter property line; provided, however, that the Office of
Engineering may prescribe more strict requirements in order to give
sublateral support to surrounding property where swell or geographic
conditions warrant it.



   (B)   Standing water.  No soil, sand, clay, gravel, or other
similar material shall be removed in such a manner as to cause water to stand
or accumulate or to result in a place of danger or menace to the public
health or safety.  The premises shall at all times be graded so that surface
water drainage is not interfered with.  Where removal or grading operations
result in a body of water forming, the owner or operator of the quarry shall
erect "Keep Out - Danger" signs on the required fence around the excavation
not more than 200 feet apart.



   (C)   Fencing.  Where an excavation, subject to this article, is in
excess of five feet in depth, the permit holder shall erect a fence around
the perimeter of the site of at least six feet in height of wire to prevent
unauthorized access to the site.  Any gates required shall be kept locked
when operations are not carried on.



   (D)   Topsoil replacement.  Whenever topsoil exists suitable for
growing vegetation at the time the operations begin, a sufficient quantity of
the existing topsoil shall be stockpiled on said site so that the entire
site, when excavation operations are completed, may be recovered with a
minimum of four inches of topsoil.  The replacement of such topsoil shall be
made immediately following the termination of the excavation operation.  In
the event, however, that such operations continue over a period of time
greater than 30 days, the operator shall replace the stored topsoil over the
stripped area as he or she progresses.  The replacement of the topsoil shall
be in a manner suitable for growing vegetation.



   (E)    Slopes.  The slopes of the banks of the excavation shall in
no event exceed a minimum ratio of three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical, and where ponded water results from the operation, the slope must
be maintained and extended into the water to a depth of five feet.  Suitable
vegetation shall be planted on all finished slopes to deter erosion.



(Ord. No. 384 § 1, 8-15-06)



CHAPTER 18:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 19:  FENCES



19-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Sterling
Heights Fence Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79)



19-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ADJACENT PROPERTY OWNER. Any person whose property is adjacent to or
immediately across from the proposed location of a sight-obscuring fence or
privacy screen.



   CONSTRUCTION SITE BARRIER. A structure erected on a temporary basis to
protect a construction site from vandalism and unauthorized entry.



   FENCE. A structure erected for the purpose of separating properties or
enclosing or protecting the property within its perimeter. A FENCE shall not
include construction site barriers, landscape treatments or privacy screens
as defined herein.



   LANDSCAPE TREATMENT. A non-sight-obscuring, decorative wooden, split
rail or metal structure used to enhance, accent or protect the landscaping of
the sate.



   PRIVACY SCREEN. A non-sight-obscuring decorative structure, erected
adjacent to or around a patio, deck, court yard or swimming pool designed to
screen the area behind it or within its confines from observation by persons
outside its perimeter.



   SIGHT-OBSCURING. Opaque or having such qualities as to constitute a
complete visual barrier to persons outside the perimeter of the
sight-obscuring object. A fence which partially obscures sight shall not be
considered sight-obscuring if the distance or open space between boards,
slats, rails, stanchions or balusters (which shall not exceed four inches in
width) equals or exceeds three inches when viewed and measured at 90 degree
angles. (See Figure 1).



(1978 Code, § 12-2; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 211-D, § 1,
11-4-92)



19-3.  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct
or cause to be constructed any fence or privacy screen upon any property
within the limits of the City of Sterling Heights without first having
obtained a permit therefor in the manner hereinafter provided. The owner of
the property, as determined by the records of the Assessment Department of
the City of Sterling Heights, shall be responsible for obtaining the permit,
unless the owner can affirmatively demonstrate that he or she has hired a
contractor to erect the fence or privacy screen. If a contractor has been
hired to erect the fence or privacy screen, then such person, firm or
corporation shall be responsible for obtaining the permit.



(1978 Code, § 12-3; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79) Penalty, see § 1-9



19-4.  APPLICATION AND FEE.



   Any person desiring to erect, build or construct, or cause to be
erected, built or constructed, a fence or privacy screen upon property in the
City of Sterling Heights shall first apply to the Building Department for a
permit and shall pay a fee as set forth in the annual appropriations
ordinance. A permit shall be issued by the Building Department only after it
has reviewed the completed application and has determined that the proposed
fence or privacy screen complies with all city ordinances and state law.



(1978 Code, § 12-4; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 388, § 11, 1-3-07)



19-5.  FENCE AND PRIVACY SCREEN CONSTRUCTION.



   All fences and privacy screens shall be of an ornamental type,
constructed of either metal, ornamental 9 to 11½ gauge wire, wrought iron,
wood or other durable ornamental material similar in nature and meeting
performance standard criteria set forth in the Building Code. A decorative
fence or privacy screen constructed of any of the preceding materials shall
be permitted, provided the Building Official determines that the proposed
fence is of structurally sound construction. All supporting posts,
cross-members and protruding bolts, screws and/or hardware of sight-obscuring
fences and privacy screens shall be inside the lot and face toward the
interior of the property of the person who erects, constructs or causes to
have constructed the sight-obscuring fence or privacy screen. All fences
abutting a public street shall be erected with the supporting posts,
cross-members, screws and/or hardware facing the property whose owner is
responsible for securing the permit. In addition, masonry pillars used in
conjunction with a fence made of approved materials shall be permitted upon
the same terms and conditions as the fence itself.



   In appropriate circumstances a masonry wall may be permitted upon terms
and conditions set by the Board of Ordinance Appeals.



(1978 Code, § 12-5; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 211-C, § 1,
11-5-80; Ord. No. 211-D, § 2, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 211-E, § 1, 11-4-98; Ord.
No. 211-F, § 1, 11-3-99)



19-6.  LANDSCAPE TREATMENTS.



   Landscape treatments as defined herein shall be permitted provided that
they do not exceed three feet in height, 32 feet in total length, 16 feet in
one continuous direction and are erected at least one foot from the sidewalk.



(1978 Code, § 12-6; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79)



19-7.  PRIVACY SCREENS.



   Privacy screens are permitted in the rear yard provided that they do
not exceed six feet in height and are located no closer than three feet from
any lot line. Privacy screens are not permitted in the front yard.



(1978 Code, § 12-7; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79)



19-8.  FENCE LOCATION.



   (A)   Interior lots. A fence, including one of sight-obscuring
design, may be erected upon any side or rear lot line and along the front
yard setback line, provided the fence is not less than three feet nor more
than six feet above grade level at any location, and provided further that
adequate access for firefighting is provided. Fences are not permitted to
extend into the front yard.



   (B)   Corner lots. The following regulations as to height and
placement of fences shall apply on corner lots.



      (1)   Sight-obscuring fences. Except as provided in this
section, a sight-obscuring fence of not less than three feet nor more than
six feet above grade level in any location may be erected upon any side or
rear lot line, provided that such fence does not encroach into the required
front yard. In addition, a sight-obscuring fence of such size may project not
more than ten feet into the required front yard which would be a side yard if
it were an interior lot. Adequate access for firefighting must be provided.



      (2)   Non-sight-obscuring fences. Except as provided in
subparagraph (3), non-sight-obscuring fences of not less than three feet nor
more than six feet above grade level in any location may be erected upon any
side or rear lot line and along any front building line, provided the fence
does not encroach into the required front yard, and provided further that
adequate access for firefighting is provided. Non-sight-obscuring fences of
not less than three feet nor more than four feet above grade level in any
location may be erected in the required front yard which would be a side yard
if it were an interior lot.



      (3)   Adjacent rear yards. Where the rear yards of two corner
lots are immediately adjacent to the side yard of an interior lot, fences may
not be erected within the required front yard of either or both lots which
would be the required side yard if those corner lots were interior lots.
Except as provided above, fences shall not be permitted to project into the
front yard.



(1978 Code, § 12-8; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 211-A, § 1,
12-11-79; Ord. No. 211-D, § 3, 11-4-92; Ord. No. 211-F, § 2, 11-3-99)



19-9.  BARBED WIRE FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
build or construct, or cause to be erected, built or constructed, a barbed
wire fence partially or wholly around any property, street, alley, lane or
public highway or in front of any public place or space. Furthermore, fences
with sharp or pointed tops, affixed spikes, projecting nails or other pointed
instruments of any kind or description are prohibited.



(1978 Code, § 12-9; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79) Penalty, see § 1-9



19-10.  ELECTRICAL FENCES.



   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect,
build, construct or maintain any fence charged or connected with an
electrical current in such manner as to transmit such current to persons,
animals or things which may come in contact with such charged fence.



(1978 Code, § 12-10; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79) Penalty, see § 1-9



19-11.  APPEALS AND VARIANCES TO FENCE ORDINANCE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Generally. The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the
authority to hear and decide appeals from and review any order requirement,
decision or determination made by any administrative official charged with
enforcing or administering the terms of this chapter. The Board of Ordinance
Appeals shall have the authority upon appeal in specific cases to authorize
such variance or modification in the provisions of this chapter with such
conditions and safeguards as it may determine, as may be in harmony with the
spirit of this chapter and so that public safety and welfare be secured and
substantial justice done. No such variance or modification of the provisions
of this chapter shall be granted unless it appears by a preponderance of the
evidence that all of the following facts and conditions exist:



      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to
other properties in the city;



      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in
the vicinity;



      (3)   The granting of such variance or modification will not
be detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the property
or improvements in the vicinity of the property;



      (4)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect
the purposes or objectives of any master plan of the city.



   Notice of the meeting at which the request for variance shall be
considered shall be given to all property owners whose property abuts the
property for which the variance is sought, at least five days prior to the
date at which the request is to be considered. If the variance is approved,
the property owner shall file a notice of variance with the County Register
of Deeds relating to the property.



   The decision of the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall be final after the
expiration of ten working days. Any requests for reconsideration by the Board
shall be filed in writing with the Board within ten working days after the
date that the decision is rendered and shall be based upon new information
not presented at the hearing. A person may not file a new application based
upon the same facts until the expiration of one year after the Board’s
decision is rendered.



   (B)   Appearance fee. The City Council may set a fee, in the annual
appropriations ordinance, for applicants to appear before the Board of
Ordinance Appeals requesting an appeal or a variance to the requirements of
this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 12-11; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 279, § 4,
10-3-89; Ord. No. 211-D, § 4, 11-9-92; Ord. No. 388, § 12, 1-3-07)



19-12.  ENCROACHMENT.



   All fences shall be built by the party desiring the same so as not to
have any part of the fence encroaching upon adjoining property. All fences
shall be erected so that no part of the fence shall encroach upon adjacent
property. The property owner who is erecting the fence (or having it erected)
shall be responsible for determining the location of property lines.



(1978 Code, § 12-12; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 211-D, § 5,
11-9-92)



19-13.  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER ORDINANCES AND STATE LAW.



   All fences shall comply with the relevant sections of the zoning
ordinance, all other ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights and all
applicable state law.



(1978 Code, § 12-13; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79)



Cross reference:



   Corner clearance, see zoning ordinance § 28.03;



19-14.  DENIAL OF RESPONSIBILITY OF CITY.



   The City of Sterling Heights shall not be responsible for the
enforcement of any agreement relative to mutual or separate payment for the
cost of construction of fences, nor shall the city be responsible for the
determination of the location of any fence to be erected, built or
constructed on a lot line.



(1978 Code, § 12-14; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79)



19-15.  MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR.



   (A)   Any person who erects, builds or constructs any fence or
privacy screen upon property which such person owns or leases shall be
responsible for the repair, upkeep and maintenance of the fence or privacy
screen and any area adjacent thereto.



   (B)   Any person who contracts with another or causes another to
erect, build or construct a fence or privacy screen shall be responsible for
the repair, upkeep and maintenance of that fence or privacy screen and any
area adjacent thereto.



   (C)   Any person who owns property upon which a fence or privacy
screen has been constructed by a previous owner shall be responsible for the
care, upkeep and maintenance of the fence or privacy screen. If a previously
constructed fence is located upon a lot line, each successive owner of the
fence shall be responsible for its care, upkeep and maintenance. If ownership
of the fence located upon a lot line is joint or cannot be determined, then
each party owning property adjacent to the fence shall be responsible for the
care, upkeep and maintenance of the fence facing his or her property. For
purposes of this paragraph, the owner of a fence shall be deemed to be any
person, persons or their successors who purchase or otherwise acquire the
property from the person who originally erected or caused a fence to be
erected thereon.



(1978 Code, § 12-15; Ord. No. 211, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 211-D, § 6,
11-9-92)



19-16.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by
the Building Official or code enforcement official of the city, or their
designates, as determined by the City Manager.



(Ord. No. 211-D, § 7, 11-9-92)




FIGURE 1
Click to view image




CHAPTER 20:  FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



20-1-20-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  FIRE PREVENTION CODE



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



20-21.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "Fire Prevention
Code of the City of Sterling Heights."



(1978 Code, § 13-21; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04)



20-22.  INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE ADOPTED.



   A certain document, two copies of which are on file in the office of
the City Clerk, being marked and designated as the International Fire Code,
2015 edition, including Appendix D, as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Sterling Heights
for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of
hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous
to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city
and providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses or operations;
and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions, and terms of
such International Fire Code, 2015 edition, published by the International
Code Council, on file in the office of the City Clerk are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this Chapter, with the
additions, insertions, deletions, and changes prescribed in Section 20-23.



(1978 Code, §13-22; Ord. No. 185-A, §1, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 185-B, §1,
6-16-86; Ord. No. 268, §1, 7-5-88; Ord. No. 287, §1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 310,
§1, 3-6-94; Ord. No. 336, §1, 9-1-98; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No.
374, §1, 12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 1-6-08; Ord. No. 413, § 1, 5-17-11;
Ord. No. 455, §1, 12-19-17)



Charter reference:



   Authority to adopt technical regulations by reference, see § 6.07



State law reference:



   State Fire Prevention Act, see M.C.L. § 29.1 et seq.



   Authority, Home Rule City Act, see M.C.L. § 117.3(k)



20-23.  LOCAL AMENDMENTS TO INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE.



   The International Fire Code, 2015 edition, shall govern generally all
fire prevention and protection matters in the City of Sterling Heights. To
further the goal of protecting the public health, safety, and welfare of the
residents and businesses of the city, the following sections of the
International Fire Code, 2015 edition, and Appendix D therein, are amended or
added as set forth in the following paragraphs:



Section 101.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   101.1.  Title.  These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of
the City of Sterling Heights, hereinafter referred to as "this code."



Section 102.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   102.3.  Change of use or occupancy.  The provisions of the Michigan
Building Code shall apply to all buildings undergoing a change of occupancy.



Section 102.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   102.4.  Application of building code.  The design and construction of
new structures shall comply with the Michigan Building Code.  Repair,
alterations and additions to existing structures shall comply with the
Michigan Building Code.



Section 102.6 shall be amended to read as follows:



   102.6.  Historic buildings.  The construction, alteration, repair,
enlargement, restoration, relocation or movement of existing buildings or
structures that are designated as historic buildings, when such buildings or
structures do not constitute a distinct hazard to life or property, shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Building Code.  Fire
protection in designated historic buildings shall be provided with an
approved fire protection plan as required in Section 1103.1.1.



Section 102.10 shall be amended to read as follows:



   102.10.  Conflicting provisions.  Where there is a conflict between a
general requirement and a specific requirement within this code, the specific
requirement shall be applicable.  Nothing in this code shall be construed,
interpreted, or applied to abrogate, nullify, or abolish any law, ordinance,
or code adopted by the jurisdiction relating to structures, processes, and
premises and safeguards from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from
the storage, handling, or use of structures, materials, or devices
specifically provided herein.  When any provision of this code is found to
be in conflict with any building, zoning, safety, health, or other applicable
law, ordinance, or code of the city existing on the effective date of this
code or hereafter adopted, the provision which establishes the higher
standard for the promotion and protection of the safety and welfare of the
public, as determined by the Fire Chief or the Fire Chief's designee, shall
prevail.  Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different materials, methods of construction, or other requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.  In the event any conflict exists between this
code and any law, ordinance, code provision, standard, or recommended
practice, which conflict is not resolved by the terms of this or any other
section of this code, the City Manager of the City of Sterling Heights or the
City Manager's designee shall determine which code shall be applicable.



Section 103.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   103.2. Appointment.  The fire code official is the Fire Chief, or a
duly authorized representative, and is appointed as provided by the City
Charter or other applicable law.



Section 103.4.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   103.4.1.  Legal defense.  Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the
lawful discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be
defended by the City Attorney if such defense is covered and approved by the
city's legal defense insurance carrier.  The code official or any
subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action, suit, or proceeding
that is instituted for actions in pursuance of the provisions of this code;
and any officer of the Fire Department, acting in good faith and without
malice, shall be free from liability for acts performed under any of its
provisions or by reason of any act or omission in the performance of official
duties in connection therewith.



Section 104.1.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   104.1.1.  Restriction of employees.  An official or employee
connected with the enforcement of this code, except one whose only connection
is that of a member of the Board of Appeals established under the provisions
of Section 108, shall not be engaged in, or directly or indirectly connected
with, the furnishing of labor, materials, or appliances for the construction,
alteration, or maintenance of a structure or the preparation of construction
documents thereof, unless that person is the owner of the structure; nor
shall such officer or employee engage in any work which conflicts with
official duties or with the interests of the Fire Department or city.



Section 104.1.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   104.1.2.  Rules and regulations specified.  All rules promulgated
under the authority of 104.1 shall have the same effect and enforceability as
any other provision of this code.  Such promulgated rules and regulations
shall include but not be limited to:



   A.   The requirements identified as the Sterling Heights Fire
Department, Fire Prevention Division Construction Requirements.



   B.   All regulations promulgated by, and on file at, the Sterling
Heights Fire Department, including but not limited to the following subjects:



      1.   Fire Protection Systems;



      2.   Fire Alarm Systems;



      3.   Fire Protection for Gasoline Dispensing Devices;



      4.   Fire Protection for Commercial Cooking Equipment;



      5.   Open Burning;



      6.   Safe Operations/Maintenance at Gasoline Stations;



      7.   Emergency Planning and Preparedness;



      8.   Hazardous Chemical Reporting (Right-to-Know);



      9.   Draftstopping;



      10.   No Parking – Fire Lane Signs;



      11.   Key Safe;



      12.   Yard Hydrant Identification;



      13.   Smoke Vent Identification;



      14.   Hazardous Stack Marking;



      15.   Fire Hydrant Impact Protection;



      16.   Fire Hydrant Access Gates;



      17.   Fire Apparatus Access Roads;



      18.   Addresses and Thoroughfare Signs;



      19.   Utility Meter and Appliance Impact Protection;



      20.   Security Gates – Emergency Operation;



      21.   Tents and Other Membrane Structures;



      22.   Temporary and Portable Cooking Facilities;



      23.   Consumer Fireworks Sales;



      24.   Fireworks Displays;



      25.   Proximate Audience Pyrotechnics;



      26.   Special Amusement Buildings;



      27.   Indoor Art & Craft Fairs, Festivals, and Similar Events;
and



      28.   Outdoor Carnivals, Festivals, Fairs, and Similar Events.



   C.   Sterling Heights Fire Department, Fire Prevention Division,
Fire Marshal Bulletins.



Section 104.1.3 shall be added to read as follows:



   104.1.3.  Rules and regulations continued.  All written policy
statements promulgated and/or issued by the code official for clarification
of a provision of this code, or as a guide for a provision of this code, or
as a rule or regulation regarding an issue not specifically or thoroughly
addressed in the code shall have the same effect and enforceability as any
other provision of this code.



Section 104.10 shall be amended to read as follows:



   104.10.  Fire investigations.  The code official, the Fire
Department, or other responsible authority shall have the authority to
investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of any fire, explosion, or
other hazardous condition.  Such investigation shall be initiated
immediately upon the occurrence of such fire, explosion, or incident; and if
it appears that such an occurrence is of a suspicious nature, the code
official shall immediately take charge of the physical evidence; and, in
order to preserve any physical evidence relating to the cause or origin of
such fire or explosion, the code official shall take means to prevent access
by any person to the structure or premises until such evidence has been
properly processed. The code official shall notify those persons designated
by law to pursue investigations into such matters and shall further cooperate
with the authorities in the collection of evidence and prosecution of the
case and shall pursue the investigation to its conclusion.  Information that
could be related to trade secrets or processes shall not be made part of the
public record except as directed by a court of law.



Section 104.10.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   Section 104.10.2.  Motor vehicle arson reduction program.  By
resolution adopted in the year 2001, the city is a participant in the auto
insurance fire loss program established by Michigan Public Act 413 of 2000,
which provides that automobile insurers must require their insureds to
complete and submit a report, on a prescribed form, prior to the payment of
any fire-related claim of $2,000 or more, when it is determined by the
insurer or the Fire Department or the Police Department that the fire may not
have been accidental. The Fire Marshal shall work in conjunction with the
Police Department to successfully implement the city's participation in the
program.



Section 104.11.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   104.11.2.  Obstructing operations.  No person shall obstruct the
operations of the Fire Department in connection with extinguishment or
control of any fire, or actions relative to other emergencies, or disobey any
lawful command of the Fire Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge
of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any lawful order of a police
officer assisting the Fire Department, or interfere with the compliance
attempts of another individual.



Section 104.11.4 shall be added to read as follows:



   104.11.4.  Unlawful boarding or tampering.  A person shall not, at
any time and without authorization from the Fire Chief or authorized fire
official, cling to, attach himself or herself to, climb upon or into, board,
or swing upon any Fire Department emergency vehicle, whether the same is in
motion or at rest, or sound the siren, horn, bell, or other sound-producing
device thereon or to manipulate or tamper with any levers, valves, switches,
starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment or protective clothing on,
or a part of, any Fire Department emergency vehicle.



Section 104.11.5 shall be added to read as follows:



   104.11.5.  Injuring Fire Department personnel.  No person shall
injure, or attempt or conspire to injure, Fire Department personnel who are
performing official duties.



Section 105.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   105.1.1.  Permits required.  Permits required by this code shall be
obtained from the code official unless otherwise provided. Unless listed in
table 105.1.1, when a permit is required by this code, the code official
shall have discretion to require an inspection and approval in lieu of a
formal permit. A permit shall not be issued until the designated fees, if
any, have been paid. The permit fees, inspection fees, and any other fees
shall be set by the city council in its annual appropriations ordinance.
Issued permits shall be kept on the premises designated therein at all times
and shall be readily available for inspection by the code official.



Table 105.1.1 shall be added to Section 105 to read as follows:



   Table 105.1.1



   PERMIT REQUIREMENTS



 


Chapter/Section

 
Description
 
Permit Required
 
Permit Fee


Chapter 3 and Section 307
 
Open Burning
 
X
 
X


Chapter 33 and Section 3307
 
Blasting/Explosives
 
X
 
X


Chapter 33 and Section 3308
 
Fireworks
 
X
 
X



 



Section 105.1.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   105.1.2.  Types of permits.  There shall be two types of permits as
follows:



   A.   Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant
to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by
Section 105.6 for either:



      (1)   A prescribed period.



      (2)   Until renewed or revoked.



   B.   Construction permit.  A construction permit allows the
applicant to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is
required by Section 105.7.  All applications for construction permits shall
be submitted to the Building Official for review and issuance or denial. 
The Building Official shall submit the applications to the fire marshal for
review and recommendations.



Section 105.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   105.2.  Application.  Application for a permit required by this code
shall be made to the code official in such form and detail as prescribed by
the code official. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by such
plans as prescribed by the code official. All applications for permit shall
include the date of birth and driver's license number of the applicant, which
shall be verified at the time the application is taken.



Section 105.6.15 shall be amended to read as follows:



   105.6.15.  Explosives.  An operational permit is required for the
manufacture, storage, handling, sale, or use of any quantity of explosive,
explosive material, fireworks, or pyrotechnic special effects within the
scope of Chapter 33 of the 2015 International Fire Code. Pursuant to Michigan
law, the City shall issue or deny fireworks display permits, as set forth
elsewhere in Chapter 20 of the City Code.



Section 105.7 shall be amended to read as follows:



   105.7.  Required construction permits.  The code official shall
review and provide a response and/or recommendations to the Building Official
regarding construction permits for work as set forth in Sections 105.7.1
through 105.7.12.



Section 107.2.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   107.2.2.  Test and inspection records.  All inspection and test
reports relating to the requirements of this Code shall be electronically
transmitted to the fire department, within seven (7) days, through an
electronic information data manager designated by the City to facilitate the
collection and transmission of such reports.  The reports shall be in a
format designated by the electronic information data manager.



Section 107.2.2.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   107.2.2.1.  Registration required.  Effective January 1, 2018, every
service provider that performs inspections, repairs, and/or tests within the
City, and any entity that performs self-inspections or in-house inspections
within the City, shall be registered with, and approved by, the Fire Marshal
and shall register with the City's designated electronic information data
manager in order to comply with subsection 107.2.1.1 before performing any
inspections and/or tests within the City.  No fee shall be assessed for
registering as required by this subsection.  Failure to comply with this
subsection shall be punishable first by a written warning notice, followed
for subsequent violations by the issuance of a municipal civil infraction,
punishable as set forth in Section 1 of the City Code.  The Fire Chief shall
designate, and the electronic information data manager shall advise each
service provider and affected entities or properties of, the inspections and
tests for which the requirements of this subsection will apply.  By way of
example and not limitation, the requirements of this subsection will apply to
fire alarm inspections, backflow inspections, fire pump tests, and
inspections or testing of sprinkler systems, fire extinguishers, and
emergency lighting.  The Fire Chief may only waive the electronic reporting
requirements of this subsection for cases of extreme hardship outside the
control of the company or entity that performed the inspection and/or test.



Section 107.2.2.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   107.2.2.2.  Approved service providers.  Effective January 1, 2018,
every business subject to fire inspections and/or tests within the City shall
utilize a service provider that has registered with, and been approved by,
the Fire Marshal.  A list of such providers shall be made available at no
charge upon request by a business within the City, and will be periodically
updated on the City's website.  Inspections and/or tests that are conducted
in violation of this subsection shall not be accepted or deemed valid for
purposes of compliance with the Code.  A service provider may only be
disapproved or removed from the approved registrations for good cause, which
includes but is not limited to lack of technological capability to comply
with this subsection; refusal to comply with this subsection; a history of
noncompliance without reliable assurance of future compliance; indebtedness
to the City; property maintenance violations; convictions, pleas, or actions
involving fraud or moral turpitude; and such other good cause as the Fire
Chief may establish in an operating guideline and which is reasonably related
to the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare.



Section 107.2.2.3 shall be added to read as follows:



   107.2.2.3.  Exception for Installers.  Service providers that install
new fire suppression or fire alarm systems are not required to register as
service providers under subsection 107.2.1.2 before performing such
installations.  However, all required permits from the Building Department
must be obtained prior to such installation.



Section 108.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   108.1.  Membership of Board.  The City has created a Board of Code
Appeals to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions, or determinations
made by the code official relative to the application and interpretation of
this code.  The members, qualifications, and procedures for the Board of
Code Appeals are set forth in Chapter 2 of the City Code.  The code official
shall be an ex officio member of the Board of Code Appeals when it convenes
to address issues and matters which arise under this code, but shall have no
vote on any matter before the Board.



Section 108.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   108.2.  Application for appeal.  Any person shall have the right of
appeal to the Board of Code Appeals from a decision of the code official. 
An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
this code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or an equally
good or better method of fire prevention is used, or that a variance to the
provisions of this code should be approved in accordance with provisions of
Section 108.4.



   The application for appeal shall be in writing and shall be accompanied
by an application fee as established by the City's annual appropriations
ordinance.  The application shall explain the exact nature of the appeal and
shall be received by the code official within 20 days after the notice of
violation was served to be considered timely.  An appeal will be considered
by the Board of Appeals in the event that it is filed after 20 days only upon
a showing of good cause to the code official as to why the appeal was not
filed within the time period provided herein.



Section 108.3 shall be replaced with the following:



   108.3.  Variances.  The Board shall have the authority upon appeal in
specific cases to authorize such variance or modification to the provisions
of this code with such conditions and safeguards as it may determine, as may
be in harmony with the spirit of this code and so that public safety and
welfare is secured and substantial justice done. No such variance shall be
granted unless the Board finds by a preponderance of the evidence that all of
the following facts and conditions exist:



   A.   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property or the building involved that do not
apply generally to other property or buildings in the city.



   B.   The granting of such variance will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or materially injurious to the property or improvements in the
vicinity of the property.



   C.   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect the
objectives set forth in this Fire Code.



   If the variance is approved, the property owner shall file a notice of
variance with the County Register of Deeds relating to the property which
shall include any conditions imposed upon the approval.



Section 109.3.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.3.3.  Prosecution of violations.  If the notice of violation is
not complied with promptly, the code official is authorized to request the
City Attorney to institute the appropriate legal proceedings at law or in
equity to restrain, correct, or abate such violation or to require removal or
termination of the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the
provisions of this code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. 
The Police Department shall be requested by the code official to make arrests
for any offense against this code or orders of the code official affecting
the immediate safety of the public.



Section 109.3.5 shall be added to read as follows:



   Section 109.3.5.  Appearance tickets.  When in the opinion of the
code official and/or his or her designate, there exists an apparent or actual
violation of a provision of this code or other codes or ordinances under the
code official's jurisdiction and the violation is of a nature that requires
immediate attention or abatement, the code official and/or his or her
designate(s) are hereby empowered to issue appearance tickets to the party or
parties responsible for correction and/or abatement of the violation. The
appearance ticket shall serve as notice that immediate action is required to
abate hazardous condition(s) or situation(s) and shall require the appearance
of the responsible party or parties in a court of law for violating the
provisions of this code.



Section 109.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   109.4.  Violation penalties.  Persons who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of its requirements or who
shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved
construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code. Regardless of any
provision to the contrary in the City Code, a person who disobeys or resists
an order of the code official to vacate a premises or structure or to
undertake or omit to undertake an act which the code official deems to
constitute an immediate threat to public safety, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for up to 90 days or a fine up to
$500.00, or both. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has
been served shall be deemed a separate offense.



Section 110.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   110.1.  General.  During the inspection of a premises, if a building
or structure or any building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a clear
and inimical threat to human life, safety, or health, the code official shall
issue such notice or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be
deemed necessary in accordance with this section and shall refer the building
to the building department for any repairs, alterations, remodeling,
removing, or demolition required. By way of illustration only, the following
are deemed to be hazardous conditions:



   (A)   Hazardous conditions liable to cause or contribute to the
spread of fire in or on said premises or structure or endanger the occupants
thereof;



   (B)   Conditions that interfere with the efficiency or operation of
any fire protection equipment and systems;



   (C)   Obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways,
doors, or windows, that are liable to interfere with the egress of occupants
or the operation of the Fire Department in case of a fire;



   (D)   Accumulations of dust or waste material in air-conditioning or
ventilating systems or grease in kitchen or other exhaust ducts;



   (E)   Accumulations of grease on kitchen cooking equipment, or oil,
grease, or dirt upon, under, or around any mechanical equipment;



   (F)   Accumulations of rubbish, waste, paper, boxes, shavings, or
other combustible materials, or excessive storage of any combustible material;



   (G)   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
utilized or installed electrical wiring, equipment, or appliances;



   (H)    Defective exit and emergency lighting systems;



   (I)   Hazardous conditions arising from defective or improperly
installed equipment for handling or using combustible, explosive, or
otherwise hazardous materials;



   (J)   Dangerous or unlawful amounts of combustible, explosive, or
otherwise hazardous materials; and



   (K)   All equipment, materials, processes, or operations that are in
violation of the provisions or intent of this code.



Section 110.1.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 110.1.1.  Unsafe conditions.  Structures or existing
equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe or deficient because of
inadequate means of egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are
otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve
illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an
unsafe condition. A vacant structure which is not secured against
unauthorized entry as required by Section 311 shall be deemed unsafe. Unsafe
structures or equipment shall be reported to the Building Official who shall
take appropriate action as deemed necessary under the provisions of the
Building Code. When a structure is rendered unsafe, dangerous, or hazardous
due to fire, explosion, or other conditions whether man-made or natural and
the Building Official is not readily available, the code official may order
the structure be secured against trespass.



Section 111.4  shall be amended to read as follows:



   Section 111.4.  Failure to comply.  Any person who shall continue any
work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as
that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition,
shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine
of $100 for the first offense. If the person continues to work in violation
of a stop work order under this section after receiving a municipal civil
infraction citation, the person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
by imprisonment for up to 90 days or a fine of not less than $250 and not
more than $500, or both.



Section 202 shall be amended to include the following definition:



   MICHIGAN BUILDING CODE.  References to the International Building Code
or the Michigan Building Code shall mean the most recent edition of the
Michigan Building Code, as promulgated by the Director of Consumer and
Industry Services, and as adopted in Chapter 11 of the City Code and enforced
by the city, or any code or document which succeeds or replaces such document.



Section 202 shall be amended to amend the following definitions:



   BONFIRE.  An outdoor fire utilized for occasional special events and
which burns only seasoned dry firewood intended to minimize the generation of
air contaminants.  A permit is required for all bonfires.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of materials wherein products of combustion
are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber. OPEN BURNING does not include road flares,
smudgepots, and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses
typically considered open flames.  For the purpose of this definition, a
chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the time combustion
occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues, or chimneys necessary to
provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas are open.



   POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCK.  A forklift, tractor, platform lift truck or
motorized hand truck powered by an electrical motor or internal combustion
engine. POWERED INDUSTRIAL TRUCKS do not include farm vehicles or automotive
vehicles for highway use.



   RECREATIONAL FIRE.  An outdoor fire burning only dry, seasoned
firewood or commercially available charcoal briquettes on the ground in a
prepared pit having a total fuel area of 4 feet or less in diameter and 2
feet or less in height for pleasure, warmth, or cooking food for human
consumption.  A permit is required for all recreational fires.



Section 305.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   305.1.  Clearance from ignition sources.  Clearance between ignition
sources, such as light fixtures, heaters and flame-producing devices,
electrical service equipment, and combustible materials shall be maintained
in an approved manner.



Section  307.1.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   307.1.2.  Allowable open burning.  The following types of open
burning shall be allowed without prior notification to the code official and
without a permit, and shall be constantly attended:



   A.   Barbecues when cooking food for human consumption using only
charcoal briquettes, LP-gas, or natural gas for fuel.



   B.   Outdoor fireplaces may burn only dry, seasoned firewood, and
shall not burn between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m., and must be
utilized in accordance with manufacturer's specifications.



   Example:  Fire pits and chimeneas purchased from stores are
acceptable, so long as the pit or chimenea is constructed of metal or
ceramic, has a solid top, has steady legs to keep it off of the ground and
anchor it against falling over, has a spark arrestor constructed of iron,
heavy wire mesh, or other non-combustible material with openings not larger
than 1/2 inch, and has a spark arrestor or screen on the top and/or sides. 
No fuels (logs, wood, etc.) shall be allowed to protrude out of the top of
the pit or from the sides.



   C.   Controlled fires by qualified instructors for fire suppression
training, e.g., firefighter training, industrial fire brigade training,
employee training for portable fire extinguishers.



   D.   Heating of building materials or for the warmth of workers at
construction sites burning only charcoal, dry, seasoned firewood, or other
approved fuel, in an approved container.



Section 307.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.2.  Permit required.  A permit shall be obtained from the code
official in accordance with Section 105.6 prior to kindling a bonfire or a
recreational fire.  Application for such approval shall only be presented by
and permits issued to the owner of the land upon which the fire is to be
kindled. Applications shall be submitted in writing at least ten days prior
to the proposed event and shall be in such form and contain such information
as required by the code official.



Section 307.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.3.  Extinguishment authority.  The Code Official is authorized to
order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible for
the fire, or the Fire Department of open burning that creates or adds to a
hazardous or objectionable situation, or which constitutes air pollution,
defined in the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act as the
presence in the outdoor atmosphere of air contaminants in quantities, of
characteristics, under conditions and circumstances, and of a duration that
are or can become injurious to human health or welfare, to animal life, to
plant life, or to property, or that interfere with the enjoyment of life and
property in this state.



Section 307.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.4.  Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than
50 feet from any structure, other combustible appurtenances or material,
public rights-of-way, and property lines, and provisions shall be made to
prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.



   Exceptions:



      1.   Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15
feet from a structure, other combustible material, public rights-of-way, and
property lines.



      2.   (Deleted)



Section 307.4.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.4.1.  Bonfire dimensions, duration, and location.  A bonfire
shall not be more than 6 feet by 6 feet by 6 feet in dimension and shall not
burn longer than 4 hours. The location of a bonfire shall be in accordance
with Section  307.4.



Section 307.4.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   307.4.2.  Recreational fire dimensions, duration, and location.  A
recreational fire shall have a fuel area of 4 feet or less in diameter and 2
feet or less in height and shall not burn longer than 4 hours. The location
of a recreational fire shall be in accordance with Section 307.3.



Section 308.1.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   308.1.4.  Open-flame cooking devices.  Charcoal burners and other
open-flame cooking devices shall not be operated or stored on combustible
balconies or within 10 feet of combustible construction.



   Exceptions:



      1.   One- and two-family dwellings.



      2.   Where buildings, balconies, and decks are protected by an
automatic sprinkler system.



Section 308.1.6.3 shall be amended to read as follows:



   308.1.6.3.  Sky lanterns.  Sky lanterns shall not be used, ignited,
launched, offered for sale, exposed for sale, sold at retail, or kept with
intent to sell at retail.  Additional regulations governing sky lanterns are
set forth in Chapter 20 of the City Code.



Section 310.7.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   310.7.1.  Multi-family dwellings.  Lighted matches, hookah devices,
chimineas, candles, lit fireworks, or any other type of open or exposed flame
is prohibited on or within 10 feet of a combustible balcony, patio,
landscaped area (for example, wood chips or mulch), or porch of a
multi-family dwelling unit.  Any unexposed flame devices or burning/burnt
remnants of a flame shall be discarded immediately utilizing only an approved
method or device.



Section 503.2.9 shall be added to read as follows:



   503.2.9.  Modifications.  The code official shall have the authority
to require or permit modifications to the requirements of this section,
through the implementation of Fire Prevention Regulations or during plan and
permit review processes, including but not limited to access widths, speed
calming devices, dead-end road turnaround dimensions, and fire lane parking
restrictions, where they are inadequate for fire or rescue operations or
where necessary to meet the public safety objectives of the City. 



Section 503.4.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   503.4.1.  Traffic calming devices.  Traffic calming devices are
prohibited unless approved by the Fire Department in accordance with a Fire
Department regulation enacted by the Fire Chief.



Section 503.6.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   503.6.1.  Approved means of emergency operation.  Unless the security
gate is constantly attended (24 hours per day, 7 days per week) by a
responsible person employed for the purpose of monitoring and administering
the security gate, the following rules shall apply:



   1.   The gate(s) shall be provided with an approved Siren Operated
Sensor (S.O.S.) designed to trigger any brand of gate operator within 3-5
seconds.  It shall have a minimum 10 minute hold. It shall have a battery
back-up system for continuous duty or open and hold until line power is
restored. In all cases the gate(s) must be accessible to 9-1-1 emergency
responders.  A suitable label/sign shall be installed to remind Fire,
Police, and E.M.S. that an S.O.S. system is installed.



   2.   If the facility has a fire alarm system the gate(s) shall be
opened and held open automatically on initiation of the alarm.



   3.   An approved manual override shall be provided.  If the manual
override requires a key it shall conform to the system approved by the Fire
Department.



   4.    A code number shall be required to allow the Police Department
to make silent entry.



   5.   Swing gates shall open in the direction of entry.  The gate
width shall be indicated on the exit side so that vehicles may stop far
enough away to allow for safe exiting.



   6.   The gates shall be set back from the approach a minimum of 30
feet to allow emergency vehicles to be pulled off of the road while
initiating gate opening.



   7.   Applicants for gated access roads must be willing to change to
another approved type of access system if such a system is required at a
future date.  All maintenance and revisions shall be at the expense of the
entity responsible for maintaining the gate.



Section 503.6.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   503.6.2.  Violation, penalty.  No person shall permit, cause, or
otherwise allow Section 503.6.1 to be violated.  Failure to ensure constant
attendance, or failure to ensure compliance with the listed rules, shall
constitute a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City
Code.  Employers, owners or presidents of corporations, or other persons
with similar authority may be charged with a violation of this section for
failure to supervise and ensure compliance with Section 503.6.1.  Any person
who fails or refuses to afford immediate access through security gates to
Fire, Police, or other emergency personnel who are engaged in rendering
emergency services or otherwise performing lawful duties shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



Section 505.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   505.1.  Address numbers.  All buildings shall have permanent
conspicuous addresses in accordance with Chapter 11 of the City Code.  The
code official may require supplemental building identification or modify the
size or location of such identification as deemed necessary to insure that
each and every building is properly identified.



Section 506 shall be replaced and shall read as follows:



SECTION 506



RAPID ENTRY SYSTEMS



   506.1.  Required.  All buildings and locations within the City that
are currently equipped with a rapid entry key box shall be required to
replace the key box if it is not the Knox Box® type and size approved by the
code official in accordance with UL 1037 as the exclusive key box system to
be utilized throughout the City.  Commercial buildings not currently
equipped with a rapid entry key box, including properties with a locked gate
or driveway which allows access to a commercial building or business, shall
install an approved key box within 90 days of any forced entry emergency
response by the Fire Department into such building or through such gate or
driveway, or within 90 days of finished reconstruction in the event that the
building was so severely damaged as to not be able to install a key box
sooner.  In addition, and in the sole discretion of the Fire Marshal, a
rapid entry key box shall be required in any building where lack of access
may result in loss of life and/or large property or environmental damage,
based on factors including, but not limited to, fire load, occupant load,
exposures, building construction, age of building, and storage or use of
hazardous materials.



   506.2.  Maintenance.  The responsible party shall immediately notify
the code official when any or all of the locks or keys have been changed and
shall keep the immediate area of the key box free and clear of any and all
obstructions.  The responsible party shall provide the proper keys for the
key box to the Fire Department and shall not have access to a key that can
open the key box.



   506.3.  Requirements.  The responsible party is required at all times
to keep a key(s) in the key box that will allow access to, and/or into, the
structure.  The key box shall contain, but not be limited to, the following
items as designated by the code official:



   a.   Labeled keys to locked points of egress, whether in interior or
exterior of the building;



   b.   Labeled keys to the locked mechanical and electrical rooms;



   c.   Labeled keys to locked elevator rooms and controls;



   d.   Labeled keys to any fence or secured areas;



   e.   Labeled keys to areas of the building where fire alarm panels
and fire protection systems are located;



   f.   Labeled keys to any other areas as required by the code
official;



   g.   A card containing the emergency contact people and phone
numbers for the building;



   h.   Floor plans of the rooms within the building showing locations
of shut-offs;



   i.   Hazardous materials information;



   j.   An inventory of the keys inside all key boxes;



   k.   Digital codes for access to any gates or any electronic door
locks within the building;



   l.   Any other keys, instructions, and/or information required by
the Fire Department's administrative regulations and guidelines.



   506.4.  Registration and installation.  The responsible party shall
apply for a registration for a key box on forms provided by and obtained from
the code official.  A registration is required prior to the installation of
a key box in order to verify the proper mounting location and installation of
the key box. The key box shall be installed on the exterior of the building
at a location and in a manner approved by the code official.  No key box
shall be installed, voluntarily or otherwise, without first obtaining the
approval of the code official.  The responsible party shall be responsible
for the cost to purchase, install, and maintain the key box.



   506.4.1.  Waiver.  The requirement for a key box may be waived by the
code official if, in the opinion of the code official, the size of the
building or other unusual circumstances render the key box ineffective for
its intended purpose, or if the building houses a business, firm, or other
entity that provides sensitive personal services or routinely stores or
handles potentially hazardous or expensive, rare, or unique materials. 
Businesses, firms, or other entities that are legally required to maintain
customer, client, trade, or patient confidentiality may opt out of the key
box requirement.



   506.4.2.  Opt out.  Any property owner not otherwise exempt may opt
out of the key box program if such owner or owner's authorized insurance
agent furnishes the code official with a letter of understanding from the
insurer of the subject premises directed to the City of Sterling Heights and
neighboring fire departments acknowledging its understanding that the City
and the fire departments are not authorized to obtain access to the premises
during an emergency by way of a lock-box key, and that damage resulting from
forced emergency entry and/or delayed entry may occur.  Additionally all
owners of such premises shall execute and deliver to the code official an
agreement, in the form and substance required by the City Attorney, holding
the City of Sterling Heights and all neighboring fire departments free,
harmless, and indemnified from any claim relating in any way to forced
emergency entry damage or delayed access.



   506.5.  Compliance dates.  All properties with existing key boxes
that are not the type and size approved by the code official shall comply
with this section by February 1, 2017.  All newly constructed buildings not
yet occupied or buildings currently under construction and all buildings or
businesses applying for a certificate of occupancy shall comply, if required
by the code official to install a key box, within 90 days of the adoption of
this Section 506 or prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy,
whichever time period is longer.  The cost of purchasing and installing,
along with any cost associated with implementation of the program at a
specific property, will be borne by the responsible party.  The code
official shall ensure that written notification is sent to all responsible
parties regarding the key box program requirements and the exemptions and opt
out conditions at least 90 days before a building is required to be in
compliance.  Such notice shall be sent by regular mail to the name and
address of record in the assessor's office and/or on file as a business
registration with the City Clerk.



   506.6.  Regulations.  The Fire Department shall create administrative
guidelines and regulations governing placement and approval of key boxes, the
keeping and use of Knox Box® keys, and Knox Box® access.  Any
administrative guidelines and regulations imposing an obligation or duty upon
a building, property, and/or responsible party shall have the force and
effect of law as if fully set forth in this Section 506.



   506.7.  Definitions.  As used in this chapter:



      COMMERCIAL BUILDING.  A building protected by an automatic fire
suppression and/or standpipe system or protected by an automatic fire alarm
system (automatic dialer, central station, external audible/visual alarm),
but does not include owner-occupied freestanding residential homes,
government buildings, or multi-family apartment buildings with units that
have direct outdoor access doors and individual addresses.



      KEY.  Any device that functions as a means to afford access
and/or to unlock that which secures or controls entrance to a building,
property, or other location, including but not limited to a standard key, an
electronic card, or a code.



      KNOX BOX®.  A key box known by its brand name, and the type of
key box required by the City for uniformity, security, access, and long-term
durability.



      RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  The property owner of a building or property
that is subject to this Section 506.  In the event that the owner is a
corporate entity, a property manager, business manager, or other individual
responsible for the daily and legal operations of the business or enterprise
on the property may be cited by the code official as the "responsible party"
under this section.



   506.8.  Applicability.  This section shall not apply to
owner-occupied one and two family dwellings.  However, any dwelling and any
building or property may participate on a voluntary basis by purchasing a
Knox Box® key box independently or through a discount program arranged with
Knox Box® by the Sterling Heights Fire Department.



Section 507.5.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   507.5.1.  Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building
hereafter constructed or moved into or within the city is more than 400 feet
from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants
and mains shall be provided where required by the fire Code Official.



   Exceptions:



   1.   For Group R-3 and Group U occupancies, the distance requirement
shall be 600 feet.



   2.   For buildings equipped throughout with an approved automatic
sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2,
the distance requirement shall be 600 feet.



   Fire hydrants shall be located not more than 100 feet from a Fire
Department  connection or standpipe connection, unless a different distance
is approved by the code official. Hydrants shall be in- service and
accessible, as prescribed by the code official, before construction and/or
alterations begin as follows:



      a.   For all residential Group R buildings or complexes; and



      b.   For all other use groups, except that the code official
may modify the requirements for in-service hydrants and access thereto for
use groups other than residential when circumstances make such requirements
impossible or impractical.



Section 507.5.3(4) shall be added to read as follows:



   4.   For additional regulations covering private water supply
systems, see Chapter 20, Article III, Section 20-51 et seq. of the Sterling
Heights City Code.



Section 507.5.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   507.5.4.  Obstructions.



      1.   Posts, fences, vehicles, growth, trash, storage, and
other materials or objects shall not be placed or kept near fire hydrants,
Fire Department inlet connections or fire protection system control valves in
a manner that would prevent such equipment or fire hydrants from being
immediately discernible or accessible. No person shall place objects or
otherwise engage in activity which deters or hinders the Fire Department from
gaining immediate access to fire protection equipment or fire hydrants.



      2.   No person shall obscure from view, damage, deface,
obstruct, or restrict the access to any fire hydrant or any Fire Department
connection for the pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire
hydrants and Fire Department connections that are located on public or
private streets and access lanes or on private property.



      3.   If, upon the expiration of the time noted in a notice of
violation, obstructions in violation of this section are not removed, the
code official may proceed to remove the obstructions. Costs incurred in the
performance of work necessary to remove the obstructions shall be paid from
the general fund with the approval of the City Manager or the City Manager's
designee, and the City Attorney shall institute appropriate action for the
recovery of such costs.



Section 507.5.4.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   507.5.4.1.  Access gates.  When fire hydrants provide coverage for
multiple sites and fences are erected that obstruct access from one site, the
code official may require that access gates be installed in said fence to
provide access to the hydrant from both sites.



Section 507.5.7 shall be added to read as follows:



   507.5.7.  Unauthorized use of hydrants.  No person shall use or
operate any fire hydrant, intended for use of the Fire Department for fire
suppression purposes, without a permit issued by the city. This section shall
not apply to the use of hydrants by persons employed by, and authorized to
make such use on behalf of the city.



Section 609.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   609.1.  General. Commercial kitchen exhaust hoods shall comply with
the requirements of the International Mechanical Code, and all Type I hood
exhaust systems shall be cleaned, inspected, and maintained as required by
the most current edition of NFPA 96 and all applicable Fire Department
regulations.



Section 609.5 shall be added to read as follows:



   609.5.  Exterior smoke.  Commercial kitchen exhaust systems shall
minimize the expulsion of visible smoke into the atmosphere outside of the
structures within which they are installed.  Any system that does not
prevent the transfer of grease-laden smoke onto a rooftop, neighboring
property, or area accessible by the public shall be in violation of this
subsection, and the owner or operator of such system shall be responsible for
citations and corrective measures required by the code official.  In such
circumstances, the code official may order the cooking operations of the
business shut down until a new system is installed, or the existing system is
modified, and the code official is satisfied that the transfer of
grease-laden smoke will no longer occur.



Section 703.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   703.1.  Maintenance.  The required fire-resistance rating of
fire-resistance-rated construction, including but not limited to walls,
firestops, shaft enclosures, partitions, smoke barriers, floors,
fire-resistive coatings, and sprayed fire-resistant materials applied to
structural members and fire-resistant joint systems, shall be maintained. 
Such elements shall be visually inspected by the owner annually and properly
repaired, restored, or replaced where damaged, altered, breached, or
penetrated.  Records of inspections and repairs shall be maintained and a
certification of compliance shall be filed with the code official on the form
and in the manner directed by Fire Department regulations.  Where concealed,
such elements shall not be required to be visually inspected by the owner
unless the concealed space is accessible by the removal or movement of a
panel, access door, ceiling tile, or similar movable entry to the space. 
Openings made therein for the passage of pipes, electrical conduit, wires,
ducts, air transfer openings, and holes made for any reason shall be
protected with approved methods capable of resisting the passage of smoke and
fire.  Openings through fire-resistance-rated assemblies shall be protected
by self- or automatic-closing doors of approved construction meeting the fire
protection requirements for the assembly.  Penetrations through barrier
walls must comply with the requirements of an approved testing agency, such
as Underwriters Laboratories Inc.



Section 703.1.4 shall be added to read as follows:



   703.1.4.  Multi-unit dwellings.  Condominium associations, landlords,
and apartment building owners shall provide either (1) the draft stop
certification required by Section 703.1 on an annual basis, or (2) proof of
installation of fire/smoke barrier wall warning signs if the building was
constructed prior to February 29, 2004 (the date of adoption of the 2003
Michigan Building Code).  Such certification and warning signs shall be in
the form directed by regulations promulgated by the Fire Department.



   Exception:  The requirements of this subsection shall not apply to
condominium buildings or apartment buildings consisting of freestanding
dwellings or which contain attic area of less than 3,000 square feet.



Section 901.2.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   901.2.2.  Required licenses and certifications. All fire protection
systems shall be installed by a contractor/installer/technician licensed or
certified for the particular type of system.  Such licenses and/or
certifications shall include:



      1.   State of Michigan Department of Consumer and Industry
Services or the current regulatory and licensing body regulating applicable
sections of Public Act 207 of 1941, and Public Act 144 of 1982, Michigan
Compiled Laws.



      2.   State of Michigan Mechanical Contractor's License through
the Department of Labor.



      3.   Certification from the company/manufacturer whose
equipment the installer/technician is authorized to install and/or service.



Section 901.5.2 shall be added to read as follows:



   901.5.2.  Separate tests.  For fire protection systems installed in
buildings designed for multiple tenants/uses, and when the system is
installed/extended as the tenant spaces are developed, the individual tenant
space systems shall be tested independently of the main system components and
a contractor's material and test certificate is required for each tenant
space.



Section 901.8 shall be amended to read as follows:



   901.8.  Removal of or tampering with equipment.  It shall be unlawful
for any person to obstruct, remove, tamper with, or otherwise disturb any
fire hydrant, fire detection and alarm system, fire suppression system, or
other fire appliance required by this code except for the purpose of
extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making
necessary repairs, or when approved by the code official.  Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. 
Defective and unapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or
repaired as directed by the code official.



Section 903.4.2 shall be amended to read as follows:



   903.4.2.  Alarms.  Approved audible and visible devices shall be
connected to every automatic sprinkler system.  Such sprinkler water-flow
alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a
single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. 
Alarm devices shall be provided on the exterior of the building in an
approved location.  Where a fire alarm system is installed, actuation of the
automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire alarm system.



Section 907.2.11.6 shall be amended to read as follows:



   907.2.11.6.  Power source.  In new construction, required smoke
alarms shall receive their primary power from the building wiring where such
wiring is served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a
battery backup.  Smoke alarms with integral strobes that are not equipped
with battery back-up shall be connected to an emergency electrical system in
accordance with Section 604.  Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the
batteries are low.  Wiring shall be permanent and without a disconnecting
switch other than as required for overcurrent protection.  In addition to
the requirements of the Housing Law of Michigan, Public Act 64 of 2004, all
residential multi-family properties shall utilize a 10-year lithium sealed
battery for the battery backup of smoke alarms in all common areas, and all
residential rental properties shall utilize a 10-year lithium sealed battery
for the battery backup of smoke alarms in each dwelling unit.  The term
"residential rental properties" includes, but is not limited to, hotels,
motels, bed and breakfast facilities, homes, and other residential spaces
offered for use as short-term or long-term dwellings in exchange for payment
or other forms of consideration.



   Exception:  Smoke alarms are not required to be equipped with battery
backup where they are connected to an emergency electrical system that
complies with Section 604.



Section 907.8.6 shall be added to read as follows:



   907.8.6.  Maintenance.  It shall be the responsibility of the owner
of any Group R (residential) occupancy, which is occupied by tenants, to
maintain in an operative condition at all times all smoke alarm devices and
systems required by this code.  It shall also be the responsibility of the
owner to certify in writing to the code official on or before July 1st of
each year that the prescribed maintenance has been performed and that any
defective smoke alarms have been repaired or replaced.



Section 907.8.7 shall be added to read as follows:



   907.8.7.  Compliance dates. Owners of single family dwellings or a
unit in a multiple family dwelling under individual ownership (condominium)
shall comply with the provisions of this section upon resale or reoccupancy,
whichever occurs first, in accordance with the provisions of this
ordinance.  Owners of multiple-family dwellings (three families or more)
occupied by tenants shall comply with Section 907.8.8.



Section 907.8.8 shall be added to read as  follows:



   907.8.8.  Certification at change of occupancy.  At every change of
occupants of every dwelling unit occasioned by or incidental to a sale,
lease, or sublease of said unit, it shall be the duty of the grantor thereof
(the seller, lessor, or sublessor as the case may be) to certify before
occupancy to the new occupant that all smoke alarms as required by this
ordinance or other applicable laws are installed and in proper working
condition. Upon the resale of any single-family or multiple-family dwelling,
the code official of the City of Sterling Heights shall be provided
certification by the seller that all smoke alarms are installed in accordance
with the applicable codes and ordinances and are in proper working condition.



Section 912.2.1.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   912.2.1.1.  Fire Department connection signal.  All Fire Department
connections shall be indicated by an audible and visible alarm device
activated by the water-flow switch, which device shall be located in the
immediate area of the Fire Department connection and at a height that will
permit constant visibility.



Section 912.4 shall be amended to read as follows:



   912.4.  Access.  Immediate access to Fire Department connections
shall be maintained at all times and without obstruction by fences, bushes,
trees, walls, or any other object for a minimum of 3 feet on either lateral
side and an unobstructed approach with a minimum width of 10 feet, unless a
wider approach is required by the code official.



Section 2304.1.1 shall be added to read as follows:



   2304.1.1.  Automatic fire suppression.  An automatic fire
extinguishing system shall be installed at all gasoline dispensing devices
open to the general public if required by, and in accordance with, all
applicable Fire Department regulations.



Section 3103.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   3103.1.  General.  Tents and membrane structures used for temporary
periods shall be white in color and shall otherwise comply with this
section.  Other temporary structures erected for a period of 180 days or
less shall comply with the International Building Code.



Section 3308.8 shall be added to read as follows:



   3308.8.  Combustible building materials.  Combustible building
materials shall not be brought onto the site before fire hydrants are
activated and fire apparatus access roads are constructed, unless otherwise
approved by the code official.



Section 3310.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   3310.1.  Required access.  Approved vehicle access for fire fighting
shall be provided to all construction or demolition sites. Vehicle access
shall be provided to within 100 feet of temporary or permanent Fire
Department connections and to within 20 feet of fire hydrants. Vehicle access
shall be provided by either temporary or permanent roads, capable of
supporting vehicle loading under all weather conditions. Access roads shall
be provided by the contractor or property owner.



Section 5601.1 shall be amended to read as follows:



   5601.1.  Scope.  The provisions of this chapter shall govern the
possession, manufacture, storage, handling, sale, and use of explosives,
explosive materials, fireworks, and small arms ammunition. Article V of
Chapter 20 of the City Code shall supersede and preempt the provisions of
this chapter to the extent that any of their respective provisions are in
conflict regarding fireworks.



Section D103.6 of Appendix D shall be amended to read as follows:



   D103.6.  Signs.  Where required by the code official, fire apparatus
access roads shall be marked with permanent  NO PARKING - FIRE LANE signs
substantially complying with Figure D103.6.  Signs shall have a minimum
dimension of 12 inches wide by 18 inches high and have red letters on a white
reflective background.  Signs shall be posted on one or both sides of the
fire apparatus road as required by Section D103.6.1 or D103.6.2.



Section D103.6.1 of Appendix D shall be amended to read as follows:



   D103.6.1.  Roads 20 to 26 feet in width.  Fire apparatus access roads
20 to 26 feet wide shall be posted on one or both sides, as directed by the
code official, as a fire lane.



(1973 Code, § 13-23; Ord. No. 185-A, § 2, 2-7-84; Ord. No. 185-B, § 2,
6-16-86; Ord. No. 185-C, § 1, 11-5-86; Ord. No. 268, § 2, 7-5-88; Ord. No.
287, § 2, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 287-A, §§ 1, 2, 11-6-91; Ord. No. 310, § 1,
3-6-94; Ord. No. 279-A, § 6, 7-2-96; Ord. No. 336, § 1, 9-1-98; Ord. No.
361, §§ 2,3,4, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 2, 1-2-08; Ord. No. 413, §§ 2 - 16, 5-17-11;
Ord. No. 429, §1, 7-16-13; Ord. No. 443, §1, 1-5-16; Ord. No. 452, §3,
6-20-17; Ord. No. 455, §2, 12-19-17)



20-24-20-49.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  MAINTENANCE, TESTING AND CERTIFICATION OF PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY
SYSTEMS AVAILABLE FOR FIRE SUPPRESSION



Editor's Note:



   With the exception of a few obsolete dates, this Article has not been
amended unless specifically noted.



20-51.  PURPOSE OF ARTICLE.



   The purpose of this Article is to acknowledge that there are private
water supply systems within the city which are available to be used for fire
suppression in certain residential and industrial facilities which must be
maintained to protect the buildings and their occupants against the risks of
fire. The city determines it is advantageous to establish a certification
program by which the owners of such private water supply systems certify to
annual testing and maintenance of the system. This Article establishes
procedures to ensure that such systems are maintained and that annual
certification will be provided by the owner to the city. It also provides
that such systems may continue but shall not be modified, altered or expanded
except with city approval.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-52.  PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   Private water supply systems existing as of November 1, 1999 which
furnish a supplemental water supply for fire suppression may continue to be
utilized as part of an overall fire protection system as provided in this
Article.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-53.  REQUIREMENTS OF PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM.



   Private water supply systems which are available to be used for fire
suppression may continue to be utilized in accordance with the requirements
of this section.



   (A)   The private water supply system and all appurtenant existing
fire hydrants shall be available for use by the city and its Fire Department
employees in the event of a fire or other emergency.



   (B)   All existing hydrants which are a part of the private water
supply system shall be modified or adapted to comply with the requirements of
the current standards of the City of Sterling Heights Engineering Office, as
they may be amended from time to time.



   (C)   The owner of the private water supply system shall provide the
city with a "drawing to scale" showing the location of the private hydrants
which are a part of the private water supply system.



   (D)   The private water supply system shall not be modified,
altered, expanded or abandoned without the prior approval of the city to
ensure that adequate water supply is available from public and private
sources to provide satisfactory fire protection to the buildings on the site
and their occupants. Private hydrants shall not be placed into or removed
from service without the approval of the code official. This provision shall
not prohibit the performance of maintenance to keep the private water supply
system in good working order.



Editor's Note:



   The new provision was transferred from former Section 20-37(B).



   (E)   The owner of the property served by the private water supply
system shall maintain the private water supply system in good working order
at all times. The owner shall notify the City Fire Department immediately at
any time that the system or any part is not functional.



   (F)   The owner shall conduct on an annual basis (or more frequently
as determined necessary by the owner) testing of the private water supply
system to the standards and regulations of the City Fire Department to
determine that the private water supply system is operational and is being
maintained in good working order. The testing shall be based upon the written
standards established by the manufacturer of the system, the American Water
Works Association Publication M17, National Fire Protection Association
Standards Reference Nos. 25 and 1201 or an alternative standard furnished by
the owner and approved by the Fire Department.



   (G)   The owner shall furnish to the city no later than November 1
of each year a certification in a form established by the city attesting that
the private water supply system is in good working order, the date of such
testing, the results of such testing, a description of any remedial work done
upon the system as a result of the testing results and the standard used in
conducting the testing. The certification shall be signed by the owner or his
or her authorized designee, dated and notarized.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-54.  INSPECTION OF PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEMS.



   The Fire Department may inspect the private water supply system to
determine that the system is in good working order if it has reasonable cause
to believe that system is not being maintained as required by this Article or
that the requirements of this Article are not being satisfied. The owner
shall pay an inspection fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by City
Council resolution. The owner shall make the private system available for
inspection upon reasonable notice by the Fire Department.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-55.  ADDITIONAL TESTING AND CERTIFICATION.



   If the Fire Department has reasonable cause to believe that (a) the
private water supply system or any part of it is not functioning or is not
being maintained as required by this Article, or (b) that the current
certification filed with the city by the owner is inaccurate or fraudulent,
the city may require that the owner conduct additional testing even if there
is a valid annual certification on file with the city. The owner shall
conduct the testing within 30 days of the date of notice from the city that
the additional testing and certification are required.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-56.  MISLEADING, FALSE OR FRAUDULENT STATEMENTS IN CONNECTION WITH
TESTING OR CERTIFICATION.



   A person shall not make any misleading, false or fraudulent statement
in connection with any testing performed or any certification furnished to
the city to satisfy the requirements of this Article.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-57.  MODIFICATION, ALTERATION, EXPANSION OR ABANDONMENT OF PRIVATE WATER
SUPPLY SYSTEM.



   When the owner of any private water supply system available to be used
for fire suppression desires to modify, alter, expand or abandon a private
water supply system regulated by this Article, the owner shall be required to
execute and deliver to the city an agreement for on-site fire protection
system satisfactory to the city, which shall include, among other
requirements, indemnification of the city for claims, damages or losses
arising from the use of such system.



(Ord. No. 345, § 1, 1-18-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §
1, 12-21-04)



20-58-20-74.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  FIRE SERVICES AND EXTRAORDINARY MEASURES



Editor's Note:



   This Article is transferred from existing Sections F-111.2,1, F-111.3,
F-111.3.1(a), and F-111.3.1(b), which were previously added to the BOCA Code
by the city. Due to their incidental relationship to fire prevention, these
provisions will now exist as independent City Code provisions, rather than
portions of the IFC.



20-75.  WITHHOLDING OF SERVICES.



   The Fire Chief or his or her designate may withhold fire suppression
and/or rescue services for any/all areas of the city that may not be
secure/safe due to civil disturbance.



(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 12-21-04)



20-76.  EXTRAORDINARY EMERGENCY MEASURES; RECOVERY OF COSTS.



   The owners and/or operators of any property, instrumentalities,
equipment or vehicles which cause in whole or in part or contribute to in
whole or in part through either negligent or intentional acts or omissions to
an occurrence which requires the city to take extraordinary emergency
measures as defined herein shall be jointly and severally responsible for
immediate repayment to the city of such costs and damages incurred. Owners
shall be liable for either intentional or negligent acts or omissions of
persons or entities acting with either express, implied, or apparent
authority or control who either cause or contribute in whole or in part to
such an occurrence which requires the taking of such extraordinary emergency
measures to enforce the code.



(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 12-21-04)



20-77.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COSTS or DAMAGES .  Includes reimbursement for wages, including
overtime, fringes and benefits for city employees involved in extraordinary
emergency measures, expenses incurred by the city to outside contractors,
independent consultants and others engaged by the city in connection with the
taking of such extraordinary emergency measures taken in connection with
enforcing the code, expenses associated with equipment damaged, lost or
destroyed through no negligence of the city or its personnel and expenses
associated with claims as a result of injuries sustained by employees or
injuries or damages for which the city is held responsible occurring to third
persons or property, including but not limited to all costs of defense
associated with actions arising from the taking of such extraordinary
emergency measures.



   ENFORCE THE CODE .  Includes deployment of equipment and personnel to
contain or control an emergency situation, investigation including cause and
origin following such emergency condition, investigation, preparation and
attendance at court proceedings, administrative proceedings or other
proceedings permitted or allowed by statute associated with such emergency
conditions.



   EXTRAORDINARY EMERGENCY MEASURES .  Measures or actions taken by the
Fire Department or other municipal departments, the Emergency Management
Coordinator, (or action taken as directed by the Environmental Protection
Agency, Michigan Department of Natural Resources or other agencies with
jurisdiction over environmental safety) in response to the dumping or
spilling of any hazardous liquid or solid materials and the securing of an
unsafe vacant structure where such securing is required to eliminate an
unsafe hazardous condition or an attractive nuisance. This shall include, but
not be limited to, actions taken to contain clean-up or mitigate any unsafe
condition caused by the dumping, spilling or other unsafe presence of
hazardous materials. EXTRAORDINARY EMERGENCY MEASURES shall not include
ordinary fire and life safety inspections, ordinary Fire Department responses
such as accidental fires, emergency medical runs, motor vehicle accidents, or
other ordinary service calls, except where the Fire Department incurs
extraordinary expenses to persons other than the city or its employees.



   OPERATOR . Any person or entity which is in possession or control of
any property, instrumentalities, equipment, or vehicles which are involved in
an occurrence which requires the city to take extraordinary emergency
measures to enforce the code. Operator shall also mean any person or entity
who, through either negligence or intentional acts or omissions, causes or
contributes in whole or in part to an occurrence resulting in enforcement of
the code.



   OWNER .  Any person or entity which has a legal interest in real or
personal property which is involved in an occurrence which requires the city
to take extraordinary emergency measures to enforce the code.



(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 12-21-04)



20-78.  CIVIL CAUSE OF ACTION.



   It shall be the responsibility jointly and severally of any and all
owners and/or operators of real or personal property upon demand to promptly
pay in full costs or damages. The city shall be permitted within two years
from the date costs or damages are incurred to commence a civil action
seeking recoupment of costs or damages. Where such civil action is filed, as
a separate item of damages, the city shall be permitted to recover actual
attorney fees and expenses in litigation if it prevails with respect to any
disputed items in litigation.  Parties paying damages shall be entitled to
contribution and release in accordance with procedures set forth in M.C.L.
§§  600.2925a through 600.2925d, as amended.



(Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1, 12-21-04)



20-79-20-99  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  FIREWORKS



20-100.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this Article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT.  The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL
28.451 et seq., as amended from time to time.



   FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a
flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation.  Fireworks
consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic,
display fireworks, homemade fireworks, and special effects.



   HOMEMADE FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device designed for the
purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation that is not produced by a commercial manufacturer and does not
comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations
of the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts
1500 and 1507.



   MINOR.  An individual who is less than 18 years of age.



   NFPA 1.  The "Uniform Fire Code," 2006 edition, developed by NFPA.



   NFPA 72.  The "National Fire Alarm Code," 2002 edition, developed by
NFPA.



   NFPA 101.  The "Life Safety Code," 2009 edition, developed by NFPA.



   NFPA 1123.  The "Code for Fireworks Display," 2010 edition, developed
by NFPA.



   NFPA 1124.  The "Code for the Manufacture, Transportation, Storage,
and Retail Sales of Fireworks and Pyrotechnic Articles," 2006 edition,
developed by NFPA.



   NFPA 1126.  The "Standard for the Use of Pyrotechnics Before a
Proximate Audience," 2011 edition, developed by NFPA.



   NOVELTIES.  The term "novelties" means that term as defined under APA
Standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5 and all of the
following:



      (1)   Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets,
strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of
explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum
explosive content per cap.



      (2)   Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick
noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in division (1) are
used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the
cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart
or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion.



      (3)   Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch
in diameter.



      (4)   Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in
cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if
the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on
the box; and toy smoke devices.



   PERMANENT BUILDING or PERMANENT STRUCTURE.  Any building or structure
that is affixed to a foundation on a site that has fixed utility connections
and that is intended to remain on the site for more than 180 consecutive
calendar days.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, §1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 442, §1, 8-18-15; Ord. No.
463, §1, 4-16-19)



SUBDIVISION A.  SALE OF FIREWORKS



20-101.  CONSUMER FIREWORKS CERTIFICATE; APPLICABLE CODES AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   No person shall sell consumer fireworks unless the person
annually obtains and maintains a consumer fireworks certificate from the
cepartment, as required by the Michigan Fireworks Safety Act.  Violations of
this subsection shall be prosecuted and punishable as provided in the Act.



   (B)   The issuance of a consumer fireworks certificate does not
itself authorize the sale of fireworks at the certified retail location. 
Consumer fireworks shall not be sold at a retail location until the Bureau
verifies compliance with Section 5 of the Act, NFPA 1124, and all applicable
administrative rules promulgated by the Department. 



   (C)   The holder of a consumer fireworks certificate shall
prominently display the original or copy of the certificate in each retail
location to which the certificate applies.  Each day the consumer fireworks
certificate is not displayed is a separate violation.  A person who violates
this subsection is responsible for a civil fine of $200.



   (D)   A person shall not sell consumer fireworks from a retail
location unless all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (2), the retail location
and any adjacent or directly associated retail storage satisfies the
applicable requirements of NFPA 101 and NFPA 1124 for consumer and low-impact
fireworks that are not in conflict with the Act and the Stille-DeRossett-Hale
single state construction code act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531. 
Any provision of the Stille-DeRossett-Hale single state construction code
act, 1972 PA 230, MCL 125.1501 to 125.1531, that is inconsistent with the
applicable requirements of NFPA 101 and NFPA 1124 is superseded to the extent
of the inconsistency or conflict.



      (2)   If the retail location is a permanent building or
structure, the building or structure is equipped with a fire suppression
system in compliance with NFPA 1124.  Beginning December 28, 2018, and
notwithstanding the NFPA 1124 requirements regarding automatic sprinkler
systems, if the retail location is in a permanent multi-tenant building or
structure, the building or structure must be equipped with an automatic
sprinkler system.  The requirement for an automatic sprinkler system
described in this division does not apply to the retail location of a person
that held a consumer fireworks certificate for a retail location of the same
address in a permanent building or structure during the calendar year prior
to December 28, 2018.



      (3)   The retailer at that retail location is licensed under
the General Sales Tax Act.



      (4)   The retailer has a valid federal taxpayer identification
number.  However, this requirement does not apply to a retailer that is a
sole proprietorship.



   (E)   A person that fails or neglects to comply with division (D) is
responsible for a state civil infraction punishable by a fine of not more
than $2,500 for each violation.  The department shall determine the amount
of the fine in accordance with the requirements of the Act.  Each day that a
person is in noncompliance constitutes a separate violation.



   (F)   During any period of time in which a person is selling
consumer fireworks, the person shall add as an additional insured, or obtain
and maintain public liability and product liability insurance coverage for,
each retail location at which the person is selling consumer fireworks, in an
amount not less than $10,000,000 per occurrence.  If the department
determines that a person has failed or neglected to comply with this
subsection, the department shall order the person to immediately cease
operations and pay a civil fine of not more than $5,000.



   (G)   A person shall not sell low-impact fireworks unless that
person registers with the low impact fireworks retail registry not less than
10 days before selling the fireworks in each calendar year in accordance with
the requirements of the Act.  A person who sells low-impact fireworks at
retail and who has not registered as required by this subsection shall cease
the sale of low-impact fireworks until the person complies with this
subsection.



   (H)   A person shall not engage in the retail sale of consumer
fireworks over the telephone, internet, or other like manner unless the
consumer fireworks are picked up or shipped from a permanent location for
which the person holds a valid consumer fireworks certificate.



   (I)   A person shall not sell consumer fireworks to a minor.  A
person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  The age of
an individual purchasing consumer fireworks shall be verified by any of the
following:



      (1)   An operator's or chauffeur's license issued under the
Michigan Vehicle Code.



      (2)   An official state personal identification card.



      (3)   An enhanced driver license or enhanced official state
personal identification card.



      (4)   A military identification card.



      (5)   A passport.



      (6)   Any other bona fide photograph identification that
establishes the identity and age of the individual.



   (J)   Nothing within these requirements shall limit the Fire Marshal
or Police Department from exercising sound judgment and strict enforcement of
measures necessary for the safety and welfare of the city and its populace.



   (K)   Nothing within these requirements shall exempt retailers from
ensuring that the proposed site is in compliance with all property
maintenance regulations and other applicable city ordinances, or from
submitting to the city all applications and supporting documentation required
by any other provisions of the City Code and/or the city's zoning ordinance
pertaining generally, without specific reference to fireworks, to retail
sales, permanent or temporary structures, temporary sales, and land use
regulations.



(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 463, § 2, 4-16-19)



State law reference:



   MCL 28.451 et seq.



Administrative rules:



   SeeR 29.201 et seq.



20-102.  AGE OF MAJORITY REQUIRED FOR PURCHASE; SUPERVISION.



   (A)   Consumer fireworks shall not be sold to persons under the age
of 18.  Violation is a state civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of
not more than $500.00.



(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



20-103.  SAFETY REVIEW.



   The Fire Marshal may, at any time, undertake a review of any fireworks
sales or storage area for which a consumer fireworks certificate has been
issued or is required, or any discharge of fireworks, to determine whether
any violations of state law or local ordinance are occurring which might
endanger the public health, safety, and welfare, or which might warrant
revocation of the certificate or permit.



(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



20-104 - 20-110.  RESERVED.



SUBDIVISION B.  MANUFACTURE AND STORAGE OF FIREWORKS



20-111.  PROHIBITION.



   No person shall manufacture any fireworks within the city.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6- 19-12)  Penalty, see § 1-9



20-112-20-114  RESERVED.



SUBDIVISION C.  FIREWORKS AND PYROTECHNIC DISPLAYS



20-115.  IGNITION, DISCHARGE, AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS.



   (A)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the
property of another person without that organization's or person's express
permission to use those fireworks on those premises.  "Property of another
person" includes hotel and motel property, apartment property, and
condominium property, where an owner, management company, or association has
or retains authority and control over the use of the property or common
areas.  A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  A
person who receives a municipal civil infraction citation for violating this
subsection and who commits another violation of this subsection within 72
hours of the first violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (B)   An individual who uses, ignites, or discharges consumer
fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic
liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a
controlled substance is responsible for a municipal civil infraction
punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (C)   An individual who violates the smoking prohibition under NFPA
1124, 7.3.11.1 (smoking within 50 feet of a consumer fireworks retail sales
area) or who does not post signage regarding the smoking prohibition that
satisfies the requirements of NFPA 1124 is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (D)   A person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer
fireworks or low-impact fireworks in a manner that is intended to harass,
scare, or injure livestock.  A person who violates this subsection is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (E)   (1)   Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged,
or used in the city.  An individual who violates this subsection is
responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a fine of $1,000
for each violation.  The amount of $500 from each fine collected for a
violation of this division shall be remitted to the Police Department.



      (2)   Exceptions.  Consumer fireworks may be ignited,
discharged, or used in the city:



         (a)   Between 11:00 a.m. on December 31 until 1:00 a.m.
on January 1;



         (b)   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday
and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day;



         (c)   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on June 29 to
July 4;



         (d)   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on July 5, if
that date is a Friday or Saturday; and



         (e)   Between 11:00 a.m. and 11:45 p.m. on the Saturday
and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day.



   (F)   (1)   State law prohibits any ordinance enacted under the
Fireworks Safety Act from regulating the ignition, discharge, or use of
consumer fireworks on the days and during the times set forth in division
(E).  However, state law does not prohibit enforcement of other ordinances
not adopted under the Fireworks Safety Act, nor does state law provide
immunity for noise and community disturbances committed as a result of
igniting, discharging, or using consumer fireworks.  Therefore, other
violations of the City Code committed during or as a result of the ignition,
discharge, or use of consumer fireworks may still be enforced, including but
not limited to:



         (a)   Disturbing the public peace;



         (b)   Violating the city's noise ordinances;



         (c)   Violating the city's nuisance ordinances; or



         (d)   Creating or depositing litter in violation of the
city's littering ordinances.



      (2)   All other city ordinances not adopted pursuant to the
Act and not directly or specifically targeted at the use of consumer
fireworks shall continue to apply and may be enforced at any time of the year.



   (G)   No adult person other than the person igniting, discharging,
or using a consumer firework shall be within 25 feet of a consumer firework
that is being ignited, discharged, or used, and no minor shall be within 50
feet of a consumer firework that is being ignited, discharged, or used,
unless such adult or minor is on his or her own neighboring property.  Any
person with control over the property who allows any adult or minor to
violate this division shall also be in violation of this division.  The City
Council hereby finds that a motivating factor for the use of consumer
fireworks is the presence and reaction of spectators, and the purpose of this
subsection is to discourage family members, neighbors, guests, onlookers, and
spectators from too closely gathering around the use of consumer fireworks,
thereby subjecting themselves to potential injury by a person who is allowed
under state law to ignite consumer fireworks without any regulation of such
activity.  This division shall be liberally construed to achieve the goal of
protecting spectators from potential harm.



   (H)   It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided by Chapter 1
of the City Code if, as a result of having ignited, discharged, or used a
consumer firework, any harm or damage is caused to any person or the property
of another.



   (I)   Every fireworks vendor advertising consumer fireworks for sale
within the city shall provide notice, as set forth in this subsection, to
every purchaser of consumer fireworks by including an 8½" x 11" flyer with
every purchase and by displaying a sign affixed to each side of any display
area or temporary facility or consumer fireworks retail stand, as both are
defined by the Michigan Administrative Code, where fireworks are sold at
retail.  To be in compliance with this subsection, the font on a flyer shall
be no smaller than 14 point boldface type, and the lettering on a sign shall
be visible and discernible from every point of sale and, for temporary
facilities, from a distance of at least 20 feet outside the footprint or
boundaries of the facility.  Each day that a vendor remains out of
compliance with the requirements of this subsection shall be chargeable as a
separate offense.  At a minimum, each flyer and/or sign shall contain any
information required by the City Manager, the Police Chief, or the Fire
Chief, as well as all of the following information:



      NOTICE OF CITY AND STATE LAWS



      1.  STATE LAW PERMITS, UNDER MCL 28.457, THE IGNITION,
DISCHARGE, AND USE OF CONSUMER FIREWORKS (IN GENERAL, THE TYPE THAT LEAVE THE
GROUND) AT THE FOLLOWING TIMES, AND SUCH ACTIVITIES ARE PROHIBITED IN
STERLING HEIGHTS ON ANY DAYS AND TIMES OTHER THAN THE FOLLOWING TIMES:
BETWEEN 11:00 A.M. AND 11:45 P.M. ON THE SATURDAY AND SUNDAY IMMEDIATELY
BEFORE MEMORIAL DAY AND LABOR DAY, JUNE 29TH TO JULY 4TH, AND JULY 5TH IF
THAT DATE IS A FRIDAY OR SATURDAY, AND BETWEEN 11:00 A.M. ON DECEMBER 31ST
UNTIL 1:00 A.M. ON JANUARY 1ST (A TOTAL OF 12 OR 13 CALENDAR DAYS PER YEAR).



      2.  FIREWORKS THAT MAKE NOISE THAT CAN BE HEARD FROM ANY PUBLIC
PLACE MAY NOT BE USED AFTER 11:00 P.M.



      3.  FOR FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND, ONLY THE PERSON
IGNITING THE FIREWORKS MAY BE WITHIN 25 FEET, AND MINORS MAY NOT BE WITHIN 50
FEET.



      4.  FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND MAY NOT BE DISCHARGED ON
GOVERNMENT PROPERTY, INCLUDING PARKING AREAS, STREETS, AND SIDEWALKS, OR ON
PROPERTY OWNED BY ANOTHER UNLESS YOU HAVE EXPRESS PERMISSION FROM THE
GOVERNMENT OR THE PROPERTY OWNER TO DISCHARGE FIREWORKS.



      5.  FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND MAY NOT BE USED BY A PERSON
WHO IS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND/OR ANY CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCE (INCLUDING PRESCRIPTIONS).



      6.  DISTURBING THE PEACE, NOISE AND NUISANCE VIOLATIONS, AND
LITTERING ARE MISDEMEANORS.  YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANING UP ANY
FIREWORKS DEBRIS THAT ENDS UP ON PROPERTY THAT IS NOT YOUR OWN.



      7.  POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS MAY CITE YOU FOR MISDEMEANOR OR
CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATIONS OF STATE LAWS AND CITY ORDINANCES, WITH FINES
RANGING FROM $150 TO $1,000 FOR EACH CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATION.  OFFICIALS
MAY ALSO CONFISCATE ILLEGAL FIREWORKS AND FIREWORKS BEING USED UNLAWFULLY. 
YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COST OF DISPOSING OF THOSE FIREWORKS.



   The reverse side of every flyer shall depict a standard calendar for
the applicable year, with each day on which consumer fireworks may be used
highlighted for easy reference.  The title on the calendar side of the flyer
shall read:  "Consumer fireworks may only be used on 12 or 13 calendar days
each year, subject to the rules on the reverse side.  Permitted days are
highlighted on the calendar below."



   (J)   Any individual who violates the restrictions in divisions (E),
(G), or (I), or who aids, abets, perpetuates, participates in, or otherwise
promotes the actions of the individual that violate said restrictions, may be
cited and prosecuted for the applicable ordinance violation(s) and/or shall
be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, punishable as provided in
Chapter 1 of the City Code.  If the unlawful activity does not cease or
resumes within 72 hours after issuance of a municipal civil infraction
citation, the owner, occupant, or other person with control of the real
property where the violations are occurring and/or the person who has or
shares control of the fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.



   (K)   Any city police officer or official who identifies a firework
that is in violation of the Act or this article shall secure the firework and
immediately notify the department of the alleged violation.  The Police
Department shall investigate the alleged violation and, if it determines that
a violation has occurred, except for a violation of section 20-101(G), may
seize the firework as evidence of the violation.  The Police Department
shall store, or cause to be stored, the evidence seized under this subsection
pending disposition of any criminal or civil proceedings arising from the
violation.  If the person subject to criminal or civil proceedings is found
guilty, responsible, or liable for the violation, the person shall be
required to pay the storage expense for the evidence seized.  Following a
final disposition of an appeal of a conviction under the Act or this article
that affirms the conviction or finding of responsibility, the police
department may dispose of or destroy any fireworks retained as evidence in
that prosecution.



   (L)   A law enforcement officer and/or fire official may confiscate
and impound all fireworks and fireworks paraphernalia involved in causing a
misdemeanor violation of this article or which are found to be within the
access and control of the violator(s).  If the impounded items are lawful to
possess, they may be retained as evidence until any court proceedings or
citations have been adjudicated and any probationary periods have been
completed.  If the impounded items are unlawful to possess, the Police
Department or Fire Department shall dispose of or destroy the items in
accordance with evidence protocols that will still allow for effective
prosecution of the charged offenses without actual retention of the items. 
If any fireworks are retained by the city, they shall be stored in compliance
with the Act and rules promulgated under the Act.  The person from whom
fireworks are seized under the Act or this article shall pay the actual costs
of storage and/or disposal of the seized fireworks.  The Police Department
may dispose of the seized fireworks by providing them to a disposal
organization approved by the Chief of Police or designee, or by allowing them
to be used by city police, fire, and code enforcement agencies for training
purposes.



   (M)   Unless otherwise specified herein, novelties are not subject
to any of the regulations in this article, except that they may not be
utilized in such a manner as to cause, create, or perpetuate a violation of
any other section of the City Code of Ordinances.



   (N)   (1)   Sky lanterns shall not be used, ignited, launched,
offered for sale, exposed for sale, sold at retail, or kept with intent to
sell at retail.



      (2)   Exception: Upon approval of the Fire Marshal, sky
lanterns may be used when necessary for religious ceremonies and the Fire
Marshal is satisfied, after reviewing a completed application for an
operational permit, that adequate safeguards will be implemented.  However,
all such sky lanterns must be tethered in a manner that prevents them from
leaving the immediate area, must be used in the manner and with the
safeguards approved by the Fire Marshal, and must be constantly attended
until extinguished and collected by the applicant.



(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12; Ord. No. 430, § 1, 8-6-13; Ord. No. 442, § 2,
8-18-15; Ord. No. 463, § 3, 4-16-19)



State law reference:



   MCL 28.451 et seq.



Administrative rules:



   R 29.2901 et seq.



20-116.  DISPLAY FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person shall discharge any Display Fireworks without a permit issued
by the City Council.  Pyrotechnic special effects shall not be discharged or
displayed without a permit issued by the Fire Marshal.  Permit applicants
shall follow the procedures set forth in §§ 20-121 through 20-125 of this
article.  Permits are not transferable and shall not be issued to a minor.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 3, 1-2- 08; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12) 
Penalty, see § 1-9



State law reference:



   MCL 28.466



20-117.  RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   An owner, occupant, or other person with control of real
property shall not allow, permit, or otherwise assent to the possession or
display of Display Fireworks on the property or an adjacent public way if
such possession or display is in violation of this subdivision.



   (B)   An owner, occupant, or other person with control of real
property shall be presumed to have assented to the possession or display of
Display Fireworks on the property or adjacent public way in violation of this
subdivision if law enforcement or fire officials observe and document the
existence of unlawful fireworks on the premises or the adjoining public way,
or the existence of the remnants of unlawful fireworks on the premises or
adjoining public way indicative of the use or display of such fireworks.



   (C)   In addition to the penalty provided in Chapter 1, a person who
pleads to or is found responsible for a violation of subsection (A) shall
clean up any fireworks remnants on or adjoining the person's property, or pay
the city's costs for such clean up, and reimburse the city's actual costs for
destruction of any unlawful fireworks and materials impounded by law
enforcement or fire officials during investigation of the unlawful activity
under subsection (A).



   (D)   A violation of subsections (A) or (C) is a municipal civil
infraction, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  If the
unlawful activity does not cease after issuance of a municipal civil
infraction citation, the owner, occupant, or other person with control of the
real property shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in
Chapter 1 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 407, § 5, 7-21-09; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



20-118-20-120.  RESERVED.



SUBDIVISION D.  PROCEDURES



20-121.  APPLICATION; RENEWAL.



   (A)   Every applicant for a permit to use or discharge Display
Fireworks and/or pyrotechnic special effects shall submit to the Fire
Department, with a nonrefundable application fee, a current and fully
completed application on a form provided by the Department.



   (B)   The fees shall be set by the city's annual appropriations
ordinance in an amount to cover the cost of investigation, review, and
inspection by the city of the premises which will be used for the use or
discharge of Display Fireworks and/or pyrotechnic special effects.



   (C)   A permit shall not be issued to a nonresident person, firm, or
corporation for ignition of articles pyrotechnic or Display Fireworks until
the person, firm, or corporation has appointed in writing a resident member
of the bar of this state or a resident agent to be the legal representative
upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the person, firm, or
corporation may be served.



   (D)   All applications shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name, residence address, and telephone number of a
resident agent who is a natural person (no post office boxes will be accepted
as legal addresses);



      (2)   The name, residence address, and telephone number of the
applicant:



         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the name,
residence address, and telephone number of each of the officers and directors
of the corporation and of each stockholder owning more than 10% of the stock
of the corporation if that individual is or will be involved in the
management and/or operation of the business.  The applicant shall also
provide the name, residence address, and telephone number of each individual
who will be involved in the management and/or operation of the business, as
well as documentation that the corporation is in good standing in the state
of incorporation;



         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, the name of the
partnership and the name, residence address, and telephone number of each of
the partners having at least a 10% ownership interest, as well as any
individual who is or will be involved in the management and/or operation of
the business;



         (c)   If the applicant owns stock or has a financial
interest in any other business which sells or manufactures fireworks, the
name, address, and telephone number of the corporation and the name, address,
and telephone number of each such business;



      (3)   The address and legal description of the property where
the fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic special effects will be
displayed;



      (4)   Authorization for the city, its agents and employees to
seek information and conduct a safety inspection of the premises where
fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic special effects will be
displayed.  The applicant shall give such additional information and
identification necessary to discover the truth of the matters required to be
set forth in the application; and



      (5)   The application shall be signed and sworn to by the
applicant.



   (E)   Permits.  In addition to the other conditions set forth in
this section, permit applications shall be subject to background
investigations to determine whether the applicant has ever been involved in
criminal or fraudulent activities, or has ever had a license or permit
suspended or revoked for cause.



      (1)   If, as a result of the investigation, the Fire Marshal
or Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant may
cause or present a danger to public safety if granted a fireworks display
permit, the City Council may deny the application.



      (2)   If, as a result of the investigation, the Fire Marshal
or Chief of Police has reasonable cause to believe that the applicant may
cause or present a danger to public safety if granted a pyrotechnic special
effects display permit, the Fire Marshal may deny the application.



   (F)   Applicants for a permit to use, discharge, or display
fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects must demonstrate financial
responsibility in the form of a bond or insurance policy in an amount,
character, and form deemed necessary by the City Council for the protection
of the public.



   (G)   Before granting a permit to use, discharge, or display
fireworks, the City Council shall rule on the competency and qualifications
of the operator of the display as required under NFPA 1123, and the time,
place, and safety aspects of the display.



   (H)   Cost of policing. Fireworks displays vary in size and scope,
and displays of large magnitude cause the city to incur significant
additional expenses for police, fire, and emergency services.  Therefore, in
addition to the nonrefundable application fee, an applicant for a permit to
use, discharge, or display fireworks shall deposit with the city, as a
condition of enjoying the privileges inherent in receipt of a permit, an
amount reasonably calculated to reimburse the city for the cost of additional
police and emergency services.  The city shall hold such amount, to be
determined by the City Council at the time the permit application is
considered, in escrow until after the fireworks display.  In determining the
amount, the City Council may utilize its past experiences and the experiences
of other communities.  The city shall itemize its additional police and
emergency services expenses incurred as a result of the fireworks display and
may draw from the escrowed funds to achieve full reimbursement. Remaining
funds shall be returned to the permit applicant.  In the event that the
escrowed funds are insufficient to cover the city's actual costs under this
division (H), the city shall serve an invoice upon the permit applicant with
a demand for payment.  Failure of a permit applicant to comply with any of
the provisions of this division (H) shall be a misdemeanor, punishable as
provided in Chapter 1 of this code.



   (I)   Term.



      (1)   Permits for the use or discharge of Display Fireworks or
pyrotechnic special effects are valid only for the date(s) and time(s) stated
on the permit itself.  Each subsequent use or discharge of Display Fireworks
or pyrotechnic special effects shall require a new permit, and the applicant
shall follow the application process set forth in this article.



   (J)   Display permit conditions.  The issuance of a permit for the
use or discharge of Display Fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects shall be
conditioned upon compliance with all of the terms and conditions of this
article, as well as the provisions of Chapter 33 of the International Fire
Code.  In addition, the issuance of such a permit shall be conditioned upon
the following:



      (1)   The applicant and property owner must execute a written
agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to allow police, fire,
and emergency personnel designated by the city to be present on the premises
before, during, and after the fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects
display for purposes of supervising and inspecting the display and
surrounding conditions for public safety hazards and violations of city codes
and ordinances; and



      (2)   The applicant and property owner must execute an
indemnification agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, to
indemnify the city for any and all liability or damages incurred by any
person or entity as a result of the fireworks or pyrotechnic special effects
display.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 4, 1-2- 08; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



State law reference:



   MCL 28.451 et seq.



20-122  INVESTIGATION.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the fully completed application, fees, and
such other information as may be required or requested by the Fire
Department, the Fire Marshal shall schedule a safety inspection to examine
the premises where fireworks will be displayed, or where pyrotechnic special
effects will be displayed.



   (B)   If the Fire Marshal finds reasonable cause to believe that
other code violations exist which are not fire safety related, the Fire
Marshal may refer the application to the Building Official, or his or her
designated representative, who shall cause a thorough inspection of the
premises to be made to ensure that the premises are in compliance with all
pertinent provisions of state law and local ordinances.  The results of such
inspections shall be returned to the Fire Marshal within 30 days of the date
the application was referred.



   (C)   For fireworks display permits, the Fire Marshal shall forward
his or her recommendation to the City Council for consideration of the permit
application within 120 days of receipt of the properly completed
application.  For pyrotechnic special effects display permits, the Fire
Marshal shall issue a decision to grant or deny the permit within 60 days of
receipt of the properly completed application.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 4, 1-2- 08; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



20-123.  CERTIFICATE OR PERMIT; REFUSAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR
NONRENEWAL.



   A permit issued under this article may be refused by the Fire Marshal
or suspended, revoked, or not renewed by the City Council for cause.  The
term CAUSE as used in this Article, shall include the doing or omitting of
any act or permitting any condition to exist on the premises for which a
permit is issued, which act, omission, or condition is contrary to the
health, safety, and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular, or
fraudulent in nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the permit
issued, or is forbidden by this Article or any applicable law. Cause shall
include but not be limited to:



   (A)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application;



   (B)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of the
business or during a safety inspection;



   (C)   Any material violation of this article or of the regulations
authorized herein;



   (D)   Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance which
creates a risk to the health, safety, or welfare of the community;



   (E)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such a
manner as to constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection
with the premises for which a permit is issued. For purposes of this Article,
NUISANCE shall be given its normal and customary meaning and shall include
the nuisances found within Chapter 33 of this code as well as, but not be
limited to, the following:



      (1)   Existing violations of building, electrical, mechanical,
plumbing, zoning, health, fire, or other applicable regulatory codes;



      (2)   A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is in
violation of the law and/or interferes with the health, safety, and welfare
of the properties in the area.



   (F)   Failure by the owner or operator to permit inspection of the
premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the enforcement
of this Article;



   (G)   Failure to pay personal property taxes, other city obligations
and real property taxes by February 14 of each year.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6- 19-12)



20-124.  PROCEDURE FOR NONRENEWAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Before any action is taken concerning revocation or suspension
of a permit, the city shall serve the holder of the permit by personal
service or first class mail, served or mailed at least ten days prior to a
hearing, with notice of hearing before the City Council or a hearing panel
designated by the City Council to conduct a hearing and forward a
recommendation to the City Council, which notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   Date, time, and place of the hearing;



      (2)   Notice of the proposed action;



      (3)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (4)   Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify;



      (5)   A statement that the holder of the permit may be
represented by legal counsel, present evidence and testimony, and confront
and cross-examine adverse witnesses;



      (6)   A statement requiring the holder of the permit to notify
the City Attorney's office at least three days prior to the hearing date if
he, she, or it intends to contest the proposed action and to provide the
names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his, her, or its
behalf.



   (B)   Upon completion of the hearing, and after a decision by the
City Council, the city shall submit to the holder of a permit a written
statement of the findings and determination of the City Council within 30
days.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6- 19-12)



20-125.  DENIAL; HEARING.



   (A)   Any person whose initial request for a pyrotechnic special
effects display permit, is denied by the Fire Marshal shall have a right to a
hearing before the City Council, provided a written request for such a
hearing is filed with the City Manager within ten days following such
denial.  The City Council shall have the right to affirm and sustain any
refusal to issue a permit or the City Council may grant any such permit.



   (B)   In addition to the information required in this article, an
applicant whose permit under this article was denied by the Fire Marshal
should be prepared to submit and discuss any additional information required
by the City Council for the appeal hearing.



(Ord. No. 361, § 1, 5-7-02; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 11-6-02; Ord. No. 374, § 1,
12-21-04; Ord. No. 393, § 4, 1-2- 08; Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



20-126 - 20-130.  RESERVED.



SUBDIVISION E.  PENALTIES



20-131.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise provided in this Article, if a person
knowingly, intentionally, or recklessly violates this Article, the person is
guilty of a crime as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or a fine of
not more than $500.00, or both.



      (2)   If the violation causes damage to the property of
another person, a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90
days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both.



      (3)   If the violation causes serious impairment of a body
function of another person, or death to another person, the violations shall
be prosecuted as felonies pursuant to the Act.



   (B)   In addition to any other penalty imposed for the violation of
the Act or this Article, a person who tenders a plea of guilty, no contest,
or responsible to a violation of this Article shall be required to reimburse
the city for the costs of storing and disposing of seized fireworks that the
city confiscated for a violation of the Act or this Article.



(Ord. No. 419, § 1, 6-19-12)



CHAPTER 21:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 22:  FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



22-1-22-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  DRIVE-IN AND FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS



22-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "Drive-In and Fast Food
Restaurant Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 14-16; Ord. No. 80A, § 2, 5-4-82)



22-17.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DRIVE-IN RESTAURANT. A business establishment serving food and/or
beverages that is so developed that its principal retail or service character
is dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor
vehicles so as to serve motor vehicles or serve patrons while in the motor
vehicles or to serve patrons at the establishment who will consume the food
and/or beverages while in the motor vehicle and on the premises of the
drive-in establishment.



   FAST FOOD RESTAURANT. A business establishment where food and/or
beverages are ordered and purchased at a counter, or cafeteria style, either
for carry-out or for consumption on the premises. Typically these
establishments serve a larger geographical area, prepare the food and/or
beverages in advance of anticipated sales and do not provide individualized
service at each table in order to achieve faster service. This term does not
include a drive-in restaurant.



   WASTE MATERIALS. Paper cups, straws, napkins, garbage, liquids and all
other waste material intended for disposal which, if not placed in a proper
receptacle, tends to create a nuisance by rendering the property unclean,
unsafe and unsightly.



(1978 Code, § 14-17; Ord No. 80-A, § 3, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 179-G, § 2,
2-17-86)



22-18-22-20.  RESERVED.



22-21.  BUSINESS PROHIBITED BETWEEN CERTAIN HOURS.



   No food, frozen dessert or beverages shall be sold or served at a
drive-in restaurant to any patron outside of an enclosed building or in any
motor vehicle between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., except Saturday
and Sunday mornings between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.



(1978 Code, § 14-21)



22-22.  PAVEMENT.



   All parking and driveway areas of a drive-in restaurant shall be
surfaced with a permanent type of pavement consisting of concrete, asphalt or
bituminous material adequately graded to prevent the collection of standing
water.



(1978 Code, § 14-22)



Cross reference:



   Concrete work, see §§ 48-60 et seq.



22-23.  LIGHTING OF PARKING AREAS.



   All parking areas of a drive-in restaurant shall be adequately lighted
in a manner not to unduly reflect on adjoining premises.



(1978 Code, § 14-23)



Cross reference:



   Requirements of zoning ordinance as to exterior lighting, see zoning
ordinance § 24.06



22-24.  CONTROL OF WASTE MATERIALS GENERALLY.



   (A)   The owner and/or manager of a drive-in or fast food restaurant
shall, at least once every 24 hours, dispose of all waste materials deposited
by patrons on the premises and shall provide sufficient waste receptacles on
the premises for the deposit of waste materials and shall keep such materials
from being strewn or littered about the premises or blowing onto adjoining
property.



   (B)   The owner or manager of any drive-in or fast food restaurant
may be charged with the cost of cleaning up or removing debris found on the
premises and on the public highway or highways adjacent to said premises. The
City Manager, the Health Officer, the Building Official or any other
enforcement officer shall have the right, if he or she sees debris on the
premises occupied by the drive-in or fast food restaurant or on the highways
adjacent thereto, to cause the same to be cleaned up and removed from the
premises and shall certify the cost of said cleaning up and removal to the
City Council.



(1978 Code, § 14-24; Ord. No. 80-A, § 5, 5-4-82)



Cross reference:



   Garbage and refuse, see Ch. 23



22-25.  DEPOSIT OF WASTE MATERIALS ON PREMISES.



   No person shall place, throw or deposit any waste material on the
premises of a drive-in or fast food restaurant, except in receptacles
provided for that purpose.



(1978 Code, § 14-25; Ord. No. 80-A, § 6, 5-4-82)



Cross reference:



   Anti-litter ordinance, see §§ 23-31 et seq.



22-26.  NOISE AND DISTURBANCES.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of the owner and the manager of a
drive-in restaurant or fast food restaurant to maintain quiet and good order
upon the premises at all times and not to permit disorderly conduct or
loitering by patrons or by any other person. Loudspeakers may be permitted
only for the purpose of giving instructions to and by employees but shall not
be of sufficient volume so as to be able to be heard at the lot line.



   (B)   No person on the premises or leaving or entering the premises
of a fast food restaurant or drive-in restaurant shall race the engine of a
motor vehicle or bring it to a sudden stop or start, blow the horn or make
any other loud noise so as to disturb the peace, quiet and good order of the
premises or neighborhood.



(1978 Code, § 14-26; Ord. No. 80-A, § 7, 5-4-82)



Cross reference:



   Noise generally, see Ch. 31



22-27-22-28.  RESERVED.



22-29-22-38.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  MOBILE UNITS FOR SALE OF ICE CREAM AND SIMILAR PRODUCTS



22-39.  MOBILE VENDING UNIT DEFINED; LICENSE REQUIRED.



   (A)   For the purpose of this article, a VENDING UNIT is defined as
any motor vehicle, motorcycle, moped, cycle or trailer used for the temporary
selling, delivering, hawking or peddling of foodstuffs or refreshments of any
type, including but not limited to ice cream and ice cream products, hot
dogs, hamburgers, popcorn, potato chips, cotton candy, candied apples,
doughnuts, candy, gum, pop and coffee.



   (B)   No person shall operate any vending unit without first having
obtained from the city a license.



(1978 Code, § 14-39; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82)



Cross reference:



   Licenses generally, see Ch. 29



22-40.  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.



   Any person desiring a license required by this article shall file with
the City Clerk a written application for the license. The application shall
contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the owner and the operator of
the vending unit;



      (2)   The application shall set forth whether or not the owner
or operator of the vending unit has been convicted of any offense against the
laws of the United States or the laws of the State of Michigan or the
ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights, and if the owner or operator has
been so convicted, the place, date and name of the crime of which convicted,
together with the name and address of the court in which the conviction was
had and the sentence, if any, imposed;



      (3)   All applications shall be referred to the Police
Department which shall cause an inspection to be made of the vending unit for
compliance with the requirements of Chapter 49 of this Code. The Police
Department shall make a written report to the City Council within 30 days.



      (4)   The operator shall furnish the results of a health
examination to the city on forms provided by the city, the health examination
to have taken place not more than 90 days prior to filing of the application;



      (5)   The operator shall file with the application two recent
photographs of himself or herself of a size which may be attached to the
license, one of which shall be attached to the license, when issued, and the
other of which shall be filed with the application;



      (6)   Every operator shall prominently display his or her
license, together with his or her photograph, on his or her vending unit so
the license may be easily seen by patrons of the vending unit.



   The application shall be accompanied by the yearly license fee.



(1978 Code, § 14-40; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82)



22-41.  FEE; EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.



   Any person operating a vending unit shall pay a license fee as
established by the annual appropriations ordinance to the City Clerk, and all
such licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year.



(1978 Code, § 14-41; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82; Ord. No. 388, § 13,
1-3-07)



22-42.  NOISE-MAKING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   No license shall be issued for any vending unit which plays any music,
rings bells or uses any other noise-making device to attract attention to
itself.



(1978 Code, § 14-42; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82)



Cross reference:



   Noise generally, see Ch. 31



22-43.  NIGHT OPERATION.



   Vending units shall not be operated later than 8:00 p.m., except during
the months of June, July, and August when the hours of operation shall be
allowed until 9:00 p.m.



(1978 Code, § 14-43; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82)



22-44.  OPERATION NEAR SCHOOLS.



   No vending unit shall be operated within 250 feet of an elementary
school during school hours.



(1978 Code, § 14-44; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1,1-5-82)



22-45.  EQUIPMENT.



   No vending unit shall be operated upon any highway or other place open
to the general public, including any area designed for the parking of motor
vehicles, unless equipped with lamps as set forth in § 49-63(7) of this Code.



(1978 Code, § 14-45; Ord. No. 53-A, § 1, 1-5-82)



CHAPTER 23:  GARBAGE AND REFUSE



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



23-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED PROPERTY.  Personal property of an occupant that has been:



      (1)   Left behind by an occupant who has surrendered or
abandoned possession of real property for any reason, including in response
to eviction proceedings commenced by an owner, governmental agency, or other
party entitled to possession;



      (2)   Disposed of by an owner, governmental agency, or other
party entitled to possession after an occupant has surrendered or abandoned
possession of real property in response to eviction proceedings brought by
such party; or



      (3)   Disposed of by a court officer under an order of
eviction restoring or granting possession to an owner, governmental agency,
or other party entitled to possession.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager or an authorized designate.



   COMMERCIAL REFUSE. The rejected, unwanted or discarded or abandoned
material generated by commercial establishments and uses, such as office
buildings, personal service establishments, technical and scientific research
facilities, professional service offices, clinics, churches and the waste
from industrial establishments.



   CONSTRUCTION REFUSE. All unwanted, rejected, discarded or abandoned
materials resulting from the alteration, repair, demolition or construction
of buildings or structures.



   COURT OFFICER.  A bailiff, sheriff, deputy sheriff, court officer, or
other person authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction to restore or
grant possession of real property to an owner, governmental agency, or other
party following eviction proceedings.



   EVICTION PROCEEDINGS.  Legal action taken or commenced by an owner or
other person entitled to possession to obtain or recover possession of real
property, including summary proceedings to recover possession of premises,
land contract forfeiture actions, land contract and mortgage foreclosures,
quiet title actions, partition actions, and any written communications or
notices given by an owner demanding possession of real property prior to or
in connection with any such legal actions.



   GARBAGE.  Waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking or
spoiling of food. The term shall not include discarded food from food
processing plants, large quantities of condemned food products or large
quantities of wind-fallen fruit subject to rapid decomposition.



   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any substance defined as a "hazardous substance" or
"hazardous waste" under any federal or state law or regulation.



   LAWN DEBRIS. Residential grass clippings, leaves, weeds, twigs,
prunings, shrub clippings, garden waste, old potting soil and dirt incidental
to minor yard work. Twigs, prunings and shrub clippings shall not exceed
pencil-thin.



   LAWN DEBRIS COLLECTION SEASON. A period each year scheduled by the City
Manager during which a separate lawn debris collection service is provided
throughout the city.



   MECHANICAL CONTAINER. Any dumpster or other metal container with a
capacity of two cubic yards or greater used to store refuse that is capable
of being emptied by mechanical means, including metal containers used by an
owner or court officer to contain abandoned property for later disposal .



   OCCUPANT.  An individual or entity residing in or having possession of
real property, including an owner in possession, mortgagor, land contract
purchaser, tenant, sub-tenant, or trespasser, or an assignee of any of
them.  Occupant is broadly defined to include an owner in possession,
mortgagor, land contract purchaser, tenant, sub-tenant, trespasser or an
assignee of any of them.



   ORDER OF EVICTION.  An order of eviction or other order issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction restoring or granting possession of real
property to an owner, governmental agency or other person entitled to
possession of real property.



   OWNER.  An individual or entity that owns or is entitled to control of
real property, including a legal title holder, land contract seller,
landlord, trustee, secured party entitled to possession of real property,
receiver, or property manager, or an agent acting on behalf of any of them.



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Furniture, goods, belongings, equipment, and
fixtures of an occupant that are on vacant real property or the premises of a
residence or other building or structure located upon real property.



   REAL PROPERTY.  Land, and buildings, structures, and other occupiable
improvements such as residences, condominiums, duplexes, apartment buildings,
multiple family dwellings, commercial and industrial buildings, shopping
centers, commercial or industrial parks, or any part of any of them that is
used, occupied, or offered for sale, rent, or occupancy by an owner or
occupant.



   REFUSE. All solid waste, including abandoned property, garbage, rubbish
and yard waste but excluding lawn debris.



   RUBBISH. Wastepaper, household plastic, empty tin cans and glass
containers if cleaned of contents, wood or wood products of under three inch
diameter and three feet in length, paper products, books, magazines, glass,
crockery, stone, concrete and similar materials.



   SECURED PARTY.  An individual or entity which has a mortgage, lien, or
other security interest in or relating to real property, including a
mortgagee, land contract vendor, lien holder, governmental agency, or other
party which has a security interest in real property under federal, state, or
local law.



   SPECIAL COLLECTION. Any collection of waste at a time other than the
regularly scheduled once per week collection or of a volume or quantity of
waste exceeding the limitations of this article whether requested by an owner
or occupant or done by the city to eliminate a violation of the City Code.



   WASTE. Refuse or lawn debris.



   YARD WASTES. Tree or shrub branches, sod, dirt and other wastes
resulting from yard care excluding lawn debris.



(1978 Code, § 15-1; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115D, § 1,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 1, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 392, §§ 1 - 2, 12-18-07)



23-2.  RECEPTACLES-GENERALLY.



   (A)   Size generally. It shall be the duty of every owner, tenant or
occupant of any building, and the owner of any property or use which
generates refuse, to provide receptacles of sufficient size to hold the
accumulated refuse between scheduled refuse collections.



   (B)   Unapproved receptacles. Stationary receptacles, large steel
drums, paint pails, cardboard barrels, cardboard boxes, paper bags and other
containers of a like nature are not approved receptacles and collection may
not be made by the city when such receptacles are used.



   (C)   Broken and the like receptacles. A receptacle that is broken
or otherwise fails to meet the requirements of this article may be deemed to
be rubbish and may be collected as such by the city without notice to the
users.



   (D)   Excess weight. Refuse placed in receptacles that exceeds the
weight limitations or otherwise does not conform to the provisions of this
article may not be collected by the city.



   (E)   Certain waste not collectible. The city will not be
responsible for collection of frozen waste adhering to the receptacle or for
any resulting damage to receptacles.



   (F)   Residential refuse. The following shall be approved
receptacles for residential refuse:



      (1)   Portable watertight and verminproof containers of
substantial construction with handles or bails and a tight-fitting cover.
These containers are to have a capacity of at least ten gallons, but not more
than 32 gallons, and each must not exceed 60 pounds in weight when full.



      (2)   Securely closed plastic bags of sufficient strength to
contain refuse without breakage of up to 32 gallons and not exceeding 40
pounds.



   (G)   Commercial refuse. The following provisions shall apply to
commercial refuse:



      (1)   In every case where the owner, occupant or user of any
premises generally accumulates less than one cubic yard of refuse within a
one week period, bagged collection as provided by § 23-2(F)(2) shall be made
available upon request up to a maximum of six bags per week.



      (2)   In every case where the owner, occupant or user of any
premises generally accumulates more than one cubic yard of refuse within any
one week period, the owner, occupant or user shall provide a container or
containers of the type designed to be handled mechanically by refuse
collection trucks and the owner, occupant or user is responsible to arrange
for private collection and disposal.



(1978 Code, § 15-2; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, §§ 2,
3, 4, 5, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 2, 1-7-97)



23-3.  SAME-INTERFERENCE AND THE LIKE.



   No person, other than the owner of refuse receptacles or his or her
agents or employees or licensees of the city, shall disturb, remove or
attempt to remove refuse receptacles or their covers or disturb or remove or
attempt to remove any refuse not in containers whether the same is on public
or private property.



(1978 Code, § 15-3; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87)



23-4.  PREPARATION FOR COLLECTION; COST RECOVERY PROGRAM.



   (A)   Garbage must be thoroughly drained of liquids and be wrapped
in several thicknesses of paper before being placed in receptacles for
collection.



   (B)   Large residential refuse items shall be broken down or
disassembled and placed in approved receptacles or securely tied compact
bundles which do not exceed 50 pounds in weight, three feet in length and
three feet in girth.



   (C)   Bulky residential refuse items, such as large appliances and
furniture, which cannot be broken down or disassembled, shall be placed for
collection in a manner to facilitate handling.



   (D)   Bulky commercial refuse items, such as large appliances,
furniture, carpeting, equipment or machinery shall not be placed for
collection. Such developments shall make their own arrangements for
collection or disposal of such items.



   (E)   Apartment complexes and schools which utilize the city's waste
collection services and which use mechanical containers for collection shall
not place bulky items such as mattresses, carpeting, hot water heaters,
furniture, appliances and the like in any mechanical containers for
collection.  Such properties shall make their own arrangements for
collection or disposal of such items.



   (F)   The City Manager or his or her designate shall have the
authority to determine the number and size of mechanical containers which
will be collected by the city waste collector from multiple-family
developments and from schools.  Due to the disproportionate cost to the city
and its taxpayers, mechanical container collection services shall not be
provided to apartment complexes and schools, and refuse collection services
shall not be provided to mobile home parks by the city's waste collector
without participation by such properties in the city's cost recovery
program.  The program shall be administered by the City Manager or a
designate, and shall require payment of the fee adopted in the city's annual
appropriations ordinance.  Properties that do not participate in the program
shall be responsible for arranging private disposal.



(1978 Code, § 15-4; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 7,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 3, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 375, § 1, 3-1-05)



23-5.  DISPOSAL OF CONSTRUCTION REFUSE.



   It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, occupant or other person
responsible for construction work to remove from the premises, within a
reasonable time after the completion of such construction work, all surplus
construction material and all refuse building and all construction refuse.
Such materials shall be removed outside the city limits or disposed of within
the city in accordance with the directions of the City Manager.



(1978 Code, § 15-5; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87)



Cross reference:



   Building regulations, see Ch. 11



23-6.  STORAGE, TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.



   Hazardous waste shall be the responsibility of the producer or owner
thereof and shall not be disposed of within the city or allowed to be stored
or transported within the city without the written approval of the City
Manager or his or her authorized agent and then only under the supervision of
a person appointed by him or her who has knowledge of the safety measures
necessary to protect the public health and safety during the storing,
transporting or disposing of hazardous waste.



(1978 Code, § 15-6; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87)



23-7.  UNLAWFUL ACCUMULATIONS OF WINDBLOWN REFUSE.



   It shall be unlawful to cause or permit any refuse to accumulate that
can be blown away by the wind anywhere in the city, excepting in a covered
container.



(1978 Code, § 15-7; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 8,
4-7-92) Penalty, see § 1-9



23-8.  PROHIBITED MATERIALS.



   No person may place for collection any materials which could ignite
waste in a receptacle or waste collection vehicle.



(1978 Code, § 15-8; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 9,
4-7-92)



23-9.  CURBSIDE COLLECTION.



   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of all persons to have their
refuse at the point of collection by 7:00 a.m. of the day specified for
collection. No waste shall be placed at the curb or street for collection
prior to 1:00 p.m. the afternoon before the scheduled collection day or after
3:00 p.m. on Fridays.



   (B)   During the week while refuse is being stored and accumulated
for ultimate disposal, all refuse must be stored inside of a building.
However, refuse may be stored outside of a building in an approved receptacle
as set forth in § 23-2(F)(1). Outside storage of refuse in any front yard as
defined by § 31.01 of the zoning ordinance is prohibited.



   (C)   After the collection of the waste, the empty receptacle shall
be removed from the curb or street by the owner or occupant or user and
replaced in the storage area as soon as possible but in no case later than
ten hours after collection has been made.



(1978 Code, § 15-9; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 10,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 4, 1-7-97)



23-10.  MECHANICAL CONTAINER COLLECTION.



   (A)   Commercial or industrial establishments and churches which
generally generate more than one cubic yard (approximately six bags) of
refuse per week shall be responsible for arranging private disposal.
Mechanical containers must be used to contain refuse generated by such
establishments.



   (B)   All mechanical containers must be maintained in good repair,
waterproof, rodentproof and equipped with lids. Lids shall be closed except
when the container is being filled or emptied.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any establishment for which
mechanical container collection is required under this chapter to permit
storage of refuse upon any portion of the premises outside of buildings that
is not confined in mechanical containers. Those establishments approved for
curbside collection may place refuse for collection at specified locations
and times up to a maximum of six bags per week.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to make any mechanical container
collection within 1,000 feet of any property used or zoned for residential
purposes prior to 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday,
prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. on Saturday or prior to 12:00 noon or
after 6:00 p.m. on Sunday, except in special cases authorized by the City
Manager or his or her designate.



(1978 Code, § 15-10; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 11,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115E, § 5, 1-7-97) Penalty, see § 1-9



23-11.  DEPOSIT OF REFUSE ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person may deposit or cause to be deposited, sort, scatter or leave
any waste, filth or other offensive materials or build or maintain any
structure or thing whatsoever containing the same in any public street or
alley or on public property in the city except as permitted in this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 15-11; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 155D, § 12,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 6, 1-7-97)



23-12.  DEPOSIT OF REFUSE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person may deposit or cause to be deposited, sort, scatter
or leave any waste, filth or other offensive materials or build or maintain
any structure or thing containing the same on any private property in the
city except as permitted in this chapter.



   (B)   No person may deposit or cause to be deposited any refuse in a
mechanical container which is not owned, leased or authorized to be used by
such person.



(1978 Code, § 15-12; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 13,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115E, § 7, 1-7-97)



23-13.  DISPOSAL OF WASTE GENERALLY.



   All waste collected for disposal from within the city limits shall be
disposed of at such facilities as may be designated by the City Manager.



(1978 Code, § 15-13; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 14,
4-7-92)



23-14.  RIGHT OF OWNER OR PRODUCER TO DISPOSE OF WASTE GENERATED.



   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prohibit or deny the
owner or producer of waste from disposing of such waste in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter or for contracting for private waste disposal
or private trash collection that does not conflict with applicable city code.



(1978 Code, § 15-14; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 15,
4-7-92)



23-15.  BURYING REFUSE.



   (A)   No person may bury waste within the city limits unless in
accordance with the city code and any applicable federal and state law.



   (B)   No person may bury any dead animal except in accordance with
federal and state law.



(1978 Code, § 15-15; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 16,
4-7-92)



23-16.  PRIVATE COLLECTOR’S LICENSE.



   (A)   No person may engage in the business of collecting waste in
the city without first obtaining a license. A person who has contracted with
the city for waste collection may be licensed by the city in the contract.



   (B)   No person may contract with any other person to collect waste
within the city limits, unless such other person is licensed by the city to
collect waste.



   (C)   The license shall expire on December 31 of each year, unless
revoked or suspended prior to that date.



   (D)   Application for a license shall be filed with the City Clerk
in the form and manner as required by this section. The application shall
include all information necessary to determine compliance with this article,
including but not limited to:



      (1)   The full names, dates of birth, proof of identification,
business addresses and residential addresses of all owners, proprietors,
officers and managers of the applicant; and the names and addresses of each
officer if the applicant is a corporation;



      (2)   The firm names under which the applicant intends to do
business;



      (3)   Whether or not the applicant or person conducting or
managing the applicant’s business has been convicted of any crime, felony,
misdemeanor or the violation of any municipal ordinance and, if so, full
particulars.



   (E)   Each and every application for a license shall be in writing
and filed in quadruplicate with the City Clerk and shall be accompanied by
the application fee established by  the annual appropriations ordinance.



   (F)   No such license shall be issued except upon payment of the fee
required by  the annual appropriations ordinance and upon posting of a
surety bond, cash or irrevocable letter of credit satisfactory to the city
guaranteeing the faithful and prompt discharge of all obligations of the
licensee to the city. These performance requirements may be waived by the
city in a city waste collection contract.



   (G)   No such license shall be issued except upon determination by
the City Manager or his or her authorized representative that the equipment
to be used conforms to the requirements of this article and that the
applicant has not been convicted of larcenous felonies or violation of any
law regarding waste disposal. The City Manager or his or her authorized
representative may deny, suspend or revoke any license for violation of any
provisions of this article or any other ordinance or law pertaining to such
business or for such other cause as he or she deems reasonable. Prior
revocation of a license shall be sufficient grounds for the refusal by the
City Manager or his or her authorized representative to approve any future
application by such licensee.



   (H)   The licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the
Board of Ordinance Appeals on any of action of denial, suspension or
revocation, provided a written request is filed with the City Clerk within
five days after issuance of notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The
Board of Ordinance Appeals may confirm such denial, suspension or revocation
or may authorize and reinstate such license. The action of the Board of
Ordinance Appeals shall be final.



   (I)   Such license shall be carried on the person at all times
during the operation for which it was issued and produced for examination,
when requested.



   (J)   Upon issuance of the license, the city shall issue an
identification sticker for each waste collection vehicle to be used in
collection to show compliance with this article. The sticker shall be affixed
to the waste refuse collection vehicle in the place designated by the city
for easy identification.



   (K)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person
who collects recyclable waste products for deposit at city-operated recycling
centers under rules and regulations made by the City Manager under §
23-24(A).



(1978 Code, § 15-16; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 17,
4-2-92; Ord. No. 388, § 14, 1-3-07)



Cross reference:



   Licenses generally, see Ch. 29



23-17.  COLLECTION VEHICLES-GENERALLY.



   Vehicles used for collection and transportation of waste within or
through the city shall be watertight, covered and conform to all laws
regulating axle and load limitations.



(1978 Code, § 15-17; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 18,
4-7-92)



Cross reference:



   Securing loads, see § 49-85;



   Vehicle equipment, size and load, see §§ 49-55 et seq.



23-18.  ROUTES.



   The city may designate the route to be taken by trucks or haulers of
waste through the city and to a disposal site.



(1978 Code, § 15-18; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 19,
4-7-92)



Cross reference:



   Truck routes, weight limitations, see § 49-83



23-19.  SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.



   (A)   A person may request a special collection for waste by
contacting the Office of Public Works. Upon receipt of such a request, the
Office of Public Works shall contact the city waste collector so that a
collection can be arranged. The person requesting the special collection
shall pay for the estimated cost of the special collection in accordance with
a fee schedule established by the City Council prior to the special
collection.



   (B)   The city may arrange to have the city waste collector make a
special collection of waste determined to constitute a violation of this
chapter in accordance with the provisions of § 23-21.



   (C)   This section shall not require the city or its waste collector
to make any special collection of waste which does not conform to the
requirements of this article by reason of volume, contents, hazardous nature,
bundling, containerization or otherwise not to make special collections for
businesses which generate waste in excess of the amounts for which regular
weekly collection is provided under this article or under the city waste
contract.



(1978 Code, § 15-19; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 20,
4-7-92)



23-20.  SPECIAL COLLECTION FEES; ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The fee for any special collection authorized by § 23-19
shall be in accordance with a fee schedule established by the City Council.



   (B)   Any fee for special collection which remains unpaid for 30
days after the invoice date shall constitute a lien against the premises from
which the waste is generated or collected. The City Manager may certify the
delinquency to the City Assessor and in such case the fee shall be entered
upon the next tax roll as a lien against the premises which shall be
collected in the same manner with the same interest and penalties as special
assessments against such premises.



   (C)   All fees for additional refuse collections for school
districts shall be in accordance with the special collection fee schedule.



   (D)   Enforcement of the lien to collect the special collection fee
shall not be the exclusive means of collection and the city may collect such
fee in any manner permitted by law.



   (E)   In addition to any other remedy the city may discontinue
collection from any premises for which there is an outstanding delinquent
collection fee. Such discontinuance shall not exempt or release the owner or
occupant of the premises from any other penalties provided by this article.



   (F)   The Department of Public Works may authorize adjustment of an
invoice where the owner or occupant of the property from which the special
collection was made did not request or receive the services itemized on the
invoice.



(1978 Code, § 15-20; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 21,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-E, § 8, 1-7-97)



23-21.  REJECTION OF WASTE; TAGGING OF WASTE; NOTICE TO CORRECT VIOLATION.



   (A)   If any owner or occupant of any property places any waste
which is rejected by the city waste collector because it does not conform to
the requirements of this chapter, the city waste collector shall give notice
to the owner or occupant of the premises by tagging the rejected waste. The
tag shall advise the owner or occupant of the reason the waste was not
collected and shall direct the owner or occupant to correct the violation
within 24 hours, and it shall warn the owner or occupant that if the
violation is not corrected, the Department of Public Works may make a special
collection for which the owner or occupant will be charged.



   (B)   If the Department of Public Works determines the owner or
occupant of the premises upon which rejected waste is located has failed to
correct the violation within the time period specified on the notice, the
Department of Public Works may have the city waste collector make a special
collection of the rejected waste.



   (C)   If the city waste collector makes a special collection of
rejected waste, the owner or occupant shall be charged a fee equal to the
special collection charge incurred by the city, plus an administrative fee.
The owner or occupant of the premises shall be sent an invoice for the costs
of special collection (including an administrative fee established by the
annual appropriations ordinance) which shall be payable within 30 days of the
date of the invoice.



(1978 Code, § 15-21; Ord. No. 115-C, § 1, 1-20-87; Ord. No. 115-D, § 22,
4-7-92; Ord. No. 115-D, § 9, 1-7-97; Ord. No. 388, § 15, 1-3-07)



23-22.  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE.



   The owner or occupant of property abutting a right-of-way shall be
presumed to have generated any waste placed for collection in the
right-of-way. For purposes of determining ownership of property, it shall be
presumed that the person whose name appears on the most recent tax assessment
roll of the city is the owner of the property.



(Ord. No. 115-D, § 23, 4-7-92)



23-23.  APPEALS.



   The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the authority to hear and
decide appeals from and review any order, decision or determination made by
any administrative official charged with enforcing or administering the terms
of this chapter.



   Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would involve practical difficulties or cause
unnecessary hardships, the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the power
upon appeal in specific cases to modify the provisions of the chapter,
imposing such conditions and safeguards as it may reasonably determine as may
be in harmony with the spirit of this chapter and so that public safety and
welfare are secured and substantial justice done.



(Ord. No. 115-D, § 24, 4-7-92)



23-24.  CONSTRUCTION AND ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER; CITY MANAGER'S RULES;
SUPERVISION OF COLLECTION AND REMOVAL.



   (A)   The City Manager is authorized to make such rules and
regulations as from time to time appear to be necessary to carry out the
intent of this article, provided that such rules are not in conflict with
this article or any other provision of the city code.



   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council that this chapter be
liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory
method of preparation, collection and disposition of municipal waste.



   (C)   The collection of waste shall be under the supervision of the
City Manager, and it shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce the
provisions of this article. The Police Department shall assist with the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (D)   The City Manager shall have the authority to deny collection
services for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 115-D, § 25, 4-7-92)



23-25.  RESTRAINING VIOLATIONS.



   All violations of this chapter are declared to be a public nuisance per
se and may be abated by order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 115-D, § 26, 4-7-92)



23-26.  STORAGE OF LAWN DEBRIS.



   (A)   Storage. Lawn debris may be stored only in accordance with the
following:



      (1)   Lawn debris may be stored on the premises which
generated the lawn debris in approved bags or containers for less than one
week prior to a scheduled city collection;



      (2)   Lawn debris may be stored in a compost pile or compost
bin in compliance with city codes regulating composting.



   (B)   Disposal. Lawn debris shall be disposed of in accordance with
the following:



      (1)   Lawn debris may be placed in approved bags or containers
for collection on a regularly scheduled collection day. Lawn debris shall not
be mixed with other refuse;



      (2)   Lawn debris may not be disposed of in a receptacle which
is not owned, leased or authorized for use by the person generating and
disposing of the lawn debris;



      (3)   Lawn debris may not be disposed of in any public
right-of-way or any other public or private place except as provided in this
section;



      (4)   Lawn debris placed for collection which does not conform
to the requirements of this section shall be tagged as rejected waste in
accordance with § 23-21 of this chapter;



      (5)   No person shall deposit lawn debris for curbside
collection that was not generated from his or her premises.



(Ord. No. 115-D, § 27, 4-7-92)



23-27.  RESERVED.



23-28-23-30.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  ANTI-LITTER ORDINANCE



23-31.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Anti-Litter
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 15-31)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to enact and enforce ordinance for control and
elimination of litter, see M.S.A. §§ 28.603(6); M.C.L. § 752.906



   Littering, see M.S.A. §§ 28.603(1) et seq. (M.C.L. §§ 752.901 et
seq.); M.C.L. §§ 324.8901 et seq.



23-32.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection
receptacle as set forth in Article I of this chapter.



   LITTER. All rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, paper,
glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances.



   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach recreation center or any
other public area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active
or passive recreation.



   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building or other structure
designed or used, either wholly or in part, for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant and
shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or
mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other
structure.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or
other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.



   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.



(1978 Code, § 15-32; Ord. No. 115-D, § 31, 4-7-92; Ord. 350, § 5, 10-17-00)



23-33.  DEPOSIT OF LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES GENERALLY; DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS
FREE OF LITTER.



   (A)   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place within the city, except in public receptacles
or in authorized private receptacles for collection or in official city dumps.



   (B)   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or
other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any
building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons
owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their
premises free of litter.



   (C)   No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep
into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city
the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or
private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business
within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises
free of litter.



(1978 Code, § 15-33)



23-34.  MANNER OF PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLES.



   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried
or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place.



(1978 Code, § 15-34)



23-35.  RESERVED.



23-36.  LITTERING BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.



   No person, while a driver or passenger in any vehicle, shall throw or
deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city.



(1978 Code, § 15-36)



23-37.  TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.



   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the
city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load
or contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place, nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any
street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances or foreign
matter of any kind.



(1978 Code, § 15-37)



Statutory reference:



   Provisions of traffic ordinance prohibiting spilling of vehicle loads,
see § 49-85



23-38.  LITTERING PARKS.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city,
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



(1978 Code, § 15-38)



Cross reference:



   General provisions concerning control of waste material in parks, see
§ 38-10



23-39.  LITTERING OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private
property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized
private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street,
sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property.



(1978 Code, § 15-39)



23-40.  LITTERING VACANT PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city, whether owned by such person or not.



(1978 Code, § 15-40)



23-41.  OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.



   The owner or person in control of private property shall, at all times,
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles
for collection.



(1978 Code, § 15-41)



23-42.  REMOVAL OF LITTER FROM VACANT PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   The City Manager is authorized and empowered to notify the
owner of any open or vacant private property within the city, or the agent of
the owner, to properly dispose of litter located on the owner’s property
which is dangerous to public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be
by registered mail, addressed to the owner at his or her last known address
as determined from the tax assessment roll.



   (B)   If the owner or his or her agent so notified fails to properly
dispose of litter dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare within
ten days after receipt of written notice provided for in subsection (A), or
within 30 days after date of such notice in the event the same is returned to
the city post office because of its inability to make delivery of the notice,
provided the same was properly addressed to the last known address of such
owner or agent, the City Manager may authorize the city waste collector to
make a special collection of the litter pursuant to §§ 23-19 and 23-20 of
this chapter. When the city waste collector makes a special collection of
litter the owner or occupant shall be charged a fee equal to the special
collection charge incurred by the city plus an administrative fee established
by the annual appropriations ordinance. The owner or occupant of the premises
shall be sent an invoice for the costs of the special collection which shall
be collectible in the same manner and subject to the same interest and
penalties as special collection charges in § 23-20.



(1978 Code, § 15-42; Ord. No. 115-D, § 32, 4-7-92; Ord. No. 388, § 16,
1-3-07)



Cross reference:



   Removal of accumulations of refuse and assessments therefor, see §§
47-19 et seq.



23-43.  REMOVAL OF DEBRIS FROM HIGHWAY.



   A person who removes a vehicle that is wrecked or damaged in an
accident on a highway, road or street shall remove all glass and other
injurious substances dropped on the highway, road or street as a result of
the accident.



   A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and is subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.



(Ord. No. 350, § 6, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.8902(2); M.C.L. § 324.8905a(a)(1)



23-44.  ADDITIONAL FINES FOR CRIMINAL OR CIVIL ACTIONS.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided in §
1-9 or this article for a criminal or civil action brought under this
article, the court may require the defendant to pay the cost of removing all
litter which is the subject of the violation and the cost of damages to any
land, water, wildlife, vegetation or other natural resource or to any
facility damaged by the violation of this article. Money collected under this
subdivision shall be distributed to the city.



   (B)   In addition to any other penalty or sanction provided for in
§ 1-9 or this article, the court shall impose, under the supervision of the
court, community service in the form of litter gathering labor, including but
not limited to litter connected with the particular violation. This
subsection shall not apply when a civil infraction citation is paid without
court appearance.



(Ord. No. 350, § 7, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 324.8905b



23-45 – 23-50.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.    DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED PROPERTY BY OWNERS AND OTHER PARTIES



23-51.  MANDATORY USE OF MECHANICAL CONTAINERS FOR DISPOSAL OF ABANDONED
PROPERTY.



   (A)   An owner who lawfully recovers possession of real property
shall place and use on the real property (or arrange for such placement and
use) one or more mechanical containers as defined in this Chapter of the Code
to contain the abandoned property until the mechanical container is removed
from the real property for disposal within the time limitations of this
article.



   (B)   An owner who uses a court officer’s services to recover or
obtain possession of real property under an order of eviction shall make
prior arrangements (either by private contract or through a court officer)
for the placement of one or more mechanical containers meeting the
requirements of this article on the real property prior to having the court
officer remove or dispose of the occupant’s abandoned property.



   (C)   An occupant, owner, or court officer who uses a mechanical
container in connection with the disposal of abandoned property shall tightly
close all lids and side doors after depositing the abandoned property into
the mechanical container to prevent spillage on the real property or
neighboring properties.



   (D)   An owner shall remove a mechanical container that is used
under this article to contain abandoned property from the real property
within 48 hours of its placement, unless the mechanical container used for
such disposal is authorized under the provisions of division (H).



   (E)   An owner shall pay the expenses of placement, removal, and
disposal of the contents of mechanical containers used to dispose of
abandoned property whether such placement was arranged by private contract or
through a court officer.  An owner who pays for the use of a mechanical
container may recover such expenses from the occupant who has vacated or been
evicted from the real property.



   (F)   A court officer who agrees to arrange for placement and use of
a mechanical container for an owner may require advance payment or an escrow
deposit for the use of such equipment.  To the extent permitted by law, the
court officer shall have a lien against the real property to secure payment
of any unpaid charges for the placement and use of a mechanical container
under this article.



   (G)   A court officer may require indemnification from an owner
using his or her services to obtain or recover possession of real property as
a condition of arranging the furnishing of mechanical containers in
connection with executing an order of eviction. 



   (H)   Nothing contained in this article shall prevent an owner of
real property that already uses mechanical containers for regular, periodic
pick-up and disposal from using such mechanical containers for containing
abandoned property, provided the mechanical containers:



      (1)   Have sufficient unused capacity to contain the abandoned
property;



      (2)   Meet the requirements of this article, except removal
from the real property within 48 hours; and



      (3)   Are emptied and returned to their usual, lawful location
within 48 hours of their placement for use under this article.



   (I)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and (B), an
owner may dispose of abandoned property without using a mechanical container
if such abandoned property can be disposed of in accordance with the terms of
Article I of this chapter and other applicable laws.



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



23-52.   REQUIREMENTS FOR MECHANICAL CONTAINERS USED TO DISPOSE OF
ABANDONED PROPERTY.



   Except for mechanical containers used in accordance with the provisions
of § 23-51(H), mechanical containers used by an owner or court officer to
dispose of abandoned property shall have wheels, side doors for access, and
sufficient capacity to contain all of the abandoned property within them.



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



23-53.   ABATEMENT REMEDIES.



   (A)   The city shall have the right to summarily abate any nuisance
condition that violates the terms of this article if the owner fails to cure
the violation within 48 hours of the time written notice of the violation is
delivered by mail or personal delivery to the owner.  Such remedies shall
include, but not be limited to:



      (1)   Removing any abandoned property located upon the real
property that is not contained in a mechanical dumpster meeting the
requirements of this article, and disposal of it as refuse, using the
City’s own personnel and resources, or contracting with a private company
to furnish such equipment and perform such services;



      (2)   Removing any mechanical container located on real
property that contains abandoned property, and disposing of its contents.



   (B)   Additional nuisance conditions or violations not specifically
set forth above may be addressed by the City through the Ordinance Board of
Appeals process set forth in Chapter 11 of the City Code, by prosecution or
other enforcement action in the district court, or by legal action in the
circuit court with prior authorization from the City Council.



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



23-54.   NUISANCE PER SE.



   Any condition on real property that violates the regulations of this
article constitutes a nuisance per se that shall be abated by a court of
competent jurisdiction if the city elects to abate the nuisance by
commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction. 



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



23-55.   REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES OF ABATEMENT.



   Expenses incurred by the city in abating any violation of this article,
including attorneys fees, court costs, title searches, administrative fees
imposed under the Appropriations Ordinance, and any other costs incurred in
connection with any abatement action, shall be paid by the owner within 30
days of the date of a city invoice for such services.  The city shall have a
lien against the real property to secure payment.  If the invoice remains
unpaid after 30 days, the amount of the invoice shall be placed upon the tax
roll, and shall be subject to the same penalties, interest, and collection
procedures that are applicable to delinquent taxes.



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



23-56.   PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION. 



   A person who violates this article shall be subject to the penalties
set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  Each day on which a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate violation.  The
imposition of a fine and/or payment of the city’s abatement costs shall not
be construed to excuse or to permit the continuation of any violation.  A
person who violates the provisions of this article shall also be subject to
penalties for violation of the Property Maintenance Code and the provisions
of the city code regulating blight and nuisance. 



(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 12-18-07)



ARTICLE IV.    CURBSIDE RECYCLING



23-61.  LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.



   The City Council finds:



   (A)   Maximizing the recycling economy in the city and throughout
the country will create and sustain additional well-paying jobs, stimulate
the economy, save energy, and conserve valuable natural resources;



   (B)   Recycling is an important action that people can take to be
environmental stewards;



   (C)   Municipal recycling rates in the United States steadily
increased from 6.6% in 1970 to 28.6% in 2000, but since 2000 the rate of
increase has slowed considerably;



   (D)   A decline in manufacturing has reduced both the supply of and
demand for recycling materials;



   (E)   Recycling allows the recovery of critical materials necessary
to sustain the recycling economy and protect national interests;



   (F)   In 2010, the United States recycling industry collected,
processed, and consumed over 130,000,000 metric tons of recyclable material,
valued at $77,000,000,000;



   (G)   Recycling saves energy by decreasing the amount of energy
needed to manufacture the products that people build, buy, and use;



   (H)   Many manufacturers use recycled commodities to make products,
saving energy and reducing the need for raw materials;



   (I)   Using recycled materials in place of raw materials can result
in energy savings of 92% for aluminum cans, 87% for mixed plastics, 63% for
steel cans, 45% for recycled newspaper, and 34% for recycled glass;



   (J)   Many city residents already utilize the city's recycling
centers, and many have expressed interest in utilizing a curbside recycling
program if one were offered and available;



   (K)   Various waste hauling entities are also engaged in the
recycling business and will provide curbside recycling for city residents and
businesses if the economies of scale justify such a program;



   (L)   An exclusive license to provide a curbside recycling program
in the city would ensure the necessary economy of scale to secure interest
from entities that can provide such a program;



   (M)   Additionally, an exclusive license would ensure that only one
entity utilizes city streets and rights-of-way, thereby minimizing roadway
wear and tear;



   (N)   The city already provides similar exclusivity to a towing
contractor and a waste hauler to provide public towing services and public
waste pickup services throughout the city;



   (O)   Therefore, the City Council finds that it is in the best
interests of the city, its residents, its businesses, and its guests to
authorize an exclusive license for a single-stream subscription-based
curbside recycling program.



(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 3-6-12)



23-62.  LICENSING PROCESS.



   (A)   Prior to awarding an exclusive license for a curbside
recycling program, the city shall request proposals from qualified entities
that may desire to be awarded such a license.  The City Manager or his
designee shall review the proposals that are received from potential
licensees and may work with each potential licensee to revise and clarify the
terms of the potential licensee's proposal.  The City Manager or his
designee shall then rate and rank the proposals, as revised, and present them
to City Council for consideration.  The City Council may thereafter, in its
discretion, grant an exclusive license under this article.  The exclusive
license shall be awarded by resolution or motion, which shall incorporate the
terms of the request for proposals and the selected entity's proposal
terms.  In the event of a conflict in terms, the terms of the request for
proposals shall control, unless the resolution or motion awarding the license
provides otherwise.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any entity, other than a licensee, to
collect, disturb, or transport curbside recyclables for a fee, if that
service is offered and/or provided by a licensee pursuant to this article. 
For purposes of this subsection, the term "curbside recyclables" shall mean
recyclable materials that have been deposited or placed on or near the curb
of a roadway for retrieval by another party.



(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 3-6-12)



23-63.  LICENSE TERMS.



   All of the license terms shall be established by the city's request for
proposals, unless otherwise provided in the selected entity's proposal and
included in the awarding resolution or motion as controlling.  Terms shall
include, but not be limited to, service, compensation, customer relations,
vehicles, employees, routes, collection days, recycling containers,
record-keeping, privacy protections, storage, transport, promotional
campaigns, reward programs, indemnity, insurance, default options,
performance deposit, license termination, customer pre-payment protections,
participation thresholds, license term, renewal options, and alternative
proposal options.



(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 3-6-12)



23-64.  LICENSE SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.



   (A)   The license awarded pursuant to this article may be suspended
by the City Manager or his designee until remedial measures required by the
City Manager or his designee are successfully implemented by the licensee to
cure the default or offending activity.  If such remedial measures are not
successfully implemented, or the default or offending activity is of such a
nature that remedial measures will, in the estimation of the City Manager, be
futile, the City Manager may instead suspend the license pending a
rudimentary due process hearing before the Solid Waste Commission or, if the
Solid Waste Commission has been dissolved or a quorum cannot be convened
within 14 calendar days, the City Council at its next regular meeting. At the
conclusion of the hearing, the City Manager's recommendation for revocation
shall either be adopted, modified or rejected. If the recommendation is
adopted, the City Manager shall revoke the license effective the next
business day.  If the recommendation is modified, the City Manager shall
implement the modifications.  If the recommendation is rejected, the City
Manager shall lift the suspension and the licensee may resume its obligations
under the license.



   (B)   Suspension and revocation may be imposed at any time for any
violation by the licensee or its agents of any law, ordinance, proposal term,
or term of the request for proposals relating to the license.  During a
period of suspension, and following revocation, the city's costs for
addressing any transition to a new contractor, replacement services,
temporary suspension of services, customer notifications, customer
assistance, customer refunds, and other costs relating to the lack of service
from the licensee or the transition to a new licensee may be recouped from
the licensee's performance deposit.



(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 3-6-12)



23-65 – 23-69.  RESERVED.



CHAPTER 24:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 25:  HUMAN RELATIONS



ARTICLE I.  RESERVED



25-1 - 25-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  FAIR HOUSING



25-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Fair Housing
Ordinance of the City of Sterling Heights."



(1978 Code, § 16-16) (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to adopt and enforce ordinance prohibiting
discrimination in real estate transactions, see M.S.A. § 26.1300(601);
M.C.L. § 564.601



   State Fair Housing Act, see M.S.A. §§ 26.1300(101) through
26.1300(704); M.C.L. §§ 564.101-564.704



25-17.  POLICY STATEMENT.



   It is hereby found that the population of the city consists of people
of many races, colors, religions, ancestries and national origins and that
discrimination in housing violates the public policy of the city and that
such discrimination in housing is injurious to the public health, safety and
general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.



(1978 Code, § 16-17) (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



25-18.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words
and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in
the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.



   DISCRIMINATE or DISCRIMINATION . Any difference in treatment of
individuals or groups in the sale, lease, rental or financing of housing
units or real estate or housing accommodations because of race, color, creed,
religion, ancestry, national or sectional origin, sex, marital status or
handicap.



   FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any person regularly engaged in the business of
lending money or guaranteeing loans on real property.



   HANDICAP . A determinable physical or mental condition of an individual
or a history of such condition which may result from disease, accident,
condition of birth or functional disorder which constitutes a physical or
mental limitation.



   MICHIGAN CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION. The Civil Rights Commission created
by the Constitution of 1963.



   NATIONAL ORIGIN. The national origin of an ancestor.



   OWNER . The lessee, lessor, sublease, sublessor, assignee, assignor,
managing agent or other person having the right of ownership or possession or
the right to sell, rent or lease any housing accommodation or any part
thereof.



   PERSON . An individual, association, corporation, joint apprenticeship
committee, joint stock company, labor union, legal representative, mutual
company partnership, receiver, trust, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy,
unincorporated organization and any other legal or commercial entity and the
state or any governmental entity or agency.



   REAL ESTATE BROKER or SALESPERSON . A person, whether licensed or not,
who, for or with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells,
purchases, exchanges, rents or leases real property, who negotiates or
attempts to negotiate any of these activities or who holds himself or herself
out as engaged in these activities, who negotiates or attempts to negotiate a
loan secured or to be secured by mortgages or other encumbrances upon real
property, who is engaged in the business of listing real property in a
publication or a person employed by or acting on behalf of any of these.



   REAL PROPERTY. Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands,
tenements, leaseholds, interest in real estate corporations, condominiums and
hereditaments, corporeal or incorporeal, or any interest therein.



(1978 Code, § 16-18)  (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



25-19.  DISCRIMINATION IN REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, whether owner of real property, lessor, lessee,
sublessee, real estate broker or salesperson, builder, advertiser, financial
or lending institution or any agent of the foregoing, shall refuse to
negotiate for a real estate transaction with another person because of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap.



   (B)   No person, whether owner of real property, lessor, lessee,
sublessee, real estate broker or salesperson, builder, advertiser, financial
or lending institution or any agent of the foregoing, shall refuse to engage
in a real estate transaction with another person because of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age or handicap.



   (C)   No person shall induce, directly or indirectly, or attempt to
induce directly or indirectly, the sale, rental or listing for sale or rental
of real property by representing that a change has occurred or will or may
occur with respect to the religion, racial, color or national origin
composition of the block, neighborhood or area in which the property is
located, nor shall any representations be made to any prospective purchaser
or tenant that any block, neighborhood or area has, will or might undergo a
change with respect to the religion, race, color or national origin
composition of the block, neighborhood or area, for the purpose of
discouraging the purchase of property in a particular area.



   (D)   No person, by threat, intimidation, coercion or physical
force, shall induce or attempt to induce any person owning an interest or
leasing an interest in real property in the city to sell, rent or lease or
not to sell, rent or lease such real property to any person because of such
person’s race, religion, color, national origin, sex, marital status, age
or handicap.



(1978 Code, § 16-19)  (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



25-20.  EXEMPTIONS FROM § 25-19.



   Section 25-19 shall not apply:



   (1)   To the rental of a housing accommodation in a building which
contains housing accommodations for not more than two families living
independently of each other, if the owner or lessor or a member of his or her
family resides in one of the housing accommodations;



   (2)   To the rental of a room or rooms in a single-family dwelling
by the owner or lessor, if he or she or a member of his or her family resides
therein;



   (3)   To the sale or rental, by the owner or lessor, of a housing
accommodation in a building which contains housing accommodations for not
more than two families living independently of each other which was not in
any manner listed or publicly advertised for sale or rental;



   (4)   To the rental of a housing accommodation for not more than 12
months by the owner or lessor, where it was occupied by him or her and
maintained as his or her home for at least three months immediately preceding
occupancy by the tenant and is temporarily vacated while maintaining legal
residence;



   (5)   With respect to the age provisions only, to the sale, rental
or lease of housing accommodations meeting the requirements of federal, state
or local housing programs for senior citizens or accommodations otherwise
intended, advertised, designed or operated, bona fide, for the purpose of
providing housing accommodations for persons 50 years of age or older.



(1978 Code, § 16-20)  (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



25-21.  ARTICLE DOES NOT REQUIRE PUBLIC OFFERING OF PROPERTY OR PROHIBIT
REFUSAL TO CONTRACT WITH CERTAIN PERSONS.



   Nothing in this article shall require anyone owning or possessing an
interest in real property to offer the property to the public at large before
selling or renting such interest; nor shall this article prohibit the owner,
lessor, lessee, sublessee, real estate broker, financial or lending
institution or the agents of the foregoing from refusing to enter into a real
estate transaction with a person who does not have the legal capacity to
enter into a self-binding contract.



(1978 Code, § 16-21)  (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



25-22.  ARTICLE DOES NOT AFFECT OTHER REMEDIES AND THE LIKE.



   Nothing in this article shall be construed as a limitation to the right
of access by an individual to remedies before the Michigan Civil Rights
Commission or before the courts of this state on an individual basis or to
prohibit cooperation between the city and the Michigan Civil Rights
Commission.



(1978 Code, § 16-22)  (Ord. No. 435, § 2, 6-17-14; Ord. No. 437, § 1,
10-7-14)



CHAPTER 26:  JUNK YARDS AND AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARDS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



26-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Junk Yard Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 17-1) (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT. All references to the ACT in this chapter shall refer to the
Secondhand Dealers and Junk Dealers Act, Public Act 350 of 1917, as amended,
and currently codified as M.C.L. §§ 445.401 et seq.



   AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD. Any place, site, or location where wrecked
autos or autos unfit for highway use are stored, disassembled, dismantled,
torn down, or disposed of or where old or wrecked autos are dismantled and
parts salvaged therefrom.



   AUTOS; AUTOMOBILES. Includes all motor vehicles.



   JUNK YARD. Any open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are
bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled,
including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, lumber, paper,
rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A JUNK YARD includes automobile wrecking
yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage,
keeping, or abandonment of junk, but does not include uses established
entirely within enclosed buildings. A used car lot where the disassembling,
wrecking, storage, sale, or salvage of parts of wrecked cars is carried on
shall be considered a JUNK YARD subject to the provisions of this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 17-2) (Ord. No. 394, § 1, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-3.  COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER.



   All persons licensed under this chapter shall operate their junk yards
and automobile wrecking yards in conformity with the rules, regulations, and
conditions set out in this chapter. The violation of any of such rules and
regulations shall be grounds for the refusal to renew or the revocation of an
existing license. Every licensee, by virtue of accepting a license under this
chapter, shall be held to have faithfully covenanted with the City Council to
operate and maintain his or her business site in conformity herewith. The
licensee shall also comply with all other city ordinances and regulations.



(1978 Code, § 17-3)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-4.  REMEDIES FOR VIOLATION OF CHAPTER.



   It is declared that the operation or maintenance of a junk yard or
automobile wrecking yard in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
declared to be a nuisance per se and the city, in addition to the issuance of
citations for ordinance and code violations, may apply to a court of
competent jurisdiction for an injunction to enjoin and abate such nuisance
upon authorization by the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 17-4)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Cross reference:



   Nuisances, see Ch. 33



26-5.  LOCATION REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY.



   No junk yard or automobile wrecking yard shall be established or
licensed under this chapter, unless at least 50% of the property fronting on
the public highway on each side of the proposed location, for a distance of
one-half mile in each direction, is being used for business purposes.



(1978 Code, § 17-5)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Cross reference:



   Zoning ordinance, see App. A



26-6.  LOCATION NEAR CHURCH, SCHOOL, STREET AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No part of the site used for a junk yard or automobile
wrecking yard shall lie within 500 feet, in a direct line, from the nearest
point of any property used for a church, synagogue, school, public library,
hospital, sanitarium, or private residence, except the residence owned by the
licensee of such yard upon the site described in the license application.



   (B)   No part of premises used as a junk yard or automobile wrecking
yard shall lie within 300 feet of an intersection, public street, or highway.



   (C)   No junk yard or automobile wrecking yard shall be established,
expanded, or maintained if any portion of the yard is within 1,000 feet of
the nearest edge of the right-of-way of any interstate or primary or
secondary highway, except the following:



      (1)   Those which are screened by natural objects, plantings,
fences, or other appropriate means so as not to be visible from the
main-traveled way of the highway, or otherwise removed from sight, in
accordance with the rules of the State of Michigan.



      (2)   Those located within areas which are zoned for
industrial use.



      (3)   Those which are not visible from the main-traveled way
of an interstate primary or secondary highway.



(1978 Code, § 17-6)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Junk yards adjacent to highways, see M.C.L. § 252.203



26-7.  GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.



   All building structures used in connection with a junk yard or
automobile wrecking yard shall be of good substantial construction and shall
be completely finished on the outside. Frame buildings shall be covered on
the outside with good siding, shingles, brick, or other equivalent material
and painted with at least two coats of good paint.



(1978 Code, § 17-7)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Cross reference:



   Building regulations, see Ch. 11



26-8.  ENCLOSING WALL.



   Every junk yard or automobile wrecking yard shall be entirely enclosed
within an obscuring masonry wall, eight feet in height on all sides and of
sufficient strength to serve as a retaining wall. Such wall shall be set back
as required by the zoning ordinance. No signs or posters will be allowed on
the wall, except those advertising the licensee's business. The wall will be
constructed in a good and substantial manner and kept in good repair and in a
neat and presentable condition. No junk, old automobiles or other property
used in connection with such business shall be parked, disassembled or
permitted to be outside of the enclosure.



(1978 Code, § 17-8)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Cross reference:



   Fences and walls, see Ch. 19



26-9.  SIGNAGE; BUSINESS HOURS; INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Every junk yard shall post in a conspicuous place in or upon
its place of business a sign having its name and occupation.



   (B)   A junk yard or automobile wrecking yard may remain open for
business during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 



   (C)   City officials and their designees may inspect the premises of
a licensee at any time during normal business hours.



(1978 Code, § 17-9)  (Ord. No. 394, § 2, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 445, § 1,
3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Signage, see M.C.L. § 445.404(1)



   Inspections, see M.C.L. § 445.402(4)



   Hours, see M.C.L. § 445.407



26-10.  BURNING PROHIBITED; USE OF WELDING AND CUTTING TORCHES; PREMISES TO
BE FREE FROM FIRE HAZARDS.



   (A)   There shall be absolutely no burning of any kind on any junk
yard or automobile wrecking yard. All welding and cutting torches shall be
used so as not to glare or annoy surrounding owners or occupants of land.



   (B)   Each junk yard or automobile wrecking yard licensee shall
conduct his or her business on the premises in such a manner as to keep it
free from fire hazards.



(1978 Code, § 17-10)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Cross reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see Ch. 20



26-11.  RECORD OF PURCHASES, EXCHANGES AND SALES.



   Every junk yard shall make and maintain a separate book or other
written or electronic record, numbered consecutively, and open to inspection
by a member of the Police Department and the Michigan State Police, in which
shall be written or entered in the English language at the time of the
purchase or exchange of any article a description of the article, and all of
the following:



      (1)   The name, description, fingerprint, operator's or
chauffeur's license or state identification number, registration plate
number, and address of the person from whom the article was purchased and
received.  The junk yard shall make a copy of the operator's license,
chauffeur's license, or state identification card as part of the book or
record.



      (2)   The day and hour the purchase or exchange was made.



      (3)   The location from which the item was obtained.



      (4)   Payment for an item shall be made only by check or by an
electronic payment system.  The record shall indicate the method of payment.



(1978 Code, § 17-11)(Ord. No. 394, § 3, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Record keeping requirements, see M.C.L. § 445.404(2)



26-12.  REPORT OF PURCHASES.



   (A)   Articles purchased or exchanged shall be retained by the
purchaser for at least 15 days before disposing of them, in an accessible
place in the building where the articles are purchased and received.  A tag
shall be attached to the articles in some visible and convenient place, with
the number written thereupon, to correspond with the entry number in the book
or other record.



   (B)   The purchaser shall prepare and deliver on Monday of each week
to the Police Chief, before 12:00 noon, a legible and correct paper or
electronic copy, in the English language, from the book or other written or
electronic record, containing a description of each article purchased or
received during the preceding week, the hour and day when the purchase was
made, the description of the person from whom it was purchased, and a copy of
the documentation required by this article regarding the person from whom it
was purchased.  The statement shall be verified in a manner acceptable to
the Police Chief.



   (C)   This section does not apply to old rags, waste paper, and
household goods except radios, televisions, record players, and electrical
appliances and does not require the purchaser to retain articles purchased
from individuals, firms, or corporations having a fixed place of business
after those articles shall have been reported.



   (D)   If the purchaser or receiver, by exchange or otherwise, is a
peddler or goes about with a wagon to purchase or obtain by exchange or
otherwise, any of such articles, and does not have a place of business in a
building, he or she need not retain such articles for 15 days before selling
them, provided on Monday of each week he or she files with the Police Chief a
report showing the place of business of the person to whom such sale was
made; and a copy of the record required to be kept in a separate book of the
articles purchased or received during the preceding week, including a
description of such articles sold, to whom sold, and the place of business.



(1978 Code, § 17-12)  (Ord. No. 394, § 4, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 445, § 1,
3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Retention, tagging, and reporting requirements, see M.C.L. § 445.405



   Peddler regulations, see M.C.L. § 445.406



26-13.  PROHIBITED PURCHASES.



   (A)   No junk yard or automobile wrecking yard licensee shall
purchase, receive, or take from any minor under the age of 18 years any
parts, salvage, junk, or refuse of any kind, whether by purchase, sale, or
gift.



   (B)   No person shall purchase or receive by sale, barter, or
exchange or otherwise, any article mentioned in this act from any person who
is at the time intoxicated, or from an habitual drunkard, or from any person
known by said buyer or receiver to be a thief, or any associate of thieves,
or receiver of stolen property, nor from any person the person has reason to
suspect of being such.



(1978 Code, § 17-13)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Prohibited purchases, see M.C.L. § 445.408



26-14.  LOITERING BY MINORS.



   Licensees shall prohibit the loitering of minors about the premises.



(1978 Code, § 17-14)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-15.  SCRAP METALS.



   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to diminish the requirements
that scrap processor and junkyard operators must comply with the Scrap Metal
Regulatory Act, being 2008 P.A. 429, as amended.



(Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Scrap Metal Regulatory Act, see M.C.L. §§ 445.421 et seq.



26-16-26-24.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  LICENSE



26-25.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of, carry on or operate any junk
yard or automobile wrecking yard in any place in the city without a license
as provided for in this article.  All licensees shall comply with all
applicable requirements of the Act and this chapter.  The business
authorized by a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall only be
conducted in the location and place designated in the license.



(1978 Code, § 17-25)  (Ord. No. 394, § 5, 3-18-08; Ord. No. 445, § 1,
3-1-16)



Statutory reference:



   Licensing provisions, see M.C.L. §§ 445.401, 445.402



26-26.  APPLICATION.



   (A)   Any person desiring to operate a junk yard or automobile
wrecking yard shall make application in writing to the City Clerk and shall
furnish the following and such other information as may be required by the
city in considering such application:



      (1)   Full name and address of applicant or applicants and/or
operators of such proposed yard. If an association, give the full name. If a
corporation, give full name and the official address thereof with the date
and state in which incorporated, full name and address of the resident agent
and attach to the application a copy of the certificate from the corporation
securities commission that the said corporation is in good standing;



      (2)   Name and address of all other owners, copartners,
officers and directors, if a corporation, including stockholders, if a closed
corporation. A closed corporation shall be considered any corporation having
complete stock ownership in five or less persons;



      (3)   Legal description of site in which operation is
contemplated, together with a complete statement of ownership of the
premises; also a site plan showing the location of the boundary lines of the
premises;



      (4)   A full and complete disclosure of the type of operation
to be carried on;



      (5)   Name and address of any other junk yard or automobile
wrecking yard operated by applicant or any officer or director of said firm
or corporation;



      (6)   Fingerprints of applicant and other persons mentioned in
subsection (2) above;



      (7)   A description of any building to be considered on the
premises and any improvements to be made thereto;



      (8)   A statement as to the use made of property fronting on
the public highway on each side of the proposed site for a distance of
one-half mile in each direction;



      (9)   Distance in each direction from proposed site to nearest
intersection, public street or highway;



      (10)   Accurate description of character of site and its use
for a distance of 1,000 feet in each direction from the boundary line of the
site proposed to be used in the business;



      (11)   A statement as to whether or not the contemplated
operation will involve the use of force or pounding, what machinery is to be
used and whether or not any objectionable noise will be created.



      (12)   A statement as to whether or not any combustible or
inflammable material will be used in the operation or stored on the premises
and, if so, for what purpose or purposes and what safety precautions will be
taken to avoid fires;



      (13)   A statement as to whether or not the operation
contemplated will be under the immediate supervision of the applicant;



      (14)   Full names and addresses of all persons to be employed
in the operation of the business;



      (15)   Individual affidavit accompanying application on each
of the persons mentioned in subsection (2) above attesting that each of the
persons applying have not been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor from five
years to date of application;



      (16)   Place of residence of applicant for three years
preceding the date of application;



      (17)   As a further part of the affidavit and as a condition
of the original granting of each license and operation of such junk yard, the
applicant or applicants shall obtain, from 65% of the freeholders and
occupants of land residing in the city within a 3,000 foot radius of any part
of the proposed site where the said business is proposed to be conducted, a
written statement or waiver addressed to the City Council recommending that
such license be granted;



      (18)   A sworn statement as to the truth of the statements in
the application.



   (B)   Accompanying the application shall be a fee established by the
annual appropriations ordinance for servicing and processing the application.



(1978 Code, § 17-26)  (Ord. No. 388, § 17, 1-3-07; Ord. No. 445, § 1,
3-1-16)



26-27.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL; FEE.



   (A)   The City Clerk shall transmit the application to the City
Council, which shall consider the same within a reasonable time, either
granting or denying the license for the operation of the said junk yard or
the said automobile wrecking yard. The City Council shall deny a license or
the renewal thereof whenever it appears that:



      (1)   The contemplated site is located on land zoned for
anything other than heaviest industrial use under the current city zoning
ordinances;



      (2)   The person making application or any member of the firm,
officer, agent of the corporation or controlling stockholder of the
corporation shall have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor contrary to
the requirement of § 26-26(15);



      (3)   It reasonably appears the granting of a license will
create a hazard to the public health, safety, morals or general welfare;



      (4)   Upon investigation, the applicant or a partner of the
applicant or officer or substantial stockholder of a corporation is a person
who habitually associates with known criminals;



      (5)   It appears that the contemplated operation will be a
nuisance to the surrounding owners of the occupied land; or



      (6)   The junk yard or automobile wrecking yard is or will be
in violation of any provision of this chapter.



   (B)   No license shall be issued for any junk yard or automobile
wrecking yard until such yard is fully complete and a certificate of such
completion and of compliance with this chapter has been furnished by the
Building Official.



   (C)   The annual license fee shall be in the amount established by
the annual appropriations ordinance. After the approval of the City Council
and upon the payment of the said fee, the City Clerk shall be authorized to
issue a license for the operation of a junk yard or an automobile wrecking
yard.



(1978, § 17-27) (Ord. No. 388, § 18, 1-3-07; Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-28.  EXPIRATION; RENEWAL; TRANSFER.



   (A)   All licenses issued under this article shall be for the period
of one year from the date of issuance.  Every licensee in good standing
desiring to renew his, her, or its license under this article shall submit a
"License Renewal" form, as prepared and furnished by the City Clerk, to the
City Clerk's office. A nonrefundable renewal fee shall be paid to the City
Clerk's office, such fee to be established by the annual appropriations
ordinance to cover the costs to the city of investigating and processing
renewal requests. The renewal form shall contain any and all changes and
updates to the information in the licensee's original application and shall
be signed and sworn to by the applicant. The Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Official, and City Planner shall advise the City Clerk
of any history of violations and any outstanding operational concerns.  The
City Clerk may conduct any additional investigations deemed necessary or
prudent for the renewal process.  Renewal shall be recommended by the City
Manager upon the recommendation of the City Clerk for one-year renewal
periods unless the City Clerk shall discover a lack of suitable character,
pending or significant violations, or a basis for denying an initial
application under this article.  The City Council shall make the final
determination regarding each one-year renewal recommended by the City
Manager.  Renewal forms must be submitted to the City Clerk's office at
least 60 days prior to the expiration of the license.



   (B)   Licenses shall be nontransferable and good only for one site.
In the event of a sale or transfer of a junk yard or automobile wrecking
yard, the new owner shall apply for and be granted a license before entering
into the operation of said business.



(1978 Code, § 19-28)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-29.  LICENSE - REFUSAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR NONRENEWAL.



   A license requested under this article, or any one-year renewal, may be
denied by the City Clerk for failure to meet the minimum requirements set
forth in this article.  Any license issued under the provisions of this
article may be suspended or revoked by the City Council for cause.  The term
CAUSE, as used in this article, shall include the doing or omitting of any
act or permitting any condition to exist on the premises for which a license
is issued, which act, omission, or condition is contrary to the health,
safety, and welfare of the public, is unlawful, irregular, or fraudulent in
nature, is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license issued, or is
forbidden by this article or any applicable law.  CAUSE shall include but
not be limited to:



      (1)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the application
for license or renewal paperwork;



      (2)   Fraud or material misrepresentation in the operation of
the licensed business;



      (3)   Any material violation of this article or of the
regulations authorized herein;



      (4)   Any violation of federal or state law or local ordinance
which creates a risk to the health, safety, or welfare of the public or to
the community or brings into question whether the licensee is of suitable
character to operate the business;



      (5)   Conducting the business in an unlawful manner or in such
a manner as to constitute a maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection
with the licensed premises.  For purposes of this article, NUISANCE shall be
given the normal and customary meaning and shall include but not be limited
to the following:



         (a)   Existing violations of building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire, or other applicable regulatory
codes;



         (b)   A pattern or practice of patron conduct which is
in violation of the law and/or interferes with the health, safety, and
welfare of the properties in the area; or



         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of
the licensed premises, including permitting litter, debris, or refuse to
exist on the premises outside of proper repositories or to blow or be
deposited upon adjoining properties;



      (6)   Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the
licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the
enforcement of this article;



      (7)   Failure of the licensee to timely pay personal property
taxes, other city obligations, and real property taxes arising from the
licensee's use and occupancy of the property.  A licensee who does not own
the real property is not responsible for the payment of the real property
taxes unless a lease or contract requires such payment;



      (8)   Any conviction of any person or principal licensed under
this article of any crime, such as receiving stolen property, acting as a
fence, or in any manner violating the criminal law of the State of Michigan
in the handling, transfer, or storage of junk or used auto parts, shall be
likewise grounds for suspension or revocation of the license.



(1978 Code, § 19-29)  (Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-30.  PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.



   (A)   Before any action is taken concerning revocation or suspension
of a license, the City Clerk shall serve the licensee by first class mail,
mailed at least ten days prior to a hearing with notice of hearing before the
City Council, which notice shall contain the following:



      (1)   Date, time, and place of the hearing;



      (2)   Notice of the proposed action;



      (3)   Reasons for the proposed action;



      (4)   Names of witnesses known at the time who will testify;



      (5)   A statement that the licensee may be represented by
legal counsel, present evidence and testimony, and confront and cross-examine
adverse witnesses;



      (6)   A statement requiring the licensee to notify the
Sterling Heights City Attorney's office at least three days prior to the
hearing date if he, she, or it intends to contest the proposed action and to
provide the names of witnesses known at that time who will testify on his,
her, or its behalf.



   (B)   Upon completion of the hearing, the City Council shall
authorize the City Clerk to send to the licensee a written statement of its
findings and determination within 30 days.



   (C)   During the procedure for revocation or suspension, the
licensee will be permitted to continue to operate until such time as the
statement of findings and determination is served upon the licensee by mail
or otherwise, unless continued operation is deemed by the Fire Chief to be an
immediate and substantial risk to the licensee and/or the public.



(Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-31.  LICENSE REFUSAL; HEARING.



   (A)   Any applicant whose initial request for a license is refused
by the City Clerk shall have a right to a hearing before the City Council,
provided a written request therefor is filed with the City Manager within ten
days following such refusal.  The City Council shall have the right to
affirm and sustain, for cause as defined above, any refusal to issue a
license, or the City Council may grant any license, with or without
conditions deemed appropriate by the City Council. 



   (B)   In addition to the information required in this article, an
applicant whose application for, or renewal of, a license under this article
was denied by the City Clerk should be prepared to submit and discuss any
additional information required by the City Council for the appeal hearing.



(Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



26-32.  APPEAL.



   Any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked, or whose renewal or
license denial has been upheld by the City Council, may appeal to the Circuit
Court, but all findings of fact made by the City Council shall be final.



(Ord. No. 445, § 1, 3-1-16)



CHAPTER 27:  LAND DIVISION AND COMBINATION



27-1.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to carry out the provisions of the
Michigan Land Division Act (Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, formerly
known as the Subdivision Control Act); to prevent the creation of parcels of
property which do not comply with applicable ordinances and the Land Division
Act; to minimize potential boundary disputes; to maintain and promote orderly
development of the community; and otherwise provide for the health, safety
and welfare of the residents and property owners of the city by establishing
reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions and
combinations of land within the city.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSIBLE. Referring to a parcel, the parcel meets one or more of the
applicable following requirements: (i) if a one family residential parcel,
the parcel is located upon an existing public street constructed to the
requirements of the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city,
and the parcel has width not less than the minimum width for such a lot or
parcel under the applicable section of the zoning ordinance; (ii) if a one
family residential parcel, the parcel is located adjacent to right-of-way
meeting the minimum standards of the city subdivision regulations, within
which a public street meeting the requirements of the codes, ordinances and
engineering standards of the city will be constructed as a condition of the
parcel division and the parcel has frontage on a public street not less than
the minimum width for such a lot or parcel under the applicable section of
the zoning ordinance; (iii) if a parcel other than one family residential,
the parcel has an existing driveway easement or public or private street
constructed in accordance with the minimum requirements for such access under
the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city, which access
leads to an existing public street; or (iv) if a parcel other than one family
residential, the parcel can have a driveway easement or public or private
street which will lead to an existing public street, which access will be
constructed in accordance with the applicable minimum requirements for such
access under the codes, ordinances and engineering standards of the city as a
condition of approval of the parcel division.



   APPLICANT. A natural person, firm, association, partnership,
corporation or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in
land whether recorded or not.



   COMBINE or COMBINATION. The addition or joining of a parcel, tract, lot
or any part of the foregoing with an existing parcel, tract, lot or any part
of such area of land to facilitate development or use as a separate zoning
parcel or lot under the terms of the City Code and ordinances.



   DIVIDE or DIVISION. Partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of
land by the proprietor of such land or by his or her heirs, executors,
administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for the purpose
of sale or lease of more than one year or of building development that
results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent and
satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act.
Divide and division do not include a property transfer between two or more
adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an
adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building
site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act
or the requirements of other applicable local ordinances.



   FORTY ACRES OR THE EQUIVALENT. Either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter
section containing not less than 30 acres or a government lot containing not
less than 30 acres.



   GOVERNING BODY. The City Council of the City of Sterling Heights.



   LAND DIVISION ACT. Public Act 288 of 1967, being M.C.L.A. §§ 560.101
through 560.293, as amended.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-3.  REQUEST FOR DIVISION OR COMBINATION, EXEMPTIONS.



   Land in the city shall not be divided or combined without the prior
review and approval of the City Assessor, or other official designated by the
City Council, in accordance with this chapter and the Land Division Act;
provided that a parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat
pursuant to the Land Division Act or a parcel which is proposed to be divided
into units through an approved condominium plan pursuant to the Condominium
Act shall be exempt from this requirement. A division or combination of land
relating to land which has a separate legal description previously created as
a result of creating a condominium in compliance with the Condominium Act or
a subdivision in compliance with the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, as
amended, shall require review and approval under this chapter, unless the
condominium plan or subdivision plan is amended in compliance with the
applicable statute.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-4.  REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION OF APPLICATION FOR LAND DIVISION OR
COMBINATION.



   An application for land division or combination shall be submitted
through the City Assessor for review by the City Assessor, Building Official,
City Planner, City Engineer and City Treasurer. Each application shall be
accompanied by the following, unless deemed unnecessary by the appropriate
reviewing official.



   (A)   A completed application on such form as may be prescribed by
the city.



   (B)   Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided or
combined.



   (C)   A survey map of the land proposed to be divided or combined,
as prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of Public Act 132 of
1970, as amended, by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by
the State of Michigan which shows the dimensions and legal descriptions of
the existing parcels or tracts, the location of all existing or proposed
structures and other land improvements, the location of any existing
easements and the accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and
utilities from the existing public roads.



   (D)   Three copies of a complete, tentative parcel map drawn to
scale, which shall be not less than one inch equals 20 feet for property
totaling under three acres and at least one inch equals 100 feet for those
totaling three acres or more. The parcel map shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor or civil engineer licensed by the State of Michigan
and shall include the following requirements:



      (1)   Dated, north arrow, scale and name of the individual or
firm responsible for the completion of the tentative parcel map;



      (2)   Proposed lot lines and their dimensions;



      (3)   Location and nature of proposed ingress and egress
locations to any existing public or private streets;



      (4)   The location of any public or private street, driveway
or any easements located or to be located within any proposed lot or parcel.
Copies of the instruments describing and granting such easements shall be
submitted with the application;



      (5)   General topographical features including contour
intervals no greater than ten feet and including a delineation of any wetland
or floodplain areas;



      (6)   The location of any existing buildings, structures,
public or private streets and driveways within 50 feet of all proposed
property lines;



      (7)   The zoning classification of all proposed lots or
parcels;



      (8)   Small scale sketch of properties and streets within
one-quarter mile of the area;



      (9)   Proposed method of handling storm water drainage and
servicing the resultant properties with water and sanitary sewer;



      (10)   If the parcel or lot which is the subject of the
requested land division or combination is located at the end of a stub
street, the tentative parcel map must include the design of a proposed
cul-de-sac meeting the city standards set forth in the city zoning ordinance
and subdivision regulations or alternative street layout plan meeting city
standards. Installation of the proposed cul-de-sac or street extension must
be completed prior to the approval of the land division.



   (E)   The history and specifications of any previous division(s) and
combination(s) of land of which the proposed division or combination was a
part sufficient to establish the parcel to be divided or combined was
lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the Land
Division Act.



   (F)   Proof that all taxes which are due and payable and all special
assessments which are outstanding pertaining to the land proposed to be
divided or combined have been paid in full.



   (G)   If a transfer of division rights is proposed in the land
transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the
proposed division rights transfer.



   (H)   A detailed written description of the development planned for
such land which is the subject of the request for division or combination,
including a description of any proposed association or other entity which
shall be responsible for operation and maintenance of any private streets,
open spaces or other similar uses or activities.



   (I)   All divisions or combinations shall result in "buildable"
parcels containing sufficient "buildable" area outside of unbuildable
wetlands, floodplains and other areas which buildings are prohibited to be
constructed and with sufficient area to comply with all required set back
provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces and maximum
allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site.



   (J)   A statement signed and sealed by a registered architect or
professional engineer indicating the use group, type of construction, height
and area calculations of all existing buildings and structures which are
located within 50 feet of the proposed property lines of the parcel or lot
created from a division or combination.



   (K)   An application fee, as established by  the annual
appropriations ordinance, to cover the costs of administrative review
associated with the proposed land division or combination under this chapter
and the Land Division Act.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 388, § 19, 1-3-07)



27-5.  PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS FOR LAND DIVISION/COMBINATION
APPROVAL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a completed Land Division/Combination
Application package for review, the City Assessor shall circulate the
application to the reviewing officials designated in § 27-4. Upon receipt of
recommended approvals by all such reviewing officials, the Assessor shall
approve with reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable
ordinances and the protection of public health, safety and welfare or
disapprove within 45 days after receipt of a complete application conforming
to the requirements of this chapter and the Land Division Act and shall
promptly notify the applicant of the decision and, if denied, the reason(s)
for any denial.



   (B)   Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the assessor
may within 21 days of the decision appeal the decision to the City Council
which shall consider the appeal at the next available regular meeting after
providing a 20 day written notice to the appellant of the time and date of
the meeting at which the appeal will be considered. The City Council may
refer the appeal to the Planning Commission for a recommendation prior to
making its decision on the appeal.



   (C)   Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the Planning
Commission under § 27-6(F)(3) may, within 21 days of the decision, appeal
the decision to the City Council which shall consider the appeal at the next
available regular meeting after providing a 20 day written notice to the
appellant of the time and date of the meeting at which the appeal will be
considered.



   (D)   Approval of a division or combination is not a determination
that the resulting parcels comply with other applicable provisions of the
City Code or other ordinances or regulations.



   (E)   The city and its officers and employees shall not be liable
for approving a land division or combination if building permits for
construction on the parcels are subsequently denied because of inadequate
water supply, sewage disposal facilities or otherwise, and any notice of
approval shall include a statement to this effect.



   (F)   A decision approving a land division or combination is
effective for 90 days after which it shall be considered revoked unless the
new legal description(s) is filed with the County Land File Division records
so that a new tax identification number can be assigned as a result of the
land division or combination.



   (G)   The Assessor or other designated official shall maintain an
official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions, combinations
and transfers of division rights.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-6.  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF LAND DIVISION OR COMBINATION.



   A proposed land division or combination shall be approved if the
following criteria are met:



   (A)   All parcels created by the proposed division(s) or
combination(s) comply with the applicable lot (parcel) yard and area
requirements of the zoning ordinance, including but not limited to minimum
lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel)
area, minimum lot width to depth ratio, maximum lot (parcel) coverage and
minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures;



   (B)   The proposed division(s) or combination(s) complies with all
requirements of the Land Division Act and this chapter;



   (C)   All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate
accessibility as defined in § 27-2 of this chapter or an area available to
provide such accessibility to a public road for public utilities and
emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinance, master road plan, road ordinance or this chapter. In
determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance standards applicable to
plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever a parcel or tract is
proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels.



   (D)   There is adequate storm drainage and public utilities to serve
the parcels created by the division or combination, as determined by the City
Engineer, or as a condition of approval of the division or combination,
suitable easements are provided to allow the extension of adequate storm
drainage and public utilities in the future.



   (E)   All taxes and special assessments on the properties sought to
be divided or combined have been paid.



   (F)   The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by the
division or combination does not exceed a four to one ratio. The permissible
depth of a parcel created by a land division or combination shall be measured
within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to
the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of
commencement of the measurement. The permissible minimum width shall be
defined in the applicable zoning ordinance or in the absence thereof as
specified in subparagraph (F)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (1)   The minimum width for a lot or parcel on a cul-de-sac or
other irregularly shaped lot or parcel shall be measured at the front yard
setback line. Such lots or parcels shall have a minimum width as set forth in
the zoning ordinance.



      (2)   For corner lots or parcels, the depth of the property
shall be measured along the longest front property line which is parallel to
or is generally parallel to the public or private street right-of-way or
easement. The width of the corner lot or parcel shall be that front property
line which is parallel to or is generally parallel to the public or private
street right-of-way or easement and is the shorter of the two front lot
lines. Where such lines are of equal length, the Planning and Zoning Manager
shall determine which property line to use for purposes of determining width
to depth for purposes of this section.



      (3)   The Planning Commission may permit the division or
combination of a lot or parcel which does not comply with the above
provisions, provided that the following findings are made:



         a.   The greater depth to width ratio is necessitated by
conditions of the land which make compliance with this section impractical.
Such conditions may include topography, road access, soil conditions,
wetlands, floodplains, water bodies or other similar unique conditions;



         b.   The division or combination of land and use of such
land will not conflict with other federal, state, county or city ordinances
or regulations, unless an appropriate variance of approval is granted as
required or permitted by such ordinances or regulations.



   (G)   The proposed division or combination shall not cause any
existing building or structure to become nonconforming.



   (H)   If the parcel or lot which is the subject of the proposed land
division or combination is located at the end of a stub street, the applicant
agrees, as a condition of approval of the land division or combination, to
design and install a cul-de-sac meeting the city standards set forth in the
city zoning ordinance and subdivision regulations or an alternative street
layout meeting the city standards which has been approved by the City
Engineer. Installation of the proposed cul-de-sac or street extension must be
completed prior to the approval of the land division.



   (I)   The proposed division or combination would not result in a
parcel containing more than one zoning classification, unless the city has
determined that multiple zoning classifications on a resultant parcel
promotes orderly and harmonious development between adjacent parcels, such as
creating a desirable transitional buffer between adjacent parcels of
different zoning classifications.



   (J)   The proposed division or combination complies with such
additional written regulations, additional conditions and safeguards which
have been established by the city deemed to ensure compliance with the
requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-7.  ALLOWANCE FOR APPROVAL OF OTHER LAND DIVISIONS.



   Notwithstanding the inability of a proposed land division or
combination to comply with all of the requirements for approval in this
chapter, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the
applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable
zoning ordinance, Building Code or other provisions of this chapter or the
City Code may be approved where the Board of Zoning Appeals or City Council
has, prior to adoption of this chapter, granted a variance to the lot, yard,
depth to width ratio, frontage and/or area requirements with which the parcel
failed to comply.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99)



27-8.  CONSEQUENCES OF NONCOMPLIANCE WITH LAND DIVISION/COMBINATION APPROVAL
REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   Any division or combination of land in violation of any
provisions of this chapter shall not be recognized as a land division or
combination on the assessment roll and no construction thereon which requires
the issuance of a construction or building permit shall be permitted. The
city shall have the authority to initiate injunctive or other relief to
prevent any violation or continuance of violation of this chapter.



   (B)   An unlawful division or attempted division shall also be
voidable at the option of the purchaser and shall subject the seller to the
forfeiture of all consideration received or pledged to be paid, together with
any damages sustained by the purchaser, recoverable in an action at law.



   (C)   Violation of this chapter shall subject the violator to the
misdemeanor penalties and enforcement actions set forth in § 1-9 of the city
code and as may otherwise be provided by law.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties prescribed by § 1-9 of the City
Code, any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall
also be subject to a civil action seeking invalidation of the land division
and appropriate injunctive or other relief.



(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 1-19-99) Penalty, see § 1-9



CHAPTER 28:  LIBRARY



28-1.  ESTABLISHED AS SEPARATE DEPARTMENT; CITY MANAGER'S JURISDICTION;
BOARD OF TRUSTEES GENERALLY.



   The Public Library shall be established as a separate department of the
city to be administered under the direction of the City Manager. A Board of
Library Trustees is established which shall advise the City Council in
matters of policy and the City Manager in matters of administration with
regard to establishment, development and operation of the library. The Board
of Library Trustees shall consist of five members appointed by the City
Council. Initially, appointments to the Board shall be as follows: two
trustees shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1974; two trustees
shall be appointed for a term ending June 30, 1973; and one trustee shall be
appointed for a term ending June 30, 1972. Thereafter, prior to the first day
of July, one member or two members, as the case may be, shall be appointed
annually for a term of three years. Each member of the Library Board of
Trustees shall serve until the successor is appointed and qualifies. All
Library Board members shall serve without compensation.



(1978 Code, § 19-1)



Cross reference:



   Boards and commissions generally, see § 2-95 et seq.



28-2.  ORGANIZATION, QUORUM AND THE LIKE OF BOARD OF TRUSTEES.



   The Board of Library Trustees shall organize by electing annually, at
its first regular meeting in July, a President, Vice-President, Secretary and
such other officers as may be necessary for the proper conduct of the duties
of the Board. The Secretary shall notify the City Council of the names of all
such officers promptly after their appointment. Three members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. The Board of
Library Trustees shall conform to all the rules and regulations promulgated
by the Charter and by the City Council that will be applicable to all other
boards and commissions.



(1978 Code, § 19-2)



28-3.  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF TRUSTEES.



   It shall be the duty of the Board of Library Trustees to recommend
bylaws, rules and regulations for the control and governing of the library
system for consideration and action by the City Manager. The Board of Library
Trustees shall recommend a reasonable schedule of fines for the infringement
of established rules and regulations and a schedule of fees for the use of
library services for consideration and action by the City Council. The Board,
in the name of the city, may accept donations, contributions and gifts for
either general or specific purposes of the public library. All monetary
donations, contributions and gifts shall be deposited with the City Treasurer
to be set aside in a separate library account. The Board may recommend the
purchase of books, periodicals, magazines, library equipment and supplies as
deemed necessary and proper. And further, the Board may recommend contracts,
rules, regulations and conditions affecting relations between the Sterling
Heights public library and other libraries in the area and in the State of
Michigan for consideration and action by the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 19-3)



28-4.  APPOINTMENT OF LIBRARY DIRECTOR; HIRING OF DEPUTY LIBRARY DIRECTOR
AND OTHER EMPLOYEES.



   The Library Director shall be appointed as provided in § 2-20 of this
code. A Deputy Library Director and other employees shall be hired in
accordance with the Charter.



(1978 Code, § 19-4; Ord. No. 201-C, § 4, 12-16-86)



28-5.  LIBRARY BUILDINGS.



   The City Council shall provide suitable quarters for housing the
library. The quarters may include temporary facilities and/or mobile units.
Whenever the construction of a library building or buildings is contemplated,
it shall be the duty of the City Manager to have detailed plans and
specifications prepared for same. The plans and specifications shall be
reviewed by the Board of Library Trustees and thereafter submitted to the
City Council for approval or rejection with the written recommendation of the
Board. The contract or contracts for such construction shall be let by the
City Council as provided by the Charter.



(1978 Code, § 19-5)



28-6.  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   The Board of Library Trustees shall keep a complete record of its
proceedings and the same shall be a public record. At the end of the fiscal
year and at any other times when requested by the Manager or City Council,
the librarian shall prepare a complete report covering all business of the
library and such statistics, information and suggestions as may be requested
or as the librarian may deem to be of general interest.



(1978 Code, § 19-6)



28-7.  BUDGET ESTIMATES.



   Not later than March 1 of each year, the Board of Library Trustees
shall, after review and consultation with the librarian, furnish to the City
Manager recommendations regarding proposed library programs for the ensuing
fiscal year, which the Manager shall review and consider in preparing the
library budget to be submitted to the City Council. Prior to submission of
the library budget to the City Council, the Manager shall review the proposed
budget with the Library Board of Trustees.



(1978 Code, § 19-7)



28-8.  RECEIPTS AND DISBURSEMENTS; PURCHASES.



   All funds received by the library shall be deposited with the City
Treasurer and the Treasurer may establish a petty cash fund for the handling
of emergency disbursements and maintenance of fines and fees. All supplies
and materials shall be obtained through the central purchasing agency of the
city in compliance with administrative rules applying to all other city
departments or in accordance with a legal contract executed by the city for
the purpose of providing such supplies and materials.



(1978 Code, § 19-8)



Cross reference:



   Purchasing, see § 2-203 et seq.



28-9.  USE OF FACILITIES.



   The library shall be maintained for the use and benefit of the
residents of the city and by reciprocal agreement for all members of the
Library Cooperative of Macomb. All residents of the city and all residents of
every member community of the Library Cooperative of Macomb shall have free
use of said library, subject only to such reasonable rules, regulations and
fees as may be adopted by the City Council and subject further to the right
of the City Manager, upon recommendation of the librarian, to exclude from
use of the library any and all persons who shall willfully violate the rules
and regulations.



(1978 Code, § 19-9; Ord. No. 142-A, § 1, 5-16-78)



28-10.  CONTRACTS FOR LIBRARY SERVICES; APPOINTMENT OF CITY REPRESENTATIVE
TO LIBRARY COOPERATIVE BOARD.



   The City Council is empowered to contract with another library,
libraries or any cooperative library systems authorized by state law in order
to provide library services to the city and its residents and to allow the
residents of the city to share in the benefits and services of other member
communities of such contractual library system. The City Council shall
appoint a citizen of Sterling Heights to act as its representative on any
library cooperative board of which the city may be a member.



(1978 Code, § 19-10; Ord. No. 142-A, § 1, 5-16-78)



28-11.  LIBRARY THEFT.



   (A)   Any person who removes, procures or possesses any library
materials, including books, pamphlets, maps, charts, paintings, pictures,
photographs, periodicals, newspapers, magazines, manuscripts, exhibits,
phonograph records, audio tapes, video tapes, compact discs, film or
sculpture, owned or on loan to the library without authority to do so shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to any penalty imposed, a person
found guilty for violating this subsection will be required to make
restitution for missing or damaged library materials.



   (B)   Any person who fails to return library materials within 14
days after notice sent by first class mail shall be responsible of a
municipal civil infraction.



(1978 Code, § 19-11; Ord. No. 142-B, § 1, 5-5-87; Ord. No. 328, §§ 6, 10,
11-5-97) Penalty, see § 1-9



CHAPTER 29:  LICENSES AND PERMITS



29-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Uniform License and
Permit Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 20-1)



29-2.  PERSONS SUBJECT TO LICENSE.



   Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance,
operation or conduct of any business or establishment or for engaging in any
activity or occupation, any person or corporation shall be subject to said
requirement if by himself or herself or through an agent, employee or partner
he or she holds himself or herself out, either expressly or impliedly, as
being engaged in the business, occupation or activity or solicits patronage
therefor, actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any act
or part thereof in furtherance of the occupation, business or activity.



(1978 Code, § 20-2)



Charter reference:



   Authority of Council relative to licenses, see § 5.18



29-3.  APPLICATIONS.



   Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall
be made in writing to the City Clerk. Each application shall state the name
of the applicant, the permit or license desired, the location to be used, if
any, the time covered and the required fee to be paid. Each application shall
contain such additional information as may be required by separate ordinance
or is necessary for the proper guidance of city officials in the issuing of
the license or permit applied for.



(1978 Code, § 20-3)



29-4.  FORMS.



   Forms for all licenses and permits and applications therefor shall be
prepared and maintained by the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 20-4)



29-5.  FEES.



   Except where otherwise provided, all fees and charges for licenses and
permits shall be paid in advance by cash or certified check at the time
application therefor is made to the City Clerk. Should the issuance of a
license or permit be subsequently denied because of an unfavorable inspection
or investigation or for any other cause, the city shall retain 10% of the fee
as a processing and administrative charges. There shall be no proration of
fees. All applicants shall pay fees in full when making application for a
license or permit.



(1978 Code, § 20-5)



29-6.  ENDORSEMENTS.



   Each license or permit shall be endorsed by the City Clerk and the City
Manager.



(1978 Code, § 20-6)



Charter reference:



   Duty of Clerk to issue and sign licenses, see § 7.03(G)



29-7.  INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, the
City Clerk, unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, shall determine if
the issuance of the license or permit shall necessitate an inspection or
investigation of the applicant and/or premises. If the City Clerk determines
that such an inspection or investigation is necessary, or if the inspection
or investigation is otherwise required by ordinance, the City Clerk shall
refer the application to the proper official for making such inspection or
investigation within 48 hours of the time the application is received by the
City Clerk. The official charged with the duty of making such inspection or
investigation shall make and submit a report thereon within ten days after
receiving the application or a copy thereof.



   (B)   The health officer or City Manager shall make or cause to be
made an inspection in regard to such license in connection with the care and
handling of foods and the prevention of nuisances and the spread of disease.



   (C)   The Building Official or his or her agent shall make or cause
to be made any such inspection with respect to the construction of buildings
or other structures.



   (D)   All other investigations, except where otherwise provided by
ordinance, shall be made by the City Manager or such official designated by
the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 20-7)



29-8.  INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING AFTER ISSUANCE.



   (A)   Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in connection
with the operation of a licensed business operation or activity are provided
for or required by ordinance or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance
with any ordinance, it shall be the duty of the licensee or person having
charge of the premises to be inspected to admit thereto, for the purpose of
making the inspection, any official or employee of the city who is authorized
or directed to make such inspection at any reasonable time admission is
requested. It shall be assumed that said request, when made when the business
operation or activity is being carried on, or during normal business hours,
is reasonable.



   (B)   Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is
reasonably necessary to secure conformance with an ordinance provision, it
shall be the duty of the licensee to give to an authorized official or
employee of the city requesting same sufficient samples of such commodity for
such analysis.



   (C)   In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the
City Council may revoke the license or permit of any person holding same who
refuses to permit such official or employee who is authorized to make an
inspection or to take a sample to make the inspection or to take the sample
or who interferes with or hinders the official or employee while in the
performance of his or her duty in making the inspection or taking such
sample. No license or permit shall be revoked for such cause, unless written
demand is made upon the licensee or person having charge of the premises, in
the name of the city, stating that such inspection or sample is desired at
the time said inspection or sample is requested.



(1978 Code, § 20-8)



29-9.  EXPIRATION.



   All licenses and permits shall expire on the last day of the calendar
year for which they are issued.



(1978 Code, § 20-9)



29-10.  APPLICANT'S BUILDINGS AND PREMISES TO COMPLY WITH CITY ORDINANCES
AND POLICIES.



   No license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business,
operation or activity if the buildings or premises to be used for that
purpose do not fully comply with existing city ordinances and policies.



(1978 Code, § 20-10)



29-11.  CHANGE OF LOCATION AFTER ISSUANCE.



   The location of any licensed or permitted business, occupation or
activity may be changed, provided ten days notice thereof is given to the
City Clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary and provided all
other city requirements are met.



(1978 Code, § 20-11)



29-12.  FRONTAGE CONSENTS.



   (A)   Whenever the consent of adjoining or neighboring owners is
required as a requisite to the conduct of any business, operation or
activity, such consent must be obtained by securing the necessary signatures
to a written consent petition. The petition shall be filed with the City
Clerk when signed prior to the conduct of the business, operation or activity
or any act in furtherance thereof.



   (B)   Consents, once given and filed, shall not be withdrawn during
the time provided for in the consent, if any. The petitions need not be
renewed for the continuous conduct of the same business, operation or
activity, whether by the same proprietor or not, or whether the landowner
giving the consent shall change.



   (C)   Each consent, when filed, shall be accompanied by the
affidavit of the person securing the signatures that each signature appearing
therein was properly secured and inscribed and that the petition contains the
necessary number of signatures required by this chapter or any other city
ordinance.



   (D)   No frontage consent shall be construed to permit the conduct
of any business, operation or activity which shall be in violation of or in
conflict with any city ordinance or requirement whatsoever.



(1978 Code, § 20-12)



29-13.  POSTING OF LICENSE.



   It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in
the city to keep his or her license posted in a prominent place on the
premises used for such business.



(1978 Code, § 20-13)



29-14.  VEHICLE LICENSES.



   Whenever a license is issued for a vehicle, the number of vehicles to
be used shall form the basis of cost of the fee. Further, the City Clerk
shall furnish each licensee with a metal tag for each vehicle covered by the
license, and such metal tag shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
back of each vehicle while it is in use. Where vehicles of identical or like
kind are covered by the license, the metal tag shall be posted in the same
place on each vehicle.



(1978 Code, § 20-14)



29-15.  REVOCATION.



   Any license or permit may be revoked by the City Council at any time
for any violation by the licensee or permittee of an ordinance relating to
the license or permit. The revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed.



(1978 Code, § 20-15)



CHAPTER 30:  MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



30-1.  SHORT TITLE.



   This chapter may be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights "Massage Licensing Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-2.  INTENT.



   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
and welfare by licensing and regulating massage parlors, massage schools, and
other similar businesses offering massage therapy services. The City Council
finds and determines that licensing standards pertaining to massage therapy
business activities are necessary to protect the public health and safety and
the personal safety of massage therapists. The City Council further finds
that public health and safety is best served by the adoption of a model
ordinance providing for regulation of massage businesses in a manner that is
consistent throughout the City of Sterling Heights. The purpose of this
chapter is to insure the protection of the public health and safety and the
personal safety of massage therapists through the establishment of certain
licensing standards pertaining to massage therapy business activities within
the city and to recognize massage therapy as a legitimate business occupation
and health enhancement service. This model ordinance shall provide for the
consistent regulation and licensing of massage therapy business activities
throughout the city. The holding of any massage-related license issued
pursuant to this chapter is hereby declared to be a privilege, and not a
right. The provisions of this chapter shall be held to be the minimum
requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and
general welfare of the people of the city receiving services from massage
establishments.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCOMMODATE.   Providing massage to an individual within the confines
of a single room.



   CITY.   The City of Sterling Heights.



   EMPLOYEE.   Any person who renders any service in connection with the
operation of a massage parlor, massage school, or other similar business and
receives consideration for such services, either from the operator of the
establishment or its patrons. Employees include but are not limited to
massologists, and the term "employee" includes leased personnel, contractors,
and similar employment relationships.



   LICENSEE.   The person or entity to whom a license has been issued to
operate a massage establishment in the City of Sterling Heights.



   MASSAGE.   The manipulation of body muscle or tissue through any
method of applying pressure on or friction against or stroking, kneading,
rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating the external soft parts
of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical
apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids such as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions,
ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of
massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the
person providing the massage shall receive consideration therefor.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.   Any building, room, place, or establishment
where massage  is practiced for consideration upon the human body by anyone
not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, registered nurse,
practical nurse operating under a physician's directions, registered speech
pathologist,  or physical or occupational therapist who treats only patients
recommended by a licensed physician and operates only under such physician's
direction, whether with or without the use of mechanical, therapeutic, or
bathing devices. A massage establishment shall include but is not limited to
massage schools, massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish
bathhouses, and steam baths, where massage services are offered or practiced.
This term shall not include a regularly licensed hospital, medical clinic, or
nursing home or other licensed facilities, such as barber shops, beauty
parlors, and salons, or any other medical facilities such as chiropractic,
physical therapy, and occupational therapy offices, where massages are
provided as an incidental or accessory use to the main use of the premises;
it shall not include transient workplace locations during normal business
hours where the massage is performed upon employees of the workplace pursuant
to a policy of medical insurance or as a benefit provided by the employer as
part of a workplace health program; it shall not include kiosks or similar
areas at locations open to the public where all massage therapy services are
performed in public view; and it shall not include an organization operating
a community center, swimming pool, tennis court, or other educational,
cultural, recreational, and athletic facilities for the welfare of the
residents of the area. Nevertheless, massage therapists who perform massage
therapy at any of the exempt locations must still be licensed as required by
the state.



   MASSAGE THERAPIST.   Any individual who engages in the practice of
massage, massage therapy, and/or massology. The term shall be used as the
gender-neutral equivalent of masseur and masseuse, and shall include any
person who administers to another person an alcohol rub, fomentation, bath,
electric, or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other
similar procedure.



   OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE.   Any individual or business that engages in
or provides massages at a location designated by the customer, client, or
patron, rather than at a massage establishment.



   OWNER.   A person who conducts or owns a massage parlor, massage
school, or other similar business.



   PATRON.   Any individual who receives a massage at a massage parlor,
massage school, or other massage establishment, but not physical therapy or
chiropractic services at the offices of a properly licensed health care
professional, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that he
or she shall provide consideration therefor.



   PRACTICE OF MASSAGE THERAPY.   The application of a system of
structured touch, pressure, movement, and holding to the soft tissue of the
human body in which the primary intent is to enhance or restore the health
and well-being of the client. Practice of massage therapy includes
complementary methods, including the external application of water, heat,
cold, lubrication, salt scrubs, body wraps, or other topical preparations;
and electromechanical devices that mimic or enhance the actions possible by
the hands. Practice of massage therapy does not include medical diagnosis;
practice of physical therapy; high-velocity, low-amplitude thrust to a joint;
electrical stimulation; application of ultrasound; or prescription of
medicines.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



Statutory reference:



   Public Health Code Part 179A definitions, see M.C.L. §§ 333.17951



ARTICLE II.  LICENSING OF ESTABLISHMENTS



30-4.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to own or
operate a massage establishment, including any massage school, without a
license.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-5.  APPLICATION FOR ESTABLISHMENT LICENSE.



   (A)   Any person desiring a license to operate a massage
establishment shall file with the City Clerk an application, under oath, on a
form provided by the City Clerk. Applications shall include the following
information:



      (1)   The full name of the applicant and whether the applicant
is an individual or a corporation, partnership or other business entity;



      (2)   The name under which the establishment will be operated;



      (3)   The business address and all telephone numbers where the
establishment will be operated;



      (4)   A copy of the signed lease for the business premises and
written consent of the owner to utilize the premises for the described
purpose, if the premises are not owned by the applicant;



      (5)   The date of the meeting at which special approval land
use was granted by the Planning Commission of the city (if applicable under
the zoning ordinance);



      (6)   The full name, address, and phone number of each
individual who will manage or be principally in charge of the operation of
the establishment, and a complete list of the names and residence addresses
of all massage therapists and employees to be utilized by the business, along
with documentation establishing that the massage therapists are licensed by
and meet the training requirements of state law for obtaining an individual
massage therapist license, with such information to be updated immediately
with any new or changed information not found on the initial list;



      (7)   A detailed summary or description of the nature and type
of services to be provided at the establishment, and whether any off-site
services will be provided and, if so, the proposed locations;



      (8)   The days and times the establishment will be open to
provide services;



      (9)   A release and authorization for the city, its agents and
employees to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of
the statements set forth on the application and the qualifications of the
applicant for the license;



      (10)   Additional massage establishment locations owned and/or
operated by the applicant, in whole or in part, within the past ten years,
and all of the applicant's previous experience in the massage establishment
industry, whether under the same or different corporate or individual name(s);



      (11)   Such other information as may be required by the Clerk;



      (12)   A written declaration by the applicant, given under
oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that the information contained
in and attached to the application is true and correct.



   (B)   Additionally, if the applicant is an individual, a group of
individuals, or an entity owned and/or operated by less than ten individuals,
the application must include the following information about each individual:



      (1)   Address(es) for the previous three years;



      (2)   Previous related experience, including but not limited
to whether the applicant has previously held any license as a massage
therapist, the location for which such a license was held, the status of such
license and, if such license was suspended or revoked, the reasons therefor;



      (3)   The applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color and
sex;



      (4)   The applicant's social security number and birth date
accompanied by written proof, consisting of either a birth certificate,
driver's license, or passport;



      (5)   A listing of all of the applicant's criminal convictions
and/or guilty or no contest pleas, if any, fully disclosing the jurisdictions
in which convicted or in which the plea was tendered, the offense on which
originally arrested/charged and the offense for which ultimately convicted or
for which the plea was tendered, and the date of same along with the
resulting penalty;



      (6)   The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of three
character references. These references shall not be relatives of any of the
individuals involved with submitting the application.



   (C)   Additionally, if the applicant is a corporation, partnership,
or other business entity, the application shall include the following
information about each individual who owns at least a 10% share in the
corporation or interest in the partnership or other business entity or serves
as a director or officer of the corporation or who holds a lien on the
establishment or on the equipment therein, each of whom shall be considered
to be an applicant:



      (1)   The individual's full name and residence address;



      (2)   The individual's addresses for the previous three years;



      (3)   A listing of the individual's business, occupation, or
employment for the previous three years, identifying the time period,
address, and telephone number for each, and a listing of previous related
experience, including but not limited to whether the individual has ever held
any license as a massage therapist, the location for which any such license
was held, the status of such license, and if such license was suspended or
revoked, the reasons therefor;



      (4)   The individual's height, weight, eye and hair color and
sex;



      (5)   The individual's social security number and birth date
accompanied by written proof, consisting of either a birth certificate,
driver's license, or passport;



      (6)   A listing of all of the individual's criminal
convictions and/or guilty or no contest pleas, if any, fully disclosing the
jurisdictions in which convicted or in which the plea was tendered, the
offense on which originally arrested or charged, and the offense for which
ultimately convicted or for which the plea was tendered and the date of same
along with the resulting penalty;



      (7)   The names and addresses of three character references
for the individual. These references shall not be relatives of the individual;



      (8)   The name and address of any business that provides
massage services, whether incidentally or otherwise, owned or operated by the
applicant or any of the individuals required to submit their personal
information pursuant to this subsection.



   (D)   All applications shall be accompanied by the following items:



      (1)   A nonrefundable application fee in an amount set by the
city's annual appropriations ordinance;



      (2)   If applicable, proof that an assumed name certificate
has been filed with the Macomb County Clerk or the State of Michigan;



      (3)   If applicable, the articles of incorporation and a
certificate of good standing issued by the State of Michigan;



      (4)   Two front face portrait photographs, at least two inches
by two inches, and a complete set of fingerprints taken by the Sterling
Heights Police Department for each individual required to submit personal
information pursuant to divisions (B) and (C) of this section, except that,
in lieu of photos of all corporate shareholders, a corporate applicant may
submit photographs of all officers and managing agents of said corporation
and a complete set of the same officers' and agents' fingerprints. In the
case of a partnership, photographs and fingerprints for each partner are
required.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any
false, fraudulent, or untruthful statement, either written or oral, or in any
way knowingly to conceal any material fact or to give or use any fictitious
name in applying for a license under this chapter. Any license obtained by
violation of this division shall be void.



   (F)   Each application shall also be accompanied by a public
liability and property damage insurance policy insuring the establishment and
its personnel against any liability arising out of its operation as a massage
establishment or the provision of massage services on the premises. Such
policy shall provide for proof of professional liability insurance with
limits of liability not less than $500,000.00 per occurrence. The insurance
policy requirements of this division may be met by submitting proof that the
minimum insurance coverage is provided to the applicant as a benefit of
membership in a professional massage organization, such as the National
Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Bodywork (NCBTMB), the
American Massage Therapy Association (AMTA), or similar entity, and proof
that the applicant's dues for membership in such organization are current and
paid through at least an additional 90-day period from the date of the
application. No person or entity shall maintain, operate, or cause to be
operated any massage establishment unless the insurance required by this
section is in force at the time of such operation.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)  Penalty, see § 1-9



30-6.  DUTIES OF THE CITY CLERK REGARDING APPLICATIONS FOR ESTABLISHMENT
LICENSES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a properly and fully completed application for
a license, the City Clerk shall forward a copy of each application to the
following for their review, investigation, and recommendation in accordance
with §§ 30-7 and 30-8 :



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D), upon receipt of favorable
recommendations from the investigating bodies mentioned under this article,
the City Clerk shall issue a license to the applicant.



   (C)   Upon issuance of a license, the City Clerk shall notify each
of the following of the issuance:



      (1)   Chief of Police;



      (2)   Building Official;



      (3)   Fire Marshal;



      (4)   City Planner;



      (5)   City Manager.



   (D)   Denial.  The City Clerk shall deny an application for any of
the following reasons:



      (1)   The applicant has been convicted of, or pled guilty or
no contest to, any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, or has pled
to or been convicted of any offense involving the use of force or violence
upon the person of another, or an offense involving sexual misconduct, or an
offense involving narcotics, controlled substances, or dangerous weapons.



      (2)   The operation or facility, as proposed in the
application, would not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not
limited to, the city's building, fire, zoning, and health ordinances.



      (3)   The applicant made a false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact or omission in the license application or any document
required by the city in conjunction therewith, or has failed to submit all
required information or the required fee.



      (4)   The applicant has had a massage business, massage
license, or other similar permit or license denied, revoked, or suspended by
the city or any other state or local agency.



      (5)   The applicant is not at least 18 years of age by the
date of the application.



      (6)   The applicant has not provided all of the information
required to be submitted with an application pursuant to this article.



   (E)   If the City Clerk denies an application, he or she shall
notify the applicant by regular mail addressed to the applicant at the
address shown on the application. Such notice shall specify the following:



      (1)   Notice of the proposed action.



      (2)   Reasons for the proposed action.



      (3)   A statement that the individual or entity has the right
to appeal the decision to the Ordinance Board of Appeals by submitting a
written application to the City Manager.



      (4)   A statement that the individual or entity may present
evidence at the appeal hearing and confront and cross-examine adverse
witnesses.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-7.  INVESTIGATION AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE CHIEF OF POLICE.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her representative shall have 60
days to investigate the application and the background of the applicants. The
Chief of Police shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the premises
where the massage business is to be carried on for the purpose of assuring
that such premises comply with all the sanitation requirements as set forth
in this chapter and with all city ordinances relating to public health,
safety, and welfare. Based on this investigation, the Chief of Police or his
or her representative shall make either a favorable or unfavorable
recommendation to the City Clerk as to the issuance of the establishment
license. If the recommendation is unfavorable, the Chief of Police or his or
her representative shall also provide a concise statement of the reasons for
this recommendation.



   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her representative shall issue
an unfavorable recommendation regarding the issuance of an establishment
license if:



      (1)   The operation, as proposed in the application, would not
comply with all applicable laws;



      (2)   Any individual required to submit personal information
pursuant to § 30-5 (B) or (C) has been convicted of or pled guilty to any
crime involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, or has pled to or been
convicted of any offense involving the use of force or violence upon the
person of another, or an offense involving sexual misconduct, or an offense
involving narcotics, controlled substances, or dangerous weapons;



      (3)   The applicant has made any false, misleading, or
fraudulent statements of fact or material omissions in the application or in
any document required to be submitted in conjunction with the application;



      (4)   The applicant has, in any location, previously held a
similar license and the license has previously been revoked or suspended;



      (5)   Any individual required to submit personal information
pursuant to § 30-5 (B) and (C) has not obtained the age of 18 years by the
date of application.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-8.  INVESTIGATION AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   (A)   The Building Official, or his or her representative, shall
have 60 days to inspect the premises to be utilized as an establishment
within the meaning of this chapter. Based upon this investigation and
inspection, the Building Official, or his or her representative, shall make
either a favorable or unfavorable recommendation to the City Clerk as to the
issuance of an establishment license. If the recommendation is unfavorable,
the Building Official, or his or her representative, shall also provide a
concise statement of the reasons for his or her recommendation.



   (B)   The Building Official or his or her representative shall make
an unfavorable recommendation regarding the issuance of a license if the
premises do not comply with each of the following requirements:



      (1)   A recognizable and legible sign shall be posted at the
main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage business. All such
signs shall comply with the applicable provisions of the Code of the City of
Sterling Heights;



      (2)   Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with
the building code and, in addition, at least one artificial light of not less
than 60 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage
services are being performed on a patron;



      (3)   Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with
the building code;



      (4)   Equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments
used in performing the actual massage shall be provided;



      (5)   Adequate massage facilities enabling the accommodation
of at least two patrons shall be provided. Adequate facilities, for the
purpose of this section, shall be defined as separate enclosed rooms, having
doors capable of being closed but not locked;



      (6)   Barrier-free dressing and toilet facilities with hot and
cold running water shall be provided for patrons and employees. One toilet
and one wash basin shall be provided by every massage establishment. If male
and female patrons are to be accommodated simultaneously at a massage
establishment, separate dressing and toilet facilities shall be provided for
male and female patrons;



      (7)   All of the physical facilities for the massage
establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary
condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, bathtubs, steam or vapor rooms or steam or
vapor cabinets, showers, and toilet rooms shall be kept thoroughly cleaned;



      (8)   There shall be no entrance or exit way which provides
direct access to another type of business, residence, or living quarters.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-9.  USE OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Each license issued under this chapter shall expire on
December 31 of each year and must be renewed prior thereto in order to be
valid.



   (B)   Each license issued under this chapter shall be conspicuously
displayed upon a wall of the massage establishment which is in an area open
to the public. All licenses shall be made available, upon request, for
inspection by any patron, police officer, or city official in order to
confirm the information contained in the licenses. Within 72 hours of any
change in fact, policy, or method which would alter the information provided
in a license application, or on the license itself, the applicant/licensee
shall notify the City Clerk of such change(s) in writing.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use
of, to his or her own or another's benefit, a license issued to him, her, or
another in accordance with this chapter.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge or
to deface or otherwise alter a license issued under the provisions of this
chapter.



   (E)   A license issued under this chapter is not transferable,
separable, or divisible, and the authority conferred shall be conferred only
upon the individuals named on the license. Upon sale, transfer, or relocation
of a massage establishment, the license therefore shall be null and void
unless pre-approved by the City Clerk. It shall be the duty of all owners or
licensees having knowledge of the sale, transfer, or relocation of a massage
establishment to immediately report such sale, transfer, or relocation to the
City Clerk's office. The failure to do so shall result in an immediate
suspension of the license. An application for transfer shall be in writing,
shall contain the same information as required by this chapter for an initial
application for a new license, and shall be accompanied by the same fee as
required for an application for a new license.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person operating an establishment
to permit or allow an employee, student, or massage therapist or any person
whatsoever to violate any of the terms of this chapter while on the premises
of the establishment, and it shall be unlawful for any person at a licensed
establishment to condone or allow any unlawful activity to occur on the
licensed premises, whether within or outside the actual licensed building. It
shall be the responsibility of an owner, operator, manager, or licensee to
insure that each person employed or engaged by him or her as a massage
therapist has a valid license issued by the State of Michigan.



   (G)   No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide, possess, or
keep, or cause to be sold, given, dispensed, provided, possessed, or kept,
any alcoholic beverage or controlled substances on the premises of any
massage establishment.



   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment to
accommodate two or more patrons in the same room, except that two patrons may
be accommodated in the same room if the two patrons knowingly and voluntarily
request that their massage services be provided in the same room, and they
execute a consent form indicating that they know each other and they each
consent to obtaining massage services in the same room with the other patron.



   (I)   All massage establishments subject to this chapter are
declared to be public places and during business hours shall not lock or
obstruct the exits and entrances to the establishment or otherwise prevent
free ingress or egress of persons.



   (J)   No massage establishment shall be kept open between the hours
of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.



   (K)   No massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute
any advertisement, picture or statement which is known or through the
exercise of reasonable care should be known to be false, deceptive, or
misleading in an effort to induce any person to purchase or utilize massage
services.



   (L)   A massage establishment shall have the premises supervised at
all times when open for business. Any business rendering massage services
shall have one person who is qualified and licensed as a massage therapist on
the premises at all times while the establishment is open. The licensee shall
personally supervise the business, and shall not violate, or permit others to
violate, any applicable provision of this chapter. The violation of any such
provision by any agent or employee of the licensee shall constitute a
violation by the licensee. Any such violation by a licensee shall also
constitute a violation by the owner, president, and/or other supervisory
official of the licensee, in his or her individual capacity, for permitting
another to violate this chapter. Any such violation may be the basis for
suspending, revoking, or not renewing a license.



   (M)   The licensee or the person designated by the licensee of a
massage establishment shall maintain a register of all persons employed or
engaged as massage therapists. Included in the register will be a copy of
each massage therapist's license. Such register shall be available at the
massage establishment for inspection by representatives of the city and/or
county or state health departments during regular business hours.



   (N)   Every patron shall furnish, and every licensee shall require
that every patron furnish, proof of identity by showing a valid driver's
license, voter registration certificate, state identification card, or
equally reliable identification, and provide a date of birth. The identity
and date of birth of every patron, the date and time of the massage, and the
identity of the massage therapist administering the massage shall be recorded
and maintained on the premises by the licensee for a period of three years
and be available at the massage establishment for inspection by
representatives of the city and/or county or state health departments during
business hours.



   (O)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in
the reception area in a location available to all prospective patrons.



   (P)   The premises of the massage establishment shall not be made
available for accommodating any person as sleeping quarters. No beds, water
mattresses, cots, or equipment designed for sleeping shall be permitted on
the premises.



   (Q)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part
of his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or
genital part of any other person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the
genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva
or breasts of a female.



   (R)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage
establishment, to expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion
thereof, to any other person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a
massage establishment, to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions
thereof, of any other person.



   (S)   No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall
operate a massage establishment or as a massage therapist under a name not
specified in the person's license, nor shall any licensee conduct business
under any designation or location not specified in the licensee's license.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)  Penalty, see § 1-9



30-9A.  REGULAR INSPECTIONS; SANITATION AND SAFETY REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   All premises used by a licensee under this chapter shall be
periodically inspected by the Police Chief, Building Official, Fire Marshal,
or their authorized representatives, for the safety of the structure and
adequacy of the plumbing, ventilation, heating, and illumination. Police
officers, code enforcement officials, and/or building department inspectors
may at reasonable times during business hours, or during times when the
licensed premises are occupied by an employee or owner of the massage
establishment, make inspections of each massage business establishment for
the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A
search warrant shall not be required for such inspections, in accordance with
the opinion of the Michigan Supreme Court in Gora v City of Ferndale, 456
Mich 704 (1998). It is unlawful for any licensee to deny or refuse access to
the premises or to hinder the official in any manner in the performance of
his or her responsibilities under this chapter, and such refusal shall
constitute sufficient grounds for immediate revocation of a license granted
under the provisions of this chapter. The following minimum standards shall
be maintained:



      (1)   Walls shall be clean and painted with washable,
mold-resistant paint in all rooms where water or steam baths are given, and
(except in reception and administrative areas) shall be made of nonporous
materials which may be readily disinfected;



      (2)   Floors shall be free from any accumulation of dust,
dirt, or refuse;



      (3)   All equipment used in the massage operation shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;



      (4)   Towels, linen, and items for personal use of massage
therapists and patrons shall be clean and freshly laundered. Towels, cloths,
and sheets shall not be used for more than one patron. Heavy, white paper may
be substituted for sheets provided that such paper is changed for every
patron. Closed containers shall be provided for wet towels and waste material;



      (5)   All equipment, shower stalls, toilets, lavatories, and
other such accoutrements shall be regularly treated with disinfectants and
shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.



   (B)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations.
When five or more employees and patrons of different sexes are on the
premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A
single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees
or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be
substituted for water closets after one water closet has been provided.
Toilets shall be designated as to the sex permitted therein.



   (C)   Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold
running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule.
Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with
sanitary towels.



   (D)   Separate dressing room or locker room facilities shall be
provided for the employees and patrons of different sex. The dressing room or
locker room facilities shall be designated as to the sex permitted. If male
and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the massage
establishment, separate massage rooms shall be provided and shall not be
shared by male and female patrons, unless the consent required by § 30-9 (H)
has been provided.



   (E)   All massage services enumerated in this chapter may be carried
on in one cubicle, room, booth, or area within the massage establishment, but
no massage services shall be performed in any room or area which is fitted
with a door capable of being locked or barred.



   (F)   Advertising that there is a nurse in attendance is prohibited
unless there is a registered graduate nurse constantly in attendance during
the business hours of the massage establishment.



   (G)   Advertising that there is a doctor in attendance is prohibited
unless there is a registered physician constantly in attendance during the
business hours of the massage establishment.



   (H)   No massage establishment granted a license under the
provisions of this chapter shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be
placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any
portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective
patrons that any service is available other than those services permitted by
this chapter, or that employees or massage therapists are dressed in any
manner other than described in division (J), nor shall any massage
establishment indicate in the text of such advertising that any service is
available other than the services permitted by this chapter.



   (I)   Licensees shall exercise every precaution for the safety of
patrons. They shall watch for early signs of fatigue or weakness and
immediately discontinue whatever form of service is being given upon the
appearance of such signs.



   (J)   All employees and massage therapists must be modestly attired.
Diaphanous, flimsy, transparent clothing is prohibited. Clothing must cover
the employee's or massage therapist's torso at all times, shall not expose
the natal cleft or navel, and shall cover the entire chest to four inches
below the collarbone. Skirts and dresses are not permitted. The uniform shall
include a photographic identification card which shall be worn whenever the
employee or massage therapist is working.



   (K)   The skin and the hands of those attending patrons shall be
clean and in healthy condition, and the nails shall be kept short. The hands
shall be washed thoroughly with hot running water, using a proper soap or
disinfectant, before giving a patron any service or treatment.



   (L)   All towels, tissues, sheets, or other coverings shall be used
singularly for each patron and discarded for laundering or disposal
immediately after use.



   (M)   Nondisposable tools of the trade shall be disinfected
immediately after use upon one patron.



   (N)   The private parts of patrons must be covered when in the
presence of any massage therapist or employees. Any contact with the patron's
genital area is prohibited.



   (O)   No licensee shall knowingly allow any patron to be served when
such patron is infected with any fungus or other skin infection, nor shall
service be performed on any patron exhibiting skin inflammation or eruptions,
unless a licensed physician has certified that such patron may be safely
served under specific prescribed conditions.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



ARTICLE III.  MASSAGE THERAPISTS



30-10.  LICENSE REQUIRED.



   No person shall practice massage as a massage therapist, employee,
instructor, or otherwise unless he or she has a valid and subsisting license
issued to him or her by the State of Michigan pursuant to Part 179A of the
Public Health Code or is otherwise exempt from such licensing under state law.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-11.  USE OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE.



   (A)   Each massage therapist license shall be conspicuously
displayed upon a wall of the establishment in which the massage therapist
practices in an area open to the public.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fraudulently make use
of, to his or her own or another's benefit, a massage therapist license.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit or forge or
to deface or to otherwise alter a massage therapist license.



   (D)   No person licensed as a massage therapist shall massage or
treat any person under the age of 18 years, except upon a written note
completed by a licensed medical doctor or other medical professional or if
the person under the age of 18 years is accompanied by his or her parent or
legal guardian during the massage or treatment. No person shall permit any
person under the age of 18 years to come or remain in any room or area where
massage services are being performed and can be observed. Any incidental
presence by a person under the age of 18 years in such room or area shall
only be related to lawful business which requires the person's presence for a
very limited duration. Notwithstanding the immediately preceding
restrictions, a person under the age of 18 years may be on the premises for
the purpose of receiving massage services if the person has in his or her
possession a signed parental or guardian consent form which consents to the
massage services and which contains parental or guardian contact information,
and if the massologist first contacts the parent or guardian and confirms
that the consent form is valid and confirms the nature and extent of the
approved massage services.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other
person for illegal purposes, or, for monetary gain or profit, have any
contact with a person's breast, genital area, or buttocks in a manner which
knowingly and intentionally arouses, appeals, or seeks to gratify the
person's sexual desires.



   (F)   No massage therapist shall engage in advertising which does
any of the following:



      (1)   Contains a misrepresentation of fact(s);



      (2)   Is misleading or deceiving in its content or context;



      (3)   Creates false or unjustified expectations of beneficial
treatment or successful cures;



      (4)   Omits a material fact that misleads or deceives the
public.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person to administer massage on
an outcall basis unless the person is licensed as a massage therapist. Any
outcall massage performed under this section shall be documented by keeping a
record of the date and hour of each treatment, and the name and address of
the patron, and the name of the massage therapist administering such
treatment and the type of treatment administered. Such records shall be open
to inspection by city officials and officials charged with the enforcement of
public health laws to the extent permitted by law. The information shall
otherwise be kept confidential by the licensee, and any unauthorized
disclosure or use of such information by the licensee or a licensed
establishment, or by someone engaged or employed by a licensed establishment,
shall be unlawful.



   (H)   The following conduct is prohibited:



      (1)   Practicing outside of the boundaries of professional
competence, based on education, training, and experience. This includes, but
is not limited to, providing massage therapy services without ensuring the
safety, comfort, and privacy of the client.



      (2)   Engaging in harassment or unfair discrimination based on
age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, national origin, religion,
sexual orientation, disability, or any basis proscribed by law.



      (3)   Refusing to provide professional service based on age,
gender identity, race, ethnicity, national origin, religion, sexual
orientation, disability, or any basis proscribed by law. This requirement
does not prevent a licensee from terminating a massage therapy session with
someone or refusing to treat any person who suggests or requests that the
licensee engage in conduct that is inappropriate, unsafe, or unethical.



      (4)   Involvement in a conflict of interest that interferes
with the exercise of professional discretion or makes the client's interests
secondary.



      (5)   Taking advantage of or exploiting a supervisee or
student to further the licensee's personal, religious, political, business,
or financial interests.



      (6)   Taking on a professional role when a personal,
scientific, legal, financial, or other relationship impairs the exercise of
professional discretion or make the interests of a client or student
secondary to those of the licensee.



      (7)   Being involved in a dual or multiple relationship with a
current or former client, when there is a risk of harm to, or exploitation
of, the client. As used here, "dual or multiple relationship" means a
relationship in which a licensee is in a professional role with a client and
one or more of the following occurs at the same time:



         (a)   The licensee takes advantage of any current or
former professional relationship or exploits the client to further the
licensee's personal, religious, political, business or financial interests,
including inducing the client to solicit business on behalf of the licensee.



         (b)   The licensee solicits or engages in a sexual
relationship with a current client.



         (c)   The licensee engages in a sexual relationship with
a former client when there is a risk of harm or exploitation to the former
client.



         (d)   The licensee promises to enter into another
relationship in the future with the client.



   (I)   Client records.



      (1)   A licensee shall maintain a legible client record for
each client, which accurately reflects the licensee's assessment and
treatment of the client. Entries in the client record shall be made in a
timely fashion.



      (2)   The client record shall contain all of the following
information:



         (a)   The name of the massage therapist providing
treatment.



         (b)   The client's full name, address, date of birth,
gender, and other information sufficient to identify the client.



         (c)   If the client is less than 18 years of age,
written permission of either a parent or guardian for the minor client's
receipt of massage therapy.



         (d)   Information identifying any pre-existing
conditions the client may have or verification that the client has no
pre-existing conditions.



         (e)   Dates of service and date of entry in the client
record.



         (f)   A client record entry for an initial client visit
that includes all of the following:



            (i)   History, including description of presenting
condition.



            (ii)   Therapeutic assessment, if applicable.



            (iii)   Treatment or care provided, if applicable.
Outcome, if available.



         (g)   A client record entry for subsequent assessments,
treatments, or care provided that includes all of the following:



            (i)   Change in condition.



            (ii)   Therapeutic assessment, if applicable.



            (iii)   Treatment or care provided, if applicable.
Outcome, if available.



         (h)   If applicable, a referral to another health care
provider.



      (3)   For massage therapy treatment provided at a special
event, a licensee shall maintain a client record that meets the requirements
of divisions (1) and (2) of this section or an abbreviated client record, as
specified in division (4) of this section. For purposes of this division,
"special event" means any of the following:



         (a)   A charitable, community, or sporting event.



         (b)   One-time events.



         (c)   Massages performed at any location that are 20
minutes or less in duration.



      (4)   An abbreviated client record allowed under division (3)
of this section shall consist of, at a minimum, a completed intake form that
contains all of the following information:



         (a)   The client's full name, date of birth, and an
address or telephone number where the client can be contacted.



         (b)   The information listed in division (2)(a), (c),
(d) ,and (e) of this section.



      (5)   A licensee shall retain a client record for at least
seven years from the date of the last massage therapy treatment for which a
client record entry is required. A licensee shall retain the client record
for a minor client until one year after the minor client reaches 18 years of
age, even if this results in the record being retained for more than seven
years.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Advertising regulations, see Administrative Rules, R 338.725



   Client records, see Administrative Rules, R 338.727



   Prohibited conduct, see Administrative Rules, R 338.723



ARTICLE IV.  RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, AND REVOCATION OF LICENSES



30-12.  RENEWAL OF LICENSES; CRITERIA FOR NON-RENEWAL, SUSPENSION, OR
REVOCATION.



   (A)   Anytime after December 1 but prior to December 15 of the year
in which the massage establishment license expires, the licensee may file
with the City Clerk a written application to renew the license on a form to
be furnished by the City Clerk. The application shall contain the information
required herein for an original license to the extent that such information
would not be duplicative, and the application shall be accompanied by the
correct fees. The applicant shall present, under oath, a written statement
that the matters contained in the original application have not changed or,
if they have changed, specifically stating the changes that have occurred. A
current medical certificate shall also be required. The applicant shall also
present proof of completion of at least six hours of continuing education
during the immediately preceding license period, consisting of courses
primarily focused on subjects directly related to the practice of massage
therapy. The City Clerk shall renew the license unless the Chief of Police,
and where applicable, the Building Official finds that the requirements of
this chapter for the issuance of a license are not met. All investigations
shall be completed within 21 days, and if the licensee's renewal application
was timely filed the licensee may continue to operate as though properly
licensed until such time as the City Clerk renews or declines to renew the
license.



   (B)   The City Clerk may decide not to renew a license, to suspend a
license, or to revoke a license based upon a determination by the Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, or Building Official that any of the following exists:



      (1)   Failure to comply with all standards, plans, or
agreements entered into in consideration for the issuance, transfer, or
continuance of the license, or failure to comply with all agreements or
consent judgments entered into subsequent to the issuance of the license.



      (2)   Violations of state laws or local ordinances, including
applicable codes and regulations, concerning health, safety, moral conduct,
or public welfare, by any licensee or employee of a licensee.



      (3)   Maintenance of a nuisance upon or in connection with the
licensed premises, including, but not limited to, any of the following:



         (a)   Existing violations of building, electrical,
mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire, or other applicable regulatory
codes;



         (b)   A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of
the licensed premises which is in violation of the law and or disturbs the
peace, order, and tranquility of the neighborhood;



         (c)   Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of
the licensed premises, including litter, debris, or refuse blowing or being
deposited upon adjoining properties;



         (d)   Activity on the licensed premises without a
required permit and/or activity which disturbs the peace, order, and
tranquility in the neighborhood of the licensed premises;



         (e)   Any advertising, promotion, or activity in
connection with the licensed premises which by its nature causes, creates, or
contributes to disorder, disobedience to rules, ordinances, or laws, or
contributes to the disruption of normal activity of those in the neighborhood
of the licensed premises.



      (4)   Failure by the licensee to permit the inspection of the
licensed premises by the city's agents or employees in connection with the
enforcement of this chapter.



   (C)   In addition to the foregoing provisions, the City Clerk may
decide to suspend, revoke, or not renew a license based upon the following
considerations:



      (1)   Compliance with all applicable provisions of existing
policy for new license applicants.



      (2)   Compliance with all standards and plans established and
approved at the time of issuance.



      (3)   Tax considerations:



         (a)   All licensees shall be held responsible for paying
all real property taxes, personal property taxes, and other bills due the
city arising from their use and occupancy by their due dates each year.



         (b)   All licensees renting or leasing the property in
which their business is located shall be responsible for paying all personal
property taxes and other bills due to the city arising from their use of that
property by their due dates each year.



      (4)   Lapse of, or failure to provide updated proof of,
required professional liability insurance coverage, whether such coverage is
provided through a professional association or procured by an independent
policy of insurance.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-13.  SUSPENSION OF LICENSE.



   (A)   Any license issued under this chapter may be suspended by the
City Clerk for a period not to exceed 90 days upon the investigation,
recommendation, and approval of the Chief of Police, Building Official, or
health inspector for any violation of this chapter by the licensee. The City
Clerk may also summarily suspend any license issued under this chapter for
failure to provide the application information required by this chapter, or
any other application-related offense or omission, until such time as the
offense or omission is remedied by the licensee.



   (B)   Any establishment license issued under this chapter may be
suspended by the City Clerk for a period not to exceed 90 days upon the
investigation, recommendation, or approval of the Chief of Police, for a
violation of this chapter by an agent or employee of the massage
establishment, provided the violation occurred on the massage establishment
premises.



   (C)   Notice of suspension may be given by delivering the same to
the licensee, by delivering the same to the establishment, or by depositing
the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the licensee at the address
stated on the license application, and the notice shall be deemed given upon
deposit of the notice in the United States mail.



   (D)   Suspension of a license shall be given effect ten days after
written notice thereof is given to the licensee. The notice shall include the
same information required elsewhere in this chapter for informing an
applicant that a license application has been denied.



   (E)   Any suspension ordered by the City Clerk may be appealed to
the Ordinance Board of Appeals.



   (F)   An appeal for any suspension hereunder shall automatically
stay any suspension pending the outcome of the appeal, unless the Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, or Building Official determines that continued operation
under the license would pose an unreasonable risk to the safety, health, or
welfare of a patron, an employee, or the general public, and the City Manager
approves an immediate suspension based upon such determination.  Such
immediate suspensions shall only be effective for a maximum period of 72
hours from the time and date of suspension, and may only be extended for one
additional 72-hour period by the City Manager if the licensee fails to
eliminate the hazardous condition during the first suspension period. The
City Council may impose an additional suspension of unlimited duration, upon
affording the licensee a due process hearing in a manner substantially
similar to the appeal process described in this chapter, if the hazardous
condition continues to exist beyond the two administrative suspensions
permitted by this subsection.



   (G)   After the determination of the appeal or if no appeal is
taken, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to take possession of the
license wherever it may be found and hold the same until the suspension
period has passed, and to post one or more conspicuous notices on the
premises that one or more licenses have been suspended.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-14.  REVOCATION OF LICENSES.



   (A)   Any license issued according to this chapter may be revoked by
the City Clerk for the following reasons, in addition to or independent of
the reasons set forth in § 30-16 :



      (1)   Upon the investigation, recommendation, and approval of
the Chief of Police, or his or her representative, for any violation of this
chapter by the licensee;



      (2)   The licensee is no longer able to satisfy the
requirements to obtain a license;



      (3)   The license has been suspended three times in a ten year
period; or



      (4)   There has been misrepresentation or withholding of
information upon the original or renewal of the license applications.



   (B)   Notice of revocation may be given by delivery to the licensee,
by delivery to the establishment or by depositing the same in the United
States mail, postage prepaid, certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, addressed to the licensee at the address stated on the license
application. If the notice is mailed, it shall be deemed delivered upon
deposit of the notice in the United States mail.



   (C)   The revocation shall be effective ten days after written
notice delivered to the licensee. The notice of revocation shall include the
same information required elsewhere in this chapter for informing an
applicant that a license application has been denied.



   (D)   Any revocation issued under this act may be appealed to the
Ordinance Board of Appeals.



   (E)   An appeal of any revocation shall automatically stay the
revocation pending the outcome of the appeal, unless the Chief of Police,
Fire Chief, or Building Official determines that continued operation under
the license would pose an unreasonable risk to the safety, health, or welfare
of a patron, an employee, or the general public.



   (F)   Following the determination of an appeal or if an appeal is
not taken, the licensee shall return all copies of the license to the City
Clerk, and the Chief of Police may take possession of the license wherever it
may be found.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



ARTICLE V.  APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR DENIAL OF LICENSES;
EXEMPTIONS



30-15.  FILING OF ORIGINAL APPEAL.



   (A)   Within ten days of receipt of notification of suspension,
revocation, or denial of a license according to this article, an applicant
may request, in the form of a written application to the City Manager, a
reconsideration hearing before the Ordinance Board of Appeals. Such
application may request either reconsideration of the suspension, revocation,
or denial, or a variance of any of the provisions or requirements of any law,
ordinance, code, or regulation the violations of which constituted grounds
for the suspension, revocation, or denial, or both.



   (B)   The appeal must state specifically the applicant's reasons for
believing the actions of the applicable city official were erroneous, and a
copy of the decision or notice complained of should be attached to the appeal.



   (C)   The appeal hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions in Chapter 2 of the Code of Ordinances. At the hearing, the
appellant and the appellant's attorney may present a statement and evidence
showing:



      (1)   That there are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances or conditions applying to the proposed massage establishment
referred to in the appeal application submitted to the City Manager, which
circumstances or conditions do not apply generally to any proposed massage
establishment; and/or



      (2)   That the granting of such massage business license will
not, under the circumstances of the particular case, have a material adverse
effect upon the health, safety, or welfare of the persons residing or working
in the neighborhood or attending any massage establishment, and will not,
under the circumstances of the particular case, be materially detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to the immediate neighborhood or the city at
large.



   (D)   In all cases where the Ordinance Board of Appeals grants a
variance of any provision or requirements of this chapter, or otherwise
relaxes or overturns an administrative decision to suspend, revoke, or deny,
the Ordinance Board of Appeals shall condition its order in any manner it
deems necessary or desirable and which will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter, and which will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.



   (E)   In no event shall the Ordinance Board of Appeals grant a
variance or relax or overturn an administrative decision where the
suspension, revocation, or denial is based upon the occurrence of criminal
acts, fraud, dishonesty, or other acts of moral turpitude, if established at
the hearing by a simple preponderance of the evidence.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



30-16.  EXEMPTIONS; ADDITIONAL LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.



   The licensing provisions of this chapter shall not apply to hospitals,
nursing homes, medical clinics, or sanitariums that offer massage treatment
for medical purposes to persons admitted for medical reasons, nor shall they
apply to persons holding a valid, unrevoked certificate to practice medicine
under the laws of the state, or to persons holding a valid, unrevoked license
or certificate of registration issued by the state, such as members of the
following professions: physical therapist, occupational therapist,
cosmetologist, barber, licensed medical doctor or other medical, osteopathic,
or chiropractic professional, or any individual working under the direct
supervision of such a person when performing the duties of such
professionals, or an athletic trainer administering a massage in the normal
course of training duties. Nevertheless, if such persons administer massage
services at a massage establishment, such establishment must still be
licensed as required by this chapter. In addition to meeting the licensing
requirements in this chapter, a massage therapist must also provide proof of
professional liability insurance as required by this chapter.



(Ord. No. 438, § 1, 12-16-14)



CHAPTER 31:  NOISE



31-1.  SHORT TITLE; INTENT AND PURPOSE..



   This chapter may be referred to as the “City of Sterling Heights
Noise Ordinance.” This chapter was created, and has been amended from time
to time, to preserve the peace and tranquility of neighborhoods, public
places, and streets within the community.  The Michigan Supreme Court has
long-recognized the right of all persons to the tranquility enjoyed by
citizens of a community where good order reigns among its members, and the
legitimate interest of municipalities in the preservation of peace and
order.  For these reasons, the City Council deems it necessary and
appropriate to regulate and restrict unnecessary and unreasonable noise
within the city.



(1978 Code, § 22-1; Ord. No. 229-A, § 5, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 380, § 1,
10-4-05)



31-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   LOUD NOISE. Any sound which, due to its volume, duration or character,
annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace and safety
of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities. The term shall be limited to
noise heard on the public streets, parking lot open to the public or other
public place, any church or hospital or in any occupied building which is not
the source of the noise, including the grounds surrounding the building. 
Unless otherwise provided in this chapter or the zoning ordinance, noise
shall be determined at a distance of at least 50 feet measured in a straight
line from the source of the noise.



(1978 Code, § 22-2; Ord. No. 229-A, § 6, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 380, § 1,
10-4-05)



31-3.  GENERAL PROHIBITION.



   Unless otherwise permitted by this chapter or the zoning ordinance, no
person shall cause, create or continue any loud noise within the city limits.



(1978 Code, § 22-3; Ord. No. 229-A, § 1, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 380, § 1,
10-4-05) Penalty, see § 1-9



31-4.  SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS.



   The following are determined to be violations of this chapter.  This
list is not exhaustive, but merely demonstrative, and it shall not preclude
enforcement of Section 31-3 or Chapter 33 under additional or variant
circumstances.



      (1)   Horns and signal devices. The sounding of any horn or
signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus or other motor vehicle for
any purpose other than to avoid an accident or collision or other reason
allowed by law.



      (2)   Electronic devices and musical instruments. The playing
of amplified music or sound as to annoy,  disturb or unreasonably interfere
with the quiet, comfort or repose of other persons.



      (3)   Shouting, singing and the like. Yelling, shouting,
singing  or the making of any other loud noise on the public streets or
right-of-way, or in or within 30 feet of a residence or residential zoning
district, as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other
persons.  The creation of any such loud noise between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. which is plainly audible from any public place within the
city is prohibited without limitation.



      (4)   Vehicle noises generally. The operation of any truck,
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle as to cause loud noise.



      (5)   Steam whistles or sirens. The operation of any steam
whistle or siren, except for the purpose of giving notice of the time to
begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or other danger or for other
purposes upon special permit from the City Council.



      (6)   Engine exhausts. The discharge outside of any enclosed
building of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion motor
engine, vehicle or motorboat engine, except through a muffler or other
similar device which effectively prevents the discharge of loud noises.



      (7)   Construction noises. The erection (including
excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building or premises, or
the excavation of streets and highways, in or within 30 feet of any residence
or residential zoning district  other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 9:00 p.m.



      (8)   Devices to attract attention. The use of any drum,
loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention to any person, event, performance, show, sale or display of
merchandise.



      (9)   Mobile sound amplification. The broadcasting of
electronically reproduced sound from motor vehicles or other portable means,
when audible to or perceived by others in the community who are not
responsible for such broadcast, has the deleterious effect upon the community
of increasing noise pollution, disturbing the peace and quiet of residential
neighborhoods and others near the sound in question, and impeding the ability
of the listener and others from hearing or noticing the approach of emergency
vehicles using sirens and other alerts.  It is the intent of this chapter to
strike an appropriate balance between the right of individuals to obtain
information and derive pleasure by listening to radios and other devices, and
the right of the public to a peaceful and healthful environment.  Therefore,
the following restrictions shall govern the broadcasting of such sound within
the city:



         (a)   The playing, transmitting, amplifying, or other
broadcasting of personal or commercial music or sound, by electronic or other
technological means installed in a motor vehicle or otherwise portable, in
such a manner that it is plainly audible at a distance of 30 feet in any
direction from the operator or source between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
11:00 p.m., is prohibited.



         (b)   The playing, transmitting, amplifying, or other
broadcasting of personal or commercial music or sound, by electronic or other
technological means installed in a motor vehicle or otherwise portable, in
such a manner that it is plainly audible in a public place or residential
neighborhood by any person other than the operator between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m., is prohibited.



         (c)   For purposes of this section, the phrase PLAINLY
AUDIBLE means any sound that can be detected by a person using his or her
unaided hearing faculties.  The enforcing officer need not determine the
title of a specific sound, specific words, or the performing artist, and the
detection of the rhythmic bass component of music is sufficient to constitute
a plainly audible sound.



         (d)   For violations of this subsection involving
broadcasts from a motor vehicle, the operator of the motor vehicle shall be
presumed to have dominion and control over the source of the broadcast, and
shall therefore be presumed to be responsible for the violation. 
Passengers, or others lacking an ownership interest, may be found guilty of
violating this subsection if such persons had constructive dominion and
control over the source of the broadcast, or otherwise aided and abetted the
operator.



         (e)   This subsection shall not be applicable to mobile
sound amplification for which a valid city permit has been issued, or for
which such sound amplification is incidental to and appropriate for the use
of a valid city permit, such as for parades, ice cream trucks, and similar
activities, so long as such activities comply with the terms of any such city
permit.



         (f)   A violation of this subsection shall be punishable
by a fine of not less than $100.  A second violation shall be punishable by
a fine of not less than $200.  A third or subsequent violation shall be
punishable by a fine of not less than $300 and, in the discretion of the
court, up to 90 days in jail and/or forfeiture of the offending equipment
and/or community service, and/or other remedial measures deemed appropriate
by the court.



   The above enumeration of activities shall not be construed to be an
exhaustive list of all prohibited activities.



(1978 Code, § 22-4; Ord. No. 229-A, § 2, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 380, § 1,
10-4-05)



Cross reference:



   Limitation of traffic ordinance on use of vehicle horns, see § 49-69;



   Provisions of traffic ordinance relative to unnecessary or unusual
noise from operation of vehicles, see § 49-150;



   Vehicle mufflers generally, see § 49-70



31-5.  EXCEPTIONS.



   None of the prohibitions shall apply to any of the following:



   (1)   Any police vehicle, ambulance, fire engine or emergency
vehicle which is engaged in necessary emergency activities;



   (2)   Excavation or repair of bridges, streets, highways, sewer or
water construction by or on behalf of the City of Sterling Heights, State of
Michigan or the County of Macomb between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
when the public welfare, safety and convenience render it necessary to
perform work during those hours.



(1978 Code, § 22-5; Ord. No. 229-A, § 3, 8-6-91; Ord. No. 380, § 1,
10-4-05)



31-6.  RESERVED.



CHAPTER 32:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 33:  NUISANCES



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



33-1.  SCOPE OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   Various nuisances are defined and prohibited in this and other
chapters of this Code and in other city ordinances. It is the intent of the
city in enacting this chapter to provide the general  means to abate
nuisances which are defined and authorized to be abated in the City Codes and
other city ordinances unless there is a more specific procedure set forth in
the chapter defining the conduct or condition that constitutes a nuisance.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter is intended to supersede the
regulation of:



      (1)   New building construction in Chapter 11;



      (2)   Fire prevention and safety in Chapter 20; and



      (3)   Property maintenance of existing structures, exterior
property, and premises in Chapter 11.



   This includes enforcement as well as appeal procedures as set forth in
Chapters 11 and 20.



(Ord. No. 64-B, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396 §
11, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 424, § 2, 2-5-13)



33-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A vehicle which has remained on public or private
property for a period of 48 hours after a police agency or other authorized
governmental agency has affixed a written notice to the vehicle.



   BOARD. The Board of Ordinance Appeals as created in Chapter 2 of this
Code.



   CHAPTER. A chapter of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Sterling
Heights.



   CITYCODE. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. Any person or persons designated by the City
Manager to be responsible for enforcement of this chapter or any provisions
contained herein.



   OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property as determined by the assessment records
or in the official records of the state, county or municipality or otherwise
having control of the property, including the guardian of any such person and
the personal representative of the estate of such person if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.



   PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.



   PROPERTY. A lot, plot or parcel of land.



   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any act, omission or condition which injuriously
affects the health, safety or morals of the public or causes some substantial
annoyance, inconvenience or injury to the public, including but not limited
to the following:



      (A)   Abandoned vehicles. The keeping of an abandoned vehicle
upon public or private property in violation of Chapter 49, Article X.



      (B)   Animals and fowl. Any violation of Chapter 8
constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 8 or this chapter.



      (C)   Burial of dead animals. The burial of dead animals
contrary to M.C.L.A. § 750.57 or other applicable state laws.



      (D)   Common law nuisance. The physical condition or use of
any property that is regarded as a public nuisance at common law.



      (E)   Composting. Any violation of Chapter 45 constituting a
public nuisance as defined by Chapter 45 or this chapter.



      (F)   Dumping. Any depositing, dumping or discarding of trash,
debris, rubbish or garbage upon public or private property, except in
accordance with the regulations of Chapter 23.



      (G)   Dust, smoke or odors. The creation or allowance of
conditions which generate dust, dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas, soot,
cinders or flyash in quantities which interfere unreasonably with the use of
nearby property or the enjoyment of life and property.



      (H)   Excavations, erosion and sedimentation. Any violation of
Chapter 17 constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 17 or this
chapter.



      (I)   Fences. Any violation of Chapter 19 constituting a
public nuisance as defined by Chapter 19 or this chapter or a violation of
any zoning ordinance provision applicable to fences.



      (J)   Fire code violations. Any violation of Chapter 20
constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 20 or this chapter.



      (K)   Garbage, refuse and litter. Any violation of Chapter 23
constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 23 or this chapter.



      (L)   Handbills. Any violation of Chapter 3 constituting a
public nuisance as defined by Chapter 3 or this chapter.



      (M)   Illicit discharge. Any unauthorized spilling, dumping or
disposal of non-storm water into the storm sewer system, except as permitted
in accordance with Chapter 53.



      (N)   Incinerators, commercial. Any violation of Chapter 4
constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 4 or this chapter.



      (O)   Junk automobile parts. The keeping of salvaged
automobile parts for a period exceeding ten days (other than in an enclosed
garage) or in an approved junkyard without incorporation of such parts into
an operable vehicle.



      (P)   Junk automobiles. The keeping of any vehicle in a
residentially zoned area (other than in an enclosed garage) which is not in
operable condition for a period exceeding ten days.



      (Q)   Malfunctioning private sewage disposal system. Any
malfunctioning private sewage disposal system which allows polluted, raw or
partially treated waste water or effluent to be deposited or to remain upon
any property.



      (R)   Noise. Any prolonged violation, whether intermittent or
continuous, of the provisions in Chapter 31.  Irrespective of whether it
originates or occurs in or upon a public place under Chapter 31, any
recurring, intermittent, or ongoing noise that disturbs the reasonable peace
and tranquility of another is also a public nuisance and shall also be
subject to the prosecutorial and abatement options set forth in this chapter.



      (S)   Refuse. Any violation of Chapter 23 constituting a
public nuisance as defined by Chapter 23 or under this chapter.



      (T)   Stagnant water. Any accumulation of water that may cause
mosquitos or other insects or breeding or proliferation, including any
violation of Chapter 17 that constitutes a nuisance as defined by Chapter 17
or this chapter.



      (U)   Trees/vegetation. Any violation of Chapter 51
constituting a public nuisance as defined by Chapter 51 or this chapter.



      (V)   Vehicles (commercial, recreational and vehicles for
sale). Any violation of Chapter 37 constituting a public nuisance as defined
by Chapter 37 or this chapter.



      (W)   Waste water. All foul, dirty or polluted water or
liquids deposited or allowed to remain upon any property.



      (X)   Weeds, noxious. Growth of noxious weeds as defined in
the Local Amendments to the International Property Maintenance Code adopted
by the City Council as set forth in § 11-87 of the City Code.



      (Y)   Zoning ordinance violations. Any violation of Zoning
Ordinance 278 as amended.



(Ord. No. 64-B, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 64-C & 286-B, § 1, 6-1-93; Ord. No.
367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396, § 11, 5-6-08; Ord. No. 424, § 3, 2-5-13)



33-3.  NUISANCE PROHIBITED.



   No person or entity shall cause, permit, maintain, create or otherwise
perpetuate a nuisance within the city.  Any person or entity who creates or
perpetuates any nuisance within the city, as defined by this or another
chapter of this Code, shall be subject to the municipal civil infraction or
misdemeanor penalties set forth in Chapter 1 of this Code, as well as the
abatement procedure and penalties set forth in this chapter unless other
abatement procedures or penalties are set forth in a particular chapter or
section of the city codes and ordinances.



(Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396 § 11, 5-6-08)



33-4.  PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.



   Whenever the Code Official determines that there has been a violation
of this chapter or has reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred and is continuing, the Code Official shall follow the enforcement
provisions prescribed in Division 4 of Article VI of Chapter 11 of this Code.



(Ord. No. 64-B, § 2, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 367, § 11, 12-17-02; Ord. No. 396 §
11, 5-6-08)



33-5.  BLIGHT.



   It is determined that the following uses, structures and activities are
causes of blight or blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend
to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No person shall maintain
or permit to be maintained any of the following causes of blight or blighting
factors upon any property in the city owned, leased, rented or occupied by
such person, and failure to prevent or eliminate the existence of such blight
is hereby deemed a nuisance.  Whenever the Code Official determines that any
of the following causes of blight or blighting factors exist upon any
property in the city, the Code Official shall follow the enforcement
provisions prescribed in Division 4 of Article VI of Chapter 11 of this
Code. 



      (1)   Storage of junk automobiles in residential areas. In any
area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of junk
automobiles, except in a completely enclosed garage. For the purpose of this
section, the term JUNK AUTOMOBILES shall include any motor vehicle which is
not lawfully registered for use upon the highways of the State of Michigan
for a period in excess of ten days and shall also include, whether so
registered or not, any motor vehicle which is not in operable condition for a
period in excess of ten days.



      (2)   Storage of building materials in residential areas. In
any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage upon any property of
building materials, unless there is in force a valid building permit issued
by the city for construction upon the property and the materials are intended
for use in connection with such construction. Building materials shall
include but shall not be limited to lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder
blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or
equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws or any other
materials used in constructing any structure.



      (3)   Storage of junk, refuse and the like in residential
areas. In any area zoned for residential purposes, the storage or
accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except domestic
refuse stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance for a period not
to exceed 30 days. The term JUNK shall include parts of machinery or motor
vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances stored in the open, remnants of
wood, metal or any other material or other cast-off material of any kind,
whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use.



      (4)   Uninhabitable or useless structures. In any area, the
existence of any structure or part of any structure which, because of fire,
wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration, is no longer
habitable, if a dwelling, nor useful for any other purpose for which it may
have been intended.



      (5)   Dwellings out of repair. In any area, a dwelling or the
parts thereof that are not kept in good repair, including plumbing, heating,
ventilating and electrical wiring. The roof shall be so maintained as not to
leak and the rainwater shall be drained and conveyed therefrom through proper
conduits into the sewerage system in accordance with plumbing regulations so
as to avoid dampness in the walls and ceilings and unsanitary conditions.



      (6)   Partially completed structures. In any area, the
existence of any partially completed structure, unless the structure is in
the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building
permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a
reasonable time.



      (7)   Unprotected vacant buildings in residential areas. In
any area zoned for residential purposes, the existence of any vacant
dwelling, garage or other outbuilding, unless such buildings are kept
securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise
protected to prevent entrance thereto by vandals.



(1978 Code, § 23-21; Ord. No. 356, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 396 § 11, 5-6-08)



CHAPTER 34:  OBSCENITY



34-1.  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   This chapter shall not apply nor be used to prosecute an individual who
is disseminating material that may be classified as obscene under this
chapter, if such individual is acting in the capacity as:



   (1)   A licensed medical practitioner or psychologist in the
treatment of a patient or patients;



   (2)   A teacher of an accredited course of study in a state or
federal approved educational institution;



   (3)   A participant in the criminal justice system, such as judge,
prosecutor, attorney, law enforcement officials, legislators or other related
officials;



   (4)   A supplier to any individual described in (1) through (3).



(1978 Code, § 24-1)



34-2.  SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES DEFINED.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the term SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES
shall mean:



   (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;



   (2)   Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy, whether
engaged in alone, between members of the same or opposite sex or between
humans and animals or humans and inanimate objects;



   (3)   Erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breast;



   (4)   Sexually explicit or erotic nudity.



(1978 Code, § 24-2)



34-3.  PUBLICATION, SALE AND THE LIKE OF OBSCENE MATERIAL GENERALLY.



   (A)   Any person who knowingly or willfully publishes, gives away,
distributes, shows or offers either to sell, lend, give away, distribute,
show or has in his or her possession with intent to either sell, lend, give
away, distribute, show or advertise in any manner or who otherwise knowingly
offers for either loan, gift, sale or distribution any obscene book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, phonograph record, picture, photograph, motion
picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any written, printed
or recorded matter of a character which is distinguished or characterized by
its substantial emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
specified sexual activities, as defined in § 34-2 and which meets the test
for obscenity, as defined in § 34-4, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in § 1-9 of this Code.



   (B)   For the purpose of this section, possession of three or more
identical copies of any obscene newspaper, story paper, writing paper,
phonograph record, magazine, pamphlet, book, picture, drawing, photograph,
slide, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or tape recording or any
written, printed or recorded matter of a character which is distinguished or
characterized by its substantial emphasis on matter depicting, describing or
relating to specified sexual activities, as defined in § 34-2, shall be
prima facie evidence of possession with intent to sell, lend, give away,
distribute or show the object.



(1978 Code, § 24-3)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.S.A. § 28.575(1); M.C.L. § 750.343a



34-4.  TEST TO BE APPLIED TO DETERMINE OBSCENITY.



   The test to be applied to determine obscenity, for the purpose of §
34-3, shall not be whether erotic sexual desires or sexually erotic thoughts
would be aroused in those comprising a particular segment of the community,
the young, the immature or the highly prudish or would leave another segment,
the scientific or highly educated or sophisticated, indifferent and unmoved,
but such test shall be whether, in the judgment of the average person living
in the city, applying contemporary standards from that community, the
material, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interest, depicts or
describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct, including that
conduct listed in § 34-2 and, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary,
artistic, political or scientific value.



(1978 Code, § 24-4)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.S.A. § 28.575(2); M.C.L. § 750.343b



34-5.  REQUIRING ACCEPTANCE OF OBSCENE LITERATURE AS CONDITIONS TO DELIVERY
FOR RESALE OF OTHER PUBLICATIONS.



   Any person who shall, as a condition to a sale, allocation, consignment
or delivery for resale of any paper, magazine, book, periodical or
publication, require that the purchaser or consignee receive for resale any
other article, book or other publication which is contrary to § 34-3 or
shall deny or threaten to deny any franchise or impose or threaten to impose
any penalty, financial or otherwise, by reason of the failure of any person
to accept such articles, books or publications or by reason of the return
thereof, shall be guilty of a violation of § 34-3 and punished as therein
provided.



(1978 Code, § 24-5)



34-6.  SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF OBSCENE MATERIAL TO MINORS.



   Whoever knowingly either sells, distributes or imports for the purpose
of selling or distributing to a person under the age of 18 years any obscene
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, phonograph
record, picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image,
wire or tape recording of any written, printed or recorded matter of a
character which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, as defined
in § 34-2, introduces into a family, school or place of education or buys,
procures, receives or has in his or her possession any obscene book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, writing paper, phonograph record,
picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture film, figure, image, wire or
tape recording or any written, printed or recorded matter of character which
is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities, as defined in § 34-2,
either for the purpose of sale, exhibition, loan or circulation to a person
under the age of 18 years or with intent to introduce the same into a family,
school or place of education shall be punished as provided in § 1-9 of this
Code.



(1978 Code, § 24-6)



CHAPTER 35:  OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



35-1.  UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS TO TELEPHONE NUMBERS ASSIGNED TO CITY.



   (A)   It is the purpose of this section to prevent the disruption
and interference with the telephone communications system of the Police
Department and Fire Department of the city by allowing alarm systems which,
when activated, connect with the communication facility of the Police
Department and Fire Department of the city by means of the Department’s
telephone system.



   (B)   No person engaged in the business of providing communication
services and facilities or any other person should use or operate, attempt to
use or operate or cause to be used or operated or arrange, adjust, program or
otherwise provide or install any device or combination of devices that will,
upon activation, either mechanically, electronically or by other automatic
means, initiate the intrastate calling, dialing or connection to any
telephone number assigned to the city or any of the departments of the city;
provided, however, this section shall not apply to any public law-enforcement
agency.



   (C)   The term "telephone number" includes any additional numbers
assigned by a public utility company engaged in the business of providing
communications services and facilities to be used by means of a rotary or
other system to connect with the city or any of its departments to such
primary number, when the primary telephone number is in use.



(1978 Code, § 25-1)



35-2.  TRESPASS AND RELATED OFFENSES GENERALLY.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to enter the lands or
premises of another without lawful authority after having been forbidden so
to do by the owner or occupant, or the agent of the owner or occupant.  This
subsection includes, without limitation, any person who returns to any place
of business after having been forbidden or banned from returning, whether due
to disorderly behavior, intoxication, theft, or otherwise.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person to remain without lawful
authority on the land or premises of another after being notified to depart
by the owner or occupant, or the agent of either.



   (C)   All delivery personnel shall use sidewalks and accepted and
approved walkways and shall refrain from traversing lawns or other private
property not normally used as a walkway by the general public in order to
effect delivery.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly enter in or
remain upon any lands of another, without the consent of the owner or lessee
of the lands, under any of the following conditions:



      (1)   The lands are fenced or enclosed in a manner to exclude
intruders;



      (2)   Notice to stay off or leave has been personally
communicated to him or her by the owner or lessee of the lands or some other
authorized person;



      (3)   Notice against trespass is given by posting in a
conspicuous manner.



   (E)   Any person who breaks and enters or enters without breaking,
any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, shop, warehouse, barn,
granary, factory or other building, boat, ship, railroad car or structure
used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or
any cottage, clubhouse, boat house, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or the
out-buildings belonging thereto, any ice shanty with a value of $100 or more,
or any other structure, whether occupied or unoccupied, without first
obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person
having immediate control thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (F)   Subsection (E) does not apply to entering without breaking,
any place which at the time of the entry was open to the public, unless the
entry was expressly denied.  Subsection (E) does not apply if the breaking
and entering or entering without breaking was committed by a peace officer or
an individual under the peace officer's direction in the lawful performance
of his or her duties as a peace officer.



   (G)   A person who violates subsection (A) or (B) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 30 days or by a fine
of not more than $250, or both, in the discretion of the Court.



(1978 Code, § 25-2; Ord. No. 217, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 350, § 8,
10-17-00; Ord. No. 407, § 6, 7-21-09) Penalty, see § 1-9



Cross reference:



   Entering closed areas of parks, see § 38-4;



   Unauthorized persons in school buildings or on school land, see § 44-7



Statutory reference:



   Trespass, see M.S.A. §§ 28.814 et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 750.546 et seq.



35-3.  TRESPASS WITH CERTAIN VEHICLES.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter in or remain upon
premises while operating any snowmobile, off-road vehicle, all-terrain
vehicle, motorcycle or motor-driven cycle under any of the following
conditions:



      (1)   The premises are enclosed in a manner so designed to
exclude intruders;



      (2)   The premises are fenced;



      (3)   The premises are posted in a conspicuous manner against
entry;



      (4)   Notice against trespass is personally communicated to
him or her by the owner or lessee of the land or other authorized person.



   (B)   As used in this section, OFF-ROAD VEHICLE or ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLE means a motor-driven vehicle capable of cross country travel, without
benefit of a road or trail, on or immediately over land, water, snow, ice,
marsh, swampland or other natural terrain. It includes but is not limited to
a multi-wheel drive or low pressure tire vehicle, motorcycle and related
two-wheel vehicle, amphibious machine, ground-effect air cushion vehicle or
other means of transportation deriving motive power from a source other than
muscle or wind. It does not include a vehicle registered under Public Act 300
of 1949, as amended, being M.C.L.A. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, a registered
motorboat or snowmobile, a farm vehicle being used for farming, a vehicle
used for military or law enforcement purposes, a construction vehicle used in
performance of its common function or a registered aircraft.



   (C)   As used in this section, MOTORCYCLE means every motor vehicle
having a saddle or seat for the use of the rider and designed to travel on
not more than three wheels in contact with the ground but excluding a tractor.



   (D)   As used in this section, MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE means every
motorcycle with a motor that produces less than five gross brake horsepower,
every motor scooter and every bicycle with motor attached, except a motorized
wheelchair or other similar vehicle not exceeding 1,000 pounds gross weight
operated by a physically afflicted or disabled person and except pedal
bicycles with helper motors rated less than one brake horsepower transmitted
by friction and not by gear or chain, which produce only ordinary pedaling
speeds up to a maximum of 20 miles per hour.



(1978 Code, § 25-3)



35-4.  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.



   (A)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that an
assault or an assault and battery has taken place or is taking place and that
the person who committed or is committing the assault or assault and battery,
is a spouse, a former spouse or a person residing or having resided in the
same household as the victim, or a person who has or has had a dating
relationship with the victim, may arrest the violator without a warrant for
that violation, irrespective of whether the assault or assault and battery
was committed in the presence of the police officer.  The term DATING
RELATIONSHIP means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by
the expectation of affectional involvement.  The term does not include a
casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in
a business or social context.



   (B)   When a person, who has not been convicted previously of
assault or assault and battery, being a violation of Section 81 or 81a of the
Michigan Penal Code, Public Act 328 of 1931, as amended, being M.C.L. §§
750.81 and 750.81a or a violation of § 35-16(i), pleads guilty to or is
found guilty of a violation of § 35-16(i), and the victim of the assault or
assault and battery is the offender's spouse, former spouse, an individual
who has had a child in common with the offender, an individual who has had a
dating relationship with the offender, or a person residing or having resided
in the same household as the offender, the court, without entering a judgment
of guilt and with the consent of the accused and of the City Attorney in
consultation with the victim, may defer further proceedings and place the
accused on probation as provided in this section. However, before deferring
proceedings under this subsection, the Court shall contact the Department of
State Police and determine whether, according to the records of the
Department of State Police, the accused has previously been convicted under
Section 81 or 81a of Public Act 328 of 1931, or under a local ordinance
substantially corresponding to Section 81 of Public Act 328 of 1931, or has
previously availed himself or herself of this section. If the search of the
records reveals an arrest for a violation of Section 81 or 81a of Public Act
328 of 1931 or a local ordinance substantially corresponding to Section 81 of
Public Act 328 of 1931 but no disposition, the Court shall contact the
arresting agency and the Court that had jurisdiction over the violation to
determine the disposition of that arrest for purposes of this section.  Upon
a violation of a term or condition of probation, the Court may enter an
adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided by law.  As used in
this subsection, DATING RELATIONSHIP means frequent, intimate associations
primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement.  This
term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization
between two individuals in a business or social context.



   (C)   An order of probation entered under subsection (B) of this
section may require the accused to participate in a mandatory counseling
program. The Court may order the accused to pay the reasonable costs of the
program.



   (D)   Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the Court shall
discharge the person and dismiss the proceedings against the person.
Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of
guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of
disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon conviction of a crime.



   (E)   There may be only one discharge and dismissal under this
section with respect to any individual. The nonpublic record of an arrest and
discharge retained by the Department of State Police shall be furnished to
the Court or Police Department upon request pursuant to subsection (B) of
this section for the purpose of showing that a defendant in a criminal action
for assault or assault and battery has already availed himself or herself on
this section or the corresponding state law.



   (F)   The Court shall enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as
otherwise provided by this section or by state law if any of the following
circumstances exist:



      (1)   The accused commits an assaultive crime during the
period of probation. As used in this subdivision, ASSAULTIVE CRIME means one
or more of the following:



         (i)   That term as defined in Section 9a of Chapter X of
the State Code of Criminal Procedure;



         (ii)   A violation of Chapter IX of the Michigan Penal
Code, Public Act 328 of 1931, being M.C.L. §§ 750.81 through 750.90;



      (2)   The accused violates an order of the court that he or
she receive counseling regarding his or her violent behavior;



      (3)   The accused violates an order of the court that he or
she have no contact with a named individual.



(1978 Code, § 25-4; Ord. No. 300, § 1, 7-2-91; Ord. No. 350, § 9,
10-17-00; Ord. No. 364, § 1, 2, 8-20-02)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 764.15a; M.C.L. § 769.4a



35-5.  HARASSMENT; MALICIOUS ANNOYANCE.



   (A)   No person shall use any service provided by a
telecommunications service provider to terrorize, frighten, intimidate,
threaten, harass, molest, or annoy another person.



   (B)   An offense is committed under this section if the
communication either originates or terminates in this city.



   (C)   As used in this section, “telecommunications service”
shall have the same meaning as provided in state law.



(Ord. No. 407, § 7, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.540e



35-6.  CIVIL RESPONSIBILITY.



   (A)   A person who engages in conduct for which a police response
was solicited by another or initiated by a police officer, and for which the
police and city attorney determined probable cause existed to believe that a
crime was committed, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction,
punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code.  If the city incurred
actual expenses for obtaining evidence or records relating to the original
charge, the court shall order full reimbursement of such expenses to the city
upon acceptance of a responsible plea.



   (B)   A violation of subsection (A) is a secondary offense.  A
person may only plead responsible to a violation of subsection (A) upon the
concurrence or recommendation of the City Attorney.



(Ord. No. 407, § 8, 7-21-09)



35-7.  INTERFERENCE WITH CRIME REPORTS.



   No person shall prevent or attempt to prevent another person from
reporting a violation of law or ordinance, or the attempted commission of a
violation of law or ordinance.  This section includes, but is not limited
to, actions by a person to disable a telephone or other communications device
in order to prevent use of the device to contact emergency or law enforcement
officials.



(Ord. No. 407, § 9, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.483a(1)(b)



35-8-35-13.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  PUBLIC OFFENSES



35-14.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Sterling
Heights Public Offenses Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 25-14; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86)



35-15.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CRUISE. To drive a motor vehicle on, around or off the premises of a
business establishment without parking such vehicle and seeking service,
unless there is no unoccupied parking space available.



   PICKET or PICKETING. Includes standing, sitting or lying or repeatedly
walking, running or otherwise moving on a public right-of-way to convey a
message. These terms also include posting a person or persons at a particular
place to apprise the public vocally or by standing or marching with signs,
banners or other means of conveying an opinion or a message.



   PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access to for
business, entertainment or other lawful purpose but does not necessarily mean
a place devoted solely to the use of the public. It includes any shopping
mall, shopping center, store, shop, restaurant, tavern or other place of
business and also public grounds, areas or parks.



   RESIDENCE. A one family, two family, mobile home or mufti family
dwelling, as defined in Sterling Heights Zoning Ordinance 278.



   TARGETED RESIDENCE. A residence which an act of picketing is directed
toward or focused upon, a residence which is a subject of an act of
picketing, the residence of an individual whom an act of picketing is
directed toward or focused upon, the residence of an individual who is a
subject of an act of picketing or a residence wherein a subject of an act of
picketing is located.



(1978 Code, § 25-15; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-L, § 2,
10-1-96)



35-16.  DISTURBING PUBLIC PEACE; ASSAULT AND BATTERY.



   (A)   No person shall act in a violent, boisterous, turbulent,
quarrelsome, indecent, or disorderly manner, or use abusive, profane,
obscene, lewd, vulgar, or libelous speech or language, or make an obscene
gesture, or commit any other act that disturbs the good order, peace, and
dignity of the city, its inhabitants, or other persons.



   (B)   No person shall act in an obscene, disorderly or riotous
manner in a public place. A person is a disorderly person if the person is
any of the following:



      (1)   A person of sufficient ability who refuses or neglects
to support his or her family;



      (2)   A common prostitute;



      (3)   A window peeper;



      (4)   A person who engages in an illegal occupation or
business;



      (5)   A person who is intoxicated in a public place and who is
either endangering directly the safety of another person or of property or is
acting in a manner that causes a public disturbance;



      (6)   A person who is engaged in indecent or obscene conduct
in a public place;



      (7)   A vagrant;



      (8)   A person found begging in a public place;



      (9)   A person found loitering in a house of ill fame or
prostitution or place where prostitution or lewdness is practiced, encouraged
or allowed;



      (10)   A person who knowingly loiters in or about a place
where an illegal occupation or business is being conducted;



      (11)   A person who loiters in or about a police station,
police headquarters building, county jail, hospital, court building or other
public building or place for the purpose of soliciting employment of legal
services or the services of sureties upon criminal recognizances;



      (12)   A person who is found jostling or roughly crowding
people unnecessarily in a public place.



      (13)   A person convicted of subsections (3), (6), or (9)
shall provide samples of the person's blood, saliva, or tissue for chemical
testing for DNA identification profiling or a determination of the sample's
genetic markers and shall provide samples for chemical testing for a
determination of the person's status as required by state law.



   (C)   No person shall disturb any lawful public assembly.



   (D)   No person shall use force, coercion, intimidation or acts of
physical violence to disrupt, interfere with or obstruct any lawful public
assembly.



   (E)   No person shall obstruct, whether in person or by the use of a
vehicle or object, the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic on public
streets, sidewalks, driveways or parking areas open to the general public
within the city.



   (F)   No person shall refuse to leave a public place when ordered to
do so by lawful authority.



   (G)   Any person in a public place and under the influence of an
intoxicating liquor or drug shall exercise care for his or her own safety to
not endanger the safety of persons or property or to create a disturbance.



   (H)   No person shall cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl
or riotous conduct endangering the life, person, health or property of
another.



   (I)   No person shall commit an assault, a battery, or an assault
and battery upon the person of another.  Violation of this subsection is
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine or not more
than $500, or both.



      (1)   Except for individuals with prior convictions, an
individual who assaults, batters or assaults and batters his or her spouse or
former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating
relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or
a resident or former resident of his or her household, is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500, or both.



      (2)   A person who intentionally commits a violation of this
subsection against a pregnant individual is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both, if the conduct results in physical injury to the embryo
or fetus.



      (3)   A person who commits a grossly negligent act against a
pregnant individual is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for
not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $100, or both, if the act
results in physical injury to the embryo or fetus.



      (4)   This subsection does not apply to an individual using
necessary reasonable physical force in compliance with section 1312 of the
revised school code, M.C.L. § 380.1312.



      (5)   As used in this subsection, DATING RELATIONSHIP means
frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of
affectional involvement.  This term does not include a casual relationship
or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social
context.



   (J)   No person shall incite or attempt to incite a riot.



   (K)   No person shall fail to obey a lawful order to disperse made
by a properly-identified police officer, where one or more persons are
committing criminal or disorderly acts in the immediate vicinity.



   (L)   No person shall do any of the following within 500 feet of the
property line of a building or other location where a funeral, memorial
service, burial, or viewing of a deceased person is being conducted or within
500 feet of a funeral procession in the hour immediately before, or during,
or in the two hours immediately following:



      (1)   Make loud noise or engage in disorderly behavior and
continue to do so after being asked to stop.



      (2)   Make any statement or gesture that would make a
reasonable person under the circumstances feel intimidated, threatened, or
harassed.



      (3)   Engage in any other conduct that the person knows or
should reasonably know will disturb, disrupt, or adversely affect the
funeral, memorial service, viewing of the deceased person, funeral
procession, or burial.



   (M)   No person shall cause any public disturbance.  For purposes
of this subsection, the term “public disturbance” means any act or series
of actions causing an interruption of the public peace and quiet; the
interference with a person who is in the pursuit of a lawful right or
occupation; the irritation or incitement of an assembly, in whole or part;
the direct endangerment of the safety of persons or property; or the
interference with law enforcement or other city officials during the
performance of their duties while in a public place or which attracts the
attention of, or disturbs, any member of the public.



   (N)   No person shall host, maintain, cause, or facilitate a public
nuisance.  For purposes of this subsection, the term “public nuisance”
means a gathering of persons on public or private premises which, by the
action or conduct of those persons in attendance, results in any one or more
of the following conditions or events occurring on neighboring public or
private property:  public drinking or drunkenness; public urination or
defecation; the unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of intoxicating
beverages or controlled substances; the unlawful deposit of trash or litter;
the unlawful storage, possession, use, or display of fireworks; the
destruction of property; the generation of pedestrian traffic or unlawful
vehicular traffic standing or parking which obstructs the free flow of
traffic or interferes with the ability to render emergency services; loud
noise which disturbs the comfort, quiet, or repose of the neighborhood,
including public disturbances, brawls, fights, or quarrels; conduct or
conditions which injure or endanger the safety, health, or welfare of the
neighborhood; indecent or obscene conduct; and any immoral exhibition or
indecent exposure by persons attending the gathering.



   This section shall not be construed to suppress the right to lawful
assembly, picketing, (not subject to the regulations of § 35-16A), public
speaking or other lawful means of expressing public opinion.



(1978 Code, § 25-16; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-I, 117-H
and 218-A, § 1, 11-3-93; Ord No. 179-L, § 3, 10-1-96; Ord. No. 350, § 10,
10-17-00; Ord. No. 364, § 3, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 407, §§ 10, 11, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Assault and battery penalty provisions, see M.C.L. §§ 750.81, 750.90b
and 750.90c



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 750.167



   DNA samples, see M.C.L. § 750.520m



   Demonstrations at funeral services, see M.C.L. §§ 123.1111 et seq.



35-16A.  PICKETING OF RESIDENCES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The City Council declares that the protection and preservation
of the home is the keystone of democratic government; that the unique nature
of the home is that it is the last citadel of the tired, the weary and the
sick, and it is the one retreat to which men and women can escape from the
tribulations of their daily pursuits; that the public health, safety and
welfare and good order of the community require that residents of the city be
able to enjoy a feeling of well-being, peacefulness, tranquility, safety, and
privacy in their homes, and when absent from their homes carry with them the
sense of security inherent to the assurance that they may return to the
enjoyment of their homes; that protecting the safety of the occupants of each
home and their guests as they walk to, approach and enter the home, is of
paramount importance; that the practice of picketing before or about
residences causes emotional disturbance and distress to the occupants and
guests, as well as to the occupants of adjacent residences, and obstructs and
interferes with the free use of public sidewalks and public ways of travel;
that such practice destroys the well-being, peacefulness, tranquility, safety
and privacy associated with the home and neighborhood; that such practice has
as its object the harassing of such occupants, and without resort to such
practice full opportunity exists, and under the terms and provisions of this
article, will continue to exist, for the exercise of freedom of speech and
other constitutional rights; and that the practice of picketing directed or
focused at a particular residence, which has by its nature as its true
objective the harassing of the occupants, is not consistent with a
citizen’s right to privacy or the government’s interest in ensuring
peaceful and safe residential neighborhoods. Therefore, this article, being
necessary for the public health, safety and welfare, shall be in full force
and effect immediately upon publication.



   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in picketing before,
about or immediately adjacent to a targeted residence. For the purpose of
this section, BEFORE, ABOUT OR IMMEDIATELY ADJACENT TO means in front of or
within one residence on either side of a targeted residence and on the same
side of the street as the targeted residence.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit picketing
to the extent that such activity is protected under the constitutional
provisions. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a person or
group of persons from proceeding in a residential area along a defined route
without stopping at any particular private residence or residences. For
purpose of this section, a DEFINED ROUTE means a path with fixed starting and
ending points, traversed once, rather than a repetitive loop around or beside
a particular area.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties provided in § 1-9 of the
Sterling Heights Code of Ordinances, any court of general equity jurisdiction
may enjoin conduct or threatened conduct proscribed by this section and may
in any such proceeding award damages against the persons who have violated
the provisions of this section.



(Ord. No. 179-L, § 1, 10-1-96) Penalty, see § 1-9



35-17.  LOITERING GENERALLY.



   (A)   No person shall loiter in a place, at a time or in a manner
not usual for law-abiding individuals, under circumstances that warrant a
justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of
persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be
considered in determining whether the alarm or immediate concern is warranted
is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a police
officer, refuses to identify himself or herself or manifestly endeavors to
conceal himself or herself or any object.



   (B)   Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it
impracticable, a police officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense
under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or
immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting him or her
to identify himself or herself and explain his or her presence and conduct.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section
if the police officer did not comply with the procedure outlined in
subsection (B) or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the
person is true and, if believed by the police officer at the time, would have
dispelled the alarm or immediate concern.



(1978 Code, § 25-17; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86)



35-17A.  LOITERING; SOLICITATION.



   (A)   No person shall remain or wander about in a public place and
repeatedly beckon to, or repeatedly stop, or repeatedly attempt to stop, or
repreatedly attempt to engage passers-by in conversation, or repeatedly stop
or attempt to stop motor vehicles, or repeatedly interfere with the free
passage of other persons, for the purpose of prostitution, or of patronizing
a prostitute.



   (B)   No person shall engage, or offer to engage, the services of
another person for any act of prostitution.



   (C)   No person shall aid, assist, or abet another to commit any act
prohibited by this section including, but not limited to, aiding, assisting,
or abetting by receiving or admitting or offering to receive or admit any
person into any public place, or any other place, for any purpose prohibited
by this section, or to knowingly permit any person to remain in any such
place for any such purpose.



(Ord. No. 407, § 12, 7-21-09)



35-18.  CRUISING AND LOITERING.



   No person shall cruise or loiter upon any driveway, sidewalk or
premises of any retail business establishment. For purposes of this section,
LOITERING shall mean remaining on the premises for more than five minutes
without making or participating in any retail transaction.



(1978 Code, § 25-18; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-1, 117-H
and 218A, § 2, 11-3-93)



35-19.  RESISTING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person may willfully resist, interfere with, hinder,
obstruct or impede or attempt to resist, interfere with, hinder, obstruct or
impede any police officer in the performance of his or her duty by physical,
verbal or passive action or inaction or by the utterance of abusive,
indecent, profane or vulgar language that by its very utterance inflicts
injury or tends to incite an immediate breach of the peace.



   (B)   No person may, by physical, verbal or passive action or
inaction:



      (1)   Willfully resist or attempt to resist an arrest which he
or she knows is being made by a police officer;



      (2)   Assist any person in custody of a police officer to
escape or attempt to escape from custody by physical action;



      (3)   Willfully misrepresent, falsify or otherwise disguise
himself or herself or the fact of his or her identity to a police officer who
is investigating possible unlawful conduct;



      (4)   Willfully fail or refuse to provide identification to an
officer who is investigating possible unlawful conduct;



      (5)   Willfully fail or refuse to obey lawful commands of a
police officer during an arrest, search, traffic stop or other lawful
execution of the police officer’s duties;



      (6)   Willfully exit and flee from a vehicle stopped by a
police officer for a traffic violation or criminal offense, whether the
person is the driver or a passenger; or



      (7)   Enter an area or remain in an area where access has been
restricted or closed by a law enforcement officer or other public official,
or whenever a person has been informed by an officer or other public official
that the area is closed or restricted, or when an area has been cordoned off
with ropes, tape, barriers or any other line or boundary designed to restrict
access to the area.



      (8)   For purposes of this section, the phrase POSSIBLE
UNLAWFUL CONDUCT means a potential violation of any provision of the city
code, where the police officer has reason to believe a misdemeanor or civil
infraction violation has occurred.



   (C)   A person shall not refuse to allow or resist the taking of his
or her fingerprints if fingerprinting is authorized or required by law.



(1978 Code, § 25-19; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-H, § 1,
3-15-88; Ord. No. 350, § 11, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 364, § 4, 8-20-02)



Statutory reference:



   Refusing fingerprinting, see M.C.L. § 28.243a



35-20.  IMPERSONATING A POLICE OFFICER; WEARING MASKS IN ASSEMBLIES, MARCHES
OR PARADES.



   (A)   No person shall falsely assume or pretend to be a police
officer or member of any Police Department or of any law enforcement agency
without being a member of the department or the agency.



   (B)   No person shall assemble, march or parade on any street,
highway or other place open to the public in this city while wearing a mask
or covering which conceals, in whole or in part, the face of the wearer. This
section shall not apply to the pranks of children on Halloween, to those
going to and from masquerade parties, to those participating in any public
parade of an educational, religious or historical character and to those
participating in the parades of minstrel troupes, circuses or other amusement
or dramatic shows.



(1978 Code, § 25-20; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 350, § 12,
10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 750.215 and M.C.L. § 750.396



35-21.  DUPLICATING A POLICE OFFICER’S UNIFORM.



   No person shall counterfeit or imitate, or cause to be counterfeited or
imitated, or wear or provide another with any badge, sign, signal or device
or any part of the uniform adopted by any Police Department or any law
enforcement agency without authority to do so.



(1978 Code, §  25-21; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86)



35-22.  GIVING FALSE INFORMATION TO A POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall falsely identify himself or herself in
response to any lawful inquiry by a police officer acting in connection with
the performance of his or her official duties.



   (B)   No person shall provide false information or make a false
report to a police officer or 9-1-1 operator.



(1978 Code, § 25-22; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-I, 117-H
and 218-A, § 3, 11-3-93; Ord. No. 407, § 13, 7-21-09)



35-23.  FALSE CRIMES, REPORTS TO POLICE OFFICERS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   A person who intentionally makes a false report of the
commission of a misdemeanor crime, or intentionally causes a false report of
the commission of a misdemeanor crime to be made, to a police officer of the
city, 9-1-1 operator, or any other governmental employee or contractor or
employee of a contractor who is authorized to receive reports of a crime,
knowing the report is false, is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both.



   (B)   As part of the sentence for a conviction under this section,
in addition to any other penalty authorized by law, the court may order the
person convicted to reimburse the city for expenses incurred in relation to
the incident, including but not limited to expenses for an emergency response
and expenses for prosecuting the person. The expenses for which reimbursement
may be ordered under this section include all of the following:



      (1)   The salaries or wages, including overtime pay, of law
enforcement personnel for time spent responding to the incident from which
the conviction arose, arresting the person convicted, processing the person
after the arrest, preparing reports on the incident, investigating the
incident, and collecting and analyzing evidence, including, but not limited
to, determining bodily alcohol content and determining the presence of and
identifying controlled substances in the blood, breath, or urine.



      (2)   The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including
overtime pay, of fire department and emergency medical service personnel,
including volunteer fire fighters or volunteer emergency medical service
personnel, for time spent in responding to and providing fire fighting,
rescue, and emergency medical services in relation to the incident from which
the conviction arose.



      (3)   The cost of medical supplies lost or expended by fire
department and emergency medical service personnel, including volunteer fire
fighters or volunteer emergency medical service personnel, in providing
services in relation to the incident from which the conviction arose.



      (4)   The salaries, wages, or other compensation, including,
but not limited to, overtime pay of prosecution personnel for time spent
investigating and prosecuting the crime or crimes resulting in conviction.



   (C)   The amount ordered to be paid under this section shall be paid
to the clerk of the court, who shall transmit the appropriate amount to the
city. If not otherwise ordered by the court, the reimbursement ordered under
this section shall be made immediately.  However, the court may require that
the person make the reimbursement ordered under this section within a
specified period or in specified installments.



   (D)   If the person convicted is placed on probation, any
reimbursement ordered under this section shall be a condition of that
probation.



   (E)   An order for reimbursement under this section may be enforced
by the city in the same manner as a judgment in a civil action.



(Ord. No. 350, § 13, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 364, § 5, 8-20-02; Ord. No. 407, §
14, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.411a



   Cost recovery, see M.C.L. § 769.1f



35-23A.  PROHIBITED USE OF EMERGENCY 9-1-1 SERVICE.



   (A)   A person shall not use an emergency 9-1-1 service for any
reason other than to call for an emergency response service from a primary
public safety answering point.



   (B)   This section does not apply to a person who calls a public
safety answering point to report a crime or seek assistance that is not an
emergency unless the call is repeated after the person is told to call a
different number.



(Ord. No. 407, § 15, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 484.1605



35-24.  DANGEROUS WEAPONS; BURGLARY TOOLS: POSSESSION  PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise permitted by law, no person shall possess
or conceal on or about his or her person, in a vehicle or conveyance, or in
any location outside of his or her residence, any dangerous or deadly weapon,
including but not limited to any irritating spray device, handgun, pistol,
revolver, machine gun, sawed-off shotgun, lead pipe, club, metal knuckles,
martial arts weapon, blackjack, switchblade knife, long knife or other
dangerous knife, or other object specifically designed or customarily carried
or possessed for use as a weapon, except hunting knives adapted and carried
as such, or any instrument attached to or designed to be attached to any
firearm for the purpose of silencing, lessening or muffling the noise of the
firing of any firearm, except as permitted by law. Every person convicted of
such violation of this section shall forfeit to the city such weapon.



   (B)   No person shall possess or control on or about his or her
person or in a vehicle or other conveyance any tool or instrument used or
adapted for the commission of burglary, larceny, or for picking locks or
pockets, or any articles used for obtaining money or property under false
pretenses, or for starting the engine of a motor vehicle or driving away a
motor vehicle without its key.



(1978 Code, § 25-24; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-1, 117-H
and 218-A, § 5, 11-3-93; Ord. No. 407, § 16, 7-21-09)



Cross reference:



   Concealed weapons in school buildings, see § 44-11



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision for possession of burglary tools, see M.C.L. §
750.116



35-25.  DAMAGING, DEFACING AND THE LIKE PUBLIC PROPERTY.



   No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, damage, deface,
tamper with or make unauthorized use of any public buildings, grounds,
vehicles, signs, sidewalks, electric lights, electric light poles, bridges,
tables, railings, equipment or any other public property.



(1978 Code, § 25-25; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86)



Cross reference:



   Damaging Fire Department emergency vehicles, see § 20-33;



   Damaging fire hydrants or Fire Department connections, see § 20-34;



   Damaging school buildings or fixtures, see §§ 44-1, 44-2;



   Damaging sewage works property, see § 53-55



35-26.  DAMAGING, DEFACING AND THE LIKE PRIVATE PROPERTY OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy, damage,
deface, tamper with or make unauthorized use of the property of others, where
the amount of the destruction or injury is less than $200.



   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the amount of the destruction or
injury, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-26; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0,
§ 2, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 14, 10-17-00)



Cross reference:



   Damaging bicycle serial number or license tag, see § 9-4



Statutory reference:



   Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, see M.S.A. §§ 28.609
et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 750.377 et seq.; M.C.L. § 750.377a



35-26A.  BURNING OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall willfully or maliciously burn any personal
property owned by himself or herself, or others, where the value of the
personal property burned or intended to be burned is less than $200.



   (B)   No person shall use, arrange, place, devise or distribute an
inflammable, combustible or explosive material, liquid or substance or any
device in or near a building or property with the intent to willfully and
maliciously set fire to or burn the building or property, nor shall any
person aid, counsel, induce, persuade or procure another to do so, where the
value of the property is less than $200.



   (C)   Violations of subsection (A) and subsection (B) shall be
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500 or three times the value of the personal property burned or
intended to be burned, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0, § 3, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 15, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 740.54; M.C.L. § 740.77



35-27.  DAMAGING, DESTROYING, ETC., TREES, GRASS AND THE LIKE.



   (A)   No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any
tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or
plant located on city property; nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or
other contrivance to any such tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or
otherwise disturb grass areas or in any other way injure or impair the
natural beauty or usefulness of any area in a city park or of any other city
property.



   (B)   No person shall willfully and maliciously, or wantonly and
without cause cut down, destroy, carve, transplant, mar or injure any tree,
shrub, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil of another that is standing,
growing or located on the land of another, where the value of the trees,
shrubs, grass, turf, plants, crops or soil cut down, destroyed, carved,
transplanted, marred or injured is less than $200.



   (C)   A person convicted under this section shall be required to
make restitution for any damage done.



   (D)   A person convicted under subsection (A) or (B) of this section
who committed the offense with a vehicle, as defined in Public Act 300 of
1949, § 79, being M.C.L.A. § 257.79, may have his or her license to operate
a vehicle in this state suspended for up to one year in addition to any other
penalty.



   (E)   A person who violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the trees, shrubs,
grass, turf, plants, crops or soil, whichever is greater, or both
imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-27; Ord. No. 179-G,  § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N &
222-0, § 4, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 16, 10-17-00)



Cross reference:



   Vegetation, see Ch. 51



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.382



35-28.  LARCENY; FROM A VEHICLE .



   (A)   No person shall commit or attempt to commit the offense of
larceny by stealing the property of another person of the value of less than
$200.



   (B)   No person shall enter or break into a motor vehicle, house
trailer, trailer, or semitrailer to steal or unlawfully remove property of
value less than $200.  If the value of the targeted property exceeds $200,
or if the person successfully completes the larceny of a wheel, tire, air
bag, catalytic converter, radio, stereo, clock, telephone, computer, or other
electronic device in or on any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or
semitrailer, then this subsection does not apply and the offense shall be
prosecuted pursuant to state law.



   (C)   A person who violates subsections (A) or (B) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93
days or a fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the property
stolen, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-28; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0,
§ 5, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 17, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 407 § 18, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Larceny, see M.S.A. §§ 25.588 et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 750.356 et seq.



   Larceny from vehicle, see M.C.L. § 750.356a



35-28A.  AUTOMOBILES.



   (A)   No person shall break and enter, or enter without breaking,
any motor vehicle, house trailer, trailer, or semi-trailer.



   (B)   No person shall pull or inspect the doors, door handles, or
any other mechanism for opening an automobile in any public or private
parking area for the purpose of, or which has the effect of, determining
whether the automobile is unlocked or otherwise accessible.



(Ord. No. 407, § 17, 7-21-09)



35-29.  RETAIL FRAUD THIRD DEGREE.



   (A)   No person shall commit any of the following acts in a store or
in its immediate vicinity:



      (1)   While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer,
remove and replace, conceal or otherwise misrepresent the price at which
property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or
to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale, if the
resulting difference in price is less than $200;



      (2)   While a store is open to the public, steal property of
the store that is offered for sale at a price of less than $200;



      (3)   With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain
money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that
was not paid for and belongs to the store, if the amount of money, or the
value of the property, obtained or attempted to be obtained is less than $200.



   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the property stolen,
whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-29; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-16-86; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0,
§ 6, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 18, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.356d



35-30.  LARCENY BY CONVERSION, EMBEZZLEMENT.



   (A)   No person who has temporary custody and possession of property
of another of a value of less than $200 shall, without consent, fraudulently
dispose of or convert the same to his or her own use or take or hide the
property with the intent to convert the same to his or her own use.



   (B)   No person who is the agent, servant or employee of another
person, governmental entity within this state or other legal entity or who is
the trustee, bailee or custodian of the property of another person,
governmental entity within this state or other legal entity shall
fraudulently dispose of or convert to his or her own use or take or conceal
with the intent to convert to his or her own use without the consent of his
or her principal, any money or other personal property of his or her
principal that has come to that person’s possession or that is under his or
her charge or control by virtue of his or her being an agent, servant,
employee, trustee, bailee or custodian, where the money or personal property
embezzled has a value of less than $200. In a prosecution under this
subsection, the failure, neglect or refusal of the agent, servant, employee,
trustee, bailee or custodian to pay, deliver or refund to his or her
principal the money or property entrusted to his or her care upon demand is
prima facie proof of intent to embezzle.



   (C)   In a prosecution under this section, the failure, neglect or
refusal of the person to pay, deliver or refund to the property’s true
owner the money or property entrusted to his or her care upon demand is prima
facie proof of intent.



   (D)   A person who violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the value of the money or property
embezzled, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-30; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0,
§ 7, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 19, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.174



35-31.  FRAUD; FALSE PRETENSES.



   (A)   No person shall, with intent to defraud or cheat, obtain or
acquire or attempt to obtain or acquire property of a value of less than $200
from another by false pretenses or by other fraudulent means.



   (B)   Any person who, with intent to defraud or cheat, and by color
of any false token or writing or by any false or bogus check or other
written, printed or engraved instrument, by counterfeit coin or metal that is
intended to simulate a coin or by any other false pretense, does one or more
of the following shall be guilty of a misdemeanor where the land, interest in
land, money, personal property, use of the instrument, facility, article or
valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained or smaller amount sold or
disposed of has a value of less than $200:



      (1)   Causes any person to grant, convey, assign, demise,
lease or mortgage any land or interest in land;



      (2)   Obtains a person’s signature on a written instrument,
the making of which would be punishable as forgery;



      (3)   Obtains from any person any money or personal property
or the use of any instrument, facility or article or other valuable thing or
service;



      (4)   By means of any false weights or measures obtains a
larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for; or



      (5)   By means of any false weights or measures sells or
disposes of a lesser amount or quantity of property than was bargained for.



   (C)   A person who violates subsection (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500 or three times the value, whichever is greater, or
both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, §  25-31; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N &
222-0, § 8, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 20, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.218



35-31A.  UTTERING AND PUBLISHING.



   (A)   No person shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft
or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any
bank or other depository with intent to defraud and knowing at the time of
the making, drawing, uttering or delivering that the maker or drawer does not
have sufficient funds in or credit with the bank or other depository to pay
the check, draft or order in full upon its presentation, where the amount
payable in the check, draft or order is less than $100.



   (B)   No person shall make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft
or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any
bank or other depository with intent to defraud if the person does not have
sufficient funds for the payment of the check, draft or order when
presentation for payment is made to the drawee, where the amount payable in
the check, draft or order is less than $100. This subsection does not apply
if the lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful
cause and that fact was not known to the person when the person made, drew,
uttered or delivered the check, draft or order.



   (C)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both.



(Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0, § 9, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 21, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.131



35-32.  POSSESSION OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the
concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property,
including motor vehicle license plates, knowing the money, goods or property
is stolen, embezzled or converted, where the money, goods or property has a
value of less than $200.



   (B)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500 or three times the value of the property purchased, received,
possessed or concealed, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(1978 Code, § 25-32; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0,
§ 10, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 22, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.535



35-32A.  FINANCIAL TRANSACTION DEVICES.



   (A)   No person shall, for the purpose of obtaining goods, property,
services or anything of value, knowingly and with intent to defraud use one
or more financial transaction devices that have been revoked or canceled by
the issuer of the device or devices, as distinguished from expired, where the
person has received notice of the revocation or cancellation and where the
value of the goods, property, services or anything of value is less than $100.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly and with intent to defraud use a
financial transaction device to withdraw or transfer funds from a deposit
account in violation of the contractual limitations imposed on the amount or
frequency of withdrawals or transfers or in an amount exceeding the funds
then on deposit in the account, where the amount of the funds withdrawn or
transferred is less than $200.



   (C)   A person who violates subsection (A) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500, or both.



   (D)   A person who violates subsection (B) is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of
not more than $500 or three times the amount of funds withdrawn or
transferred, whichever is greater, or both imprisonment and a fine.



(Ord. No. 179-N & 222-0, § 11, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 350, § 23, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.157s; M.C.L. § 750.157w



35-33.  INDECENT EXPOSURE.



   No person shall willfully expose his or her genital area or bare
buttocks in a public place.  An individual convicted of a violation of this
section shall provide samples of his or her blood, saliva, or tissue for
chemical testing for DNA identification profiling or a determination of the
sample's genetic markers and shall provide samples for chemical testing for a
determination of his or her secretor status as required by state law.



   (B)   No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place except
with regards to a public restroom in toilets designated for such purposes.



   (C)   A person shall not for payment or promise of payment knowingly
or intentionally display in a public place either of the following:



      (1)   Any individual’s genitals or anus with less than a
fully opaque covering; or



      (2)   A female individual’s breast with less than a fully
opaque covering of the nipple and the areola.



   (D)   Exceptions. The preceding subsection (C) of this section shall
not prohibit:



      (1)   A woman’s breast-feeding of a baby whether or not the
nipple or areola is exposed during or incidental to the feeding;



      (2)   Material, as such term is defined in Public Act 343 of
1984, § 2, as amended, being M.C.L. § 752.362;



      (3)   Sexually explicit visual material, as defined in Public
Act 33 of 1978, § 3, as amended, being M.C.L. § 722.673.



(1978 Code, § 25-33; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 179-J,
11-15-94; Ord. No. 350, § 24, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 364, § 6, 8-20-02)



Cross reference:



   Obscenity generally, see Ch. 34



Statutory reference:



   Indecent exposure, see M.S.A. § 28.567(1); M.C.L. § 750.335a



   DNA sample, see M.C.L. § 750.520m



35-34.  ILLEGAL OCCUPATION OR BUSINESS; PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in any illegal occupation or
knowingly frequent, patronize, or do business in any place where any illegal
occupation or business is being conducted.



   (B)   No person 17 years of age or older shall accost, solicit, or
invite another person in a public place, in or from a building or vehicle, or
electronically, by word, gesture, or any other means, to commit prostitution
or to do any other lewd or immoral act.



   (C)   No person 17 years of age or older shall receive or admit, or
offer to receive or admit, any person into a place, structure, house,
building, or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or
assignation, or knowingly permit a person to remain in a place, structure,
house, building, or vehicle for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or
assignation, or knowingly permit a person to remain in a place, structure,
house, building, or vehicle for such purposes.



   (D)   No person shall engage or offer to engage the services of
another person for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, or assignation, by
the payment in money or other forms of consideration.



   (E)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both, except that persons with prior convictions shall be
punishable as provided by state law.



(1978 Code, § 25-34; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 407, § 19,
7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. §§ 750.448 et seq.



35-35.  CONSUMPTION, POSSESSION OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN
PLACES.



   (A)   No person shall consume any alcoholic liquor on a highway,
street, alley, sidewalk, parking area or on the premises of a business
establishment not so licensed or parking lot. The term PARKING AREA shall
include any area wherein motor vehicles are parked by the public in
conjunction with any private business, enterprise, commercial establishment,
office building or apartment building.



   (B)   No person shall without a permit possess any alcoholic
beverage in a park, regardless of whether or not such beverages are intended
for consumption within the park.



(1978 Code, § 25-35; Ord. No. 179-G, § 1, 2-17-86; Ord. No. 350, § 25,
10-17-00)



Cross reference:



   Alcoholic beverages generally, see Ch. 5;



   Alcoholic beverages in school buildings or school land, see § 44-10;



   Parks, see Ch. 38



35-36.  RESERVED.



35-37.  RESERVED.



35-38.  RESERVED.



35-39.  OPERATION OF SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES, ROLLER BLADES, SCOOTERS OR
SIMILAR NON-MOTORIZED WHEELED DEVICES.



   (A)   A person shall not ride or in any manner use a skateboard,
roller skate, roller blade, scooter or similar non-motorized wheeled device
on city owned property commonly known as the Civic Center Complex, including
but not limited to any sidewalk, ramp, staircase, bike path or roadway
thereof.



   (B)   The city shall post warning signs no less than 12 inches by 12
inches, nor greater than 12 inches by 18 inches size upon the Civic Center
Complex property prohibiting the use of skateboards, roller skates, roller
blades, scooters or similar non-motorized wheeled devices.



   (C)   A violation of this section constitutes a municipal civil
infraction and any sanctions for such violation shall be made in accordance
with § 1-9 of this Code.



(Ord. No. 339 & 328-B, § 1, 1-19-99)



35-40.  CONTRIBUTING TO NEGLECT OR DELINQUENCY OF CHILDREN.



   Any person who shall by any act, or by any word, encourage, contribute
toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to
become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the
jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the probate court, as defined in
Public Act 288 of 1939, Ch. 12a, § 2, as added by Public Act 54 of 1944
(Extra Session), and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall
in fact be adjudicated a ward of the probate court, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 350, § 27, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.145



35-41.  JUVENILES TAKEN INTO CUSTODY.



   (A) Any policy officer may immediately take into custody any child who
is found violating any law or ordinance or whose surroundings are such as to
endanger his or her health, morals or welfare or who is violating or has
violated a personal protection order. If such an officer takes a child into
custody, he or she shall immediately attempt to notify the child’s parent.
While awaiting the arrival of the parent, a child under the age of 17 years
taken into custody under the provisions of this section shall not be held in
any detention facility unless the child is completely isolated so as to
prevent any verbal, visual or physical contact with any adult prisoner.
Unless the child requires immediate detention as provided for in the Probate
Code of 1939, the officer shall accept the written promise of the parent to
bring the child to the court at the designated time. The child shall then be
released to the custody of the parent.



   (B)   When an officer apprehends a juvenile for an offense without
court order and does not warn and release the juvenile, does not refer the
juvenile to a diversion program or does not have authorization from the City
Attorney or County Prosecutor to file a complaint and warrant charging the
juvenile with an offense as though an adult pursuant to state law, the
officer may:



      (1)   Issue a citation or ticket to appear at a date and time
to be set by the court and release the juvenile;



      (2)   Accept a written promise of the parent to bring the
juvenile to court, if requested, at a date and time to be set by the court
and release the juvenile to the parent; or



      (3)   Take the juvenile into custody and submit a petition, if:



         (i)   The officer has reason to believe that due to the
nature of the offense, the interest of the juvenile or the interest of the
public would not be protected by release of the juvenile; or



         (ii)   A parent cannot be located or the parent refuses
to take custody of the juvenile.



   (C)   The officer who apprehends a juvenile must immediately contact
the court when:



      (1)   The officer detains the juvenile;



      (2)   The officer is unable to reach a parent who will appear
promptly to accept custody of the juvenile; or



      (3)   The parent will not agree to bring the juvenile to court.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, the term PARENT means a parent,
guardian or custodian as set forth in the Probate Code of 1939.



(Ord. No. 350, § 28, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 712A.14; M.C.R. § 5.933



35-42.  LEAVING CHILD UNATTENDED IN VEHICLE.



   (A)   A person who is responsible for the care or welfare of a child
shall not leave that child unattended in a vehicle for a period of time that
poses an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to the child or under
circumstances that pose an unreasonable risk of harm or injury to the child.



   (B)   A violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500, or
both, except that a violation of this section that results in physical harm
to the child, a violation shall be punishable as provided by state law.



(Ord. No. 407, § 20, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 750.135a



35-43-35-49.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA



35-50.  PURPOSE.



   To promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City
of Sterling Heights by regulating the possession and sale of certain
paraphernalia designed to facilitate the unlawful use or administration of
controlled substances.



(1978 Code, § 25-50; Ord. No. 218, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 436, § 1, 8-19-14)



35-51.  DEFINITION OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means all equipment, products, and
materials of any kind which are or have been used, intended for use, or
designed for use, in planting; propagating; cultivating; growing; harvesting;
manufacturing; compounding; converting; producing; processing; preparing;
testing; analyzing; packaging; repackaging; storing; containing; concealing;
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body,
a controlled substance; including, but not limited to, all of the following:



      (1)   An isomerization device specifically designed for use in
increasing the potency of any species of plant which plant is a controlled
substance.



      (2)   Testing equipment specifically designed for use in
identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of a
controlled substance.



      (3)   A weight scale or balance specifically designed for use
in weighing or measuring a controlled substance.



      (4)   A diluent or adulterant, including, but not limited to,
quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, specifically
designed for use with a controlled substance.



      (5)   A separation gin or sifter specifically designed for use
in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marihuana.



      (6)   An object specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish
oil into the human body.



      (7)   A kit specifically designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived.



      (8)   A kit specifically designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances.



      (9)   A device, commonly known as a cocaine kit, that is
specifically designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing controlled substances into the human body, and which consists of
at least a razor blade and a mirror.



      (10)   A device, commonly known as a bullet, that is
specifically designed to deliver a measured amount of controlled substances
to the user.



      (11)   A device, commonly known as a snorter, that is
specifically designed to carry a small amount of controlled substances to the
user's nose.



      (12)   A device, commonly known as an automotive safe, that is
specifically designed to carry and conceal a controlled substance in an
automobile, including, but not limited to, a can used for brake fluid, oil,
or carburetor cleaner which contains a compartment for carrying and
concealing controlled substances.



      (13)   A spoon, with or without a chain attached, that has a
small diameter bowl and that is specifically designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing controlled substances into the human body.



   (B)   In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a
court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the
object concerning its use;



      (2)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a
direct violation of laws and ordinances relating to controlled substances;



      (3)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;



      (4)   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on
the object;



      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an
owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he
or she knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this
section; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as
to a direct violation of this section shall not prevent a finding that the
object is intended for use, or designed for use as drug paraphernalia;



      (6)   Instructions, oral or written provided with the object
concerning its use;



      (7)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which
explain or depict its use;



      (8)   National and local advertising concerning its use;



      (9)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;



      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales
of the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;



      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the
object in the community;



      (12)   Expert testimony concerning its use;



      (13)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object,
is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;



      (14)   Prior violations by an owner, or by anyone in control
of the object, of any law or ordinance relating to controlled substances; and



      (15)   Positive tests revealing the current or former presence
of controlled substances in the body of the owner or person with possession
or control of the object.



(1978 Code, § 25-51; Ord. No. 218, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 436, § 1, 8-19-14)



Statutory reference:



   Similar definition of drug paraphernalia, see M.C.L. § 333.7451



35-52.  UNLAWFUL POSSESSION AND SALE OF PARAPHERNALIA; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to possess drug paraphernalia,
unless otherwise permitted by law, and no person shall possess marihuana
accessories on the grounds of a public or private school where children
attend classes in preschool programs, kindergarten programs, or grades 1
through 12, in a school bus, or on the grounds of any correctional facility.



   (B)   A person shall not sell or offer for sale drug paraphernalia,
knowing that the drug paraphernalia will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject,
ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance.  This subsection does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   An object sold or offered for sale to a person licensed
under Article 15 of the Public Health Code or under the Occupational Code,
1980 PA 299, M.C.L. §§ 339.101 to 339.2721, or any intern, trainee,
apprentice, or assistant in a profession licensed under Article 15 of the
Public Health Code or under the Occupational Code, 1980 PA 299, M.C.L. §§
339.101 to 339.2721, for use in that profession.



      (2)   An object sold or offered for sale to any hospital,
sanitarium, clinical laboratory, or other health care institution including a
penal, correctional, or juvenile detention facility for use in that
institution.



      (3)   An object sold or offered for sale to a dealer in
medical, dental, surgical, or pharmaceutical supplies.



      (4)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device not
specifically designed for a use described in subsection (c).



      (5)   A hypodermic syringe or needle sold or offered for sale
for the purpose of injecting or otherwise treating livestock or other animals.



      (6)   An object sold, offered for sale, or given away by a
state or local governmental agency or by a person specifically authorized by
a state or local governmental agency to prevent the transmission of
infectious agents.



      (7)   To the extent of the permitted conduct only, this
section does not apply to any person or entity who is licensed or otherwise
permitted by law to manufacture, use, possess, prescribe, dispense,
distribute, conduct research with respect to, or administer a controlled
substance in the normal course of their respective businesses or professions,
if such actions are taken in the normal course; nor to common carriers or
warehousers or their employees engaged in the lawful transportation of the
paraphernalia, nor to public officers or employees while engaged in the
performance of their official duties, nor to persons suffering from asthma,
diabetes, or other medical conditions requiring introduction of a controlled
substance into the human body by self-injection.



   (C)   Except as provided in subsection (D), a person who violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not
more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500, or both.  Any drug
paraphernalia used, sold, possessed with intent to use or sell, or
manufactured with intent to sell in violation of this section shall be seized
and forfeited.



   (D)   The use, manufacture, possession, and purchase of marihuana
accessories by a person 21 years of age or older and the distribution or sale
of marihuana accessories to a person 21 years of age or older is authorized,
is not unlawful, is not an offense, is not grounds for seizing or forfeiting
property, is not grounds for arrest, prosecution, or penalty in any manner,
and is not grounds to deny any other right or privilege.



(1978 Code, § 25-52; Ord. No. 218, § 1, 5-6-80; Ord. No. 179-I, 117-H and
218-A, § 6, 11-3-93; Ord. No. 436, § 1, 8-19-14; Ord. No. 461, § 1,
12-18-18) Penalty, see § 1-9



Statutory reference:



   Paraphernalia sales, see M.C.L. § 333.7453



   Possession/use on school property, see M.C.L. §§  333.27951 et seq.



   Exceptions, see M.C.L. § 333.7457 and M.C.L. §§ 333.27951 et seq.



35-53-35-63.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  MARIHUANA



35-64.  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article:



   ACT means the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act, M.C.L.
§§ 333.27951 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.



   CONSUME  or CONSUMING means to smoke, ingest, eat, drink, or otherwise
imbibe.



   CULTIVATE means to propagate, breed, grow, harvest, dry, cure, or
separate parts of the marihuana plant by manual or mechanical means.



   MARIHUANA means all parts of the plant genus cannabis, growing or not;
the seeds of the plant; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and
every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
plant or its seeds or resin, including marihuana concentrate and
marihuana-infused products.  It does not include the mature stalks of the
plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the
plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or
preparation of the mature stalks, except the resin extracted from those
stalks, fiber, oil, or cake, or any sterilized seed of the plant that is
incapable of germination; industrial hemp; or any other ingredient combined
with marihuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or
other products.



   MARIHUANA CONCENTRATE means the resin extracted from any part of the
plant of the genus cannabis.



   PROCESS or PROCESSING means to separate or otherwise prepare parts of
the marihuana plant and to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise
make or prepare marihuana concentrate or marihuana-infused products.



   PUBLIC PLACE means a place or location that is open to or may be used
by the members of the community, or where the general public has a right or
invitation to resort, or where the public may come and go, including without
limitation any public street, sidewalk, or park; any area open to the general
public in a publicly owned or operated building; real property or an
appurtenance to the real property that is publicly owned; areas within a
place of business that is open to the public at any time; any space, room, or
building wherein, by general invitation, members of the public attend for
reasons of business, communal activities, entertainment, instruction,
lodging, or similar activities, and are welcome as long as they conform to
what is customarily done there; any public conveyance; any place of
employment while employees are working and guests or patrons are present or
generally invited; any place of public assembly; the common areas of any
commercial place of communal living, such as a home for the aged; any place
or location to which the public is generally invited or permitted to visit;
within a privately owned vehicle located in a public place, such as a parking
lot that is open for use by the general public; or otherwise any place
determined by the courts of the State of Michigan to be a public place when
analyzed in the context to which the term is applied.



   SMOKING or SMOKE means the burning of marihuana or any substance or
matter that contains marihuana within a cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other
item or device.



(1978 Code, § 25-64; Ord. No. 122-A, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 436, § 2,
8-19-14; Ord. No. 461, § 3, 12-18-18)



Statutory reference:



   Definition, see M.C.L. § 333.27951



35-65.  POSSESSION AND USE OF MARIHUANA; PROHIBITIONS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   A person shall not:



      (1)   Possess, use, or deliver any controlled substance or a
controlled substance analogue listed in Section 7212(d)(1) of the Public
Health Code, or a prescription form, except as otherwise permitted by law or
this section;



      (2)   Transfer marihuana or marihuana accessories to a person
under the age of 21;



      (3)   If under the age of 21, possess, consume, purchase or
otherwise obtain, cultivate, process, transport, or sell marihuana;



      (4)   Separate plant resin by butane extraction or another
method that utilizes a substance with a flashpoint below 100 degrees
Fahrenheit in any public place, motor vehicle, or within the curtilage of any
residential structure;



      (5)   Consume marihuana in a public place;



      (6)   Smoke marihuana where prohibited by the person who owns,
occupies, or manages the property;



      (7)   Cultivate marihuana plants if the plants are visible
from a public place without the use of binoculars, aircraft, or other optical
aids or outside of an enclosed area equipped with locks or other functioning
security devices that restrict access to the area;



      (8)   Consume marihuana while operating, navigating, or being
in physical control of any motor vehicle, aircraft, snowmobile, off-road
recreational vehicle, or motorboat;



      (9)   Smoke marihuana within the passenger area of a vehicle
upon a public way;



      (10)   Possess or consume marihuana on the grounds of a public
or private school where children attend classes in preschool programs,
kindergarten programs, or grades 1 through 12, in a school bus, or on the
grounds of any correctional facility; or



      (11)   Possess more than 2.5 ounces of marihuana within a
person's place of residence unless the excess marihuana is stored in a
container or area equipped with locks or other functioning security devices
that restrict access to the contents of the container or area.



   For a violation of subsection (10) by a person under the age of 17, the
person shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a
fine of $500, except that the fine will be $100 if the person completes a
drug awareness program approved by the police department, either within 30
days of receiving the citation or prior to entering a plea of responsibility
at the district court.



   (B)   The following acts by a person 21 years of age or older are
not unlawful, are not an offense, are not grounds for seizing or forfeiting
property, are not grounds for arrest, prosecution, or penalty in any manner,
are not grounds for search or inspection, and are not grounds to deny any
other right or privilege:



      (1)   Except as permitted by subsection (2), possessing, using
or consuming, internally possessing, purchasing, transporting, or processing
2.5 ounces or less of marihuana, except that not more than 15 grams of
marihuana may be in the form of marihuana concentrate;



      (2)   Within the person's residence, possessing, storing, and
processing not more than 10 ounces of marihuana and any marihuana produced by
marihuana plants cultivated on the premises and cultivating not more than 12
marihuana plants for personal use, provided that if more than 12 marihuana
plants are possessed, cultivated, or processed on the premises at once, the
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1
of the City Code and by forfeiture of the plants;



      (3)   Assisting another person who is 21 years of age or older
in any of the acts described in this subsection; and



      (4)   Giving away or otherwise transferring without
remuneration up to 2.5 ounces of marihuana, except that not more than 15
grams of marihuana may be in the form of marihuana concentrate, to a person
21 years of age or older, as long as the transfer is not advertised or
promoted to the public, provided that a transfer for remuneration of any
kind, overt or inferred, and a transfer that exceeds the limits set forth
here or which is advertised or promoted to the public shall constitute a
misdemeanor punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code and by
forfeiture of the marihuana.



   (C)   Except for a person who engaged in conduct described in
subsections (A)(2), (3), (4), (8), (9), (10), or as otherwise provided in the
Act, a person who possesses, cultivates, delivers without receiving any
remuneration to a person who is at least 21 years of age, or possesses with
intent to deliver not more than the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection
(B) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and may be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 and forfeiture of the marihuana.



   (D)   Except for a person who engaged in conduct described in
subsection (A), or as otherwise provided in the Act, a person who possesses,
cultivates, delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is at
least 21 years of age, or possesses with intent to deliver not more than
twice the amount of marihuana allowed by subsection (B):



      (1)   For a first violation, is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction punishable by a fine of $500 and forfeiture of the marihuana.



      (2)   For a second violation, is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction punishable by a fine of $1,000 and forfeiture of the
marihuana.



      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation, is guilty of a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500 and forfeiture of the
marihuana.



   (E)   Except for a person who engaged in conduct described by
subsections (A)(3), (7), (8), or as otherwise provided in the Act, a person
under 21 years of age who possesses not more than 2.5 ounces of marihuana or
who cultivates not more than 12 marihuana plants:



      (1)   For a first violation, is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction punishable as follows:



         (a)   If the person is less than 18 years of age, by a
fine of $100 or community service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and
completion of 4 hours of drug education or counseling.



         (b)   If the person is at least 18 years of age, by a
fine of $100 and forfeiture of the marihuana.



      (2)   For a second violation, is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction punishable as follows:



         (a)   If the person is less than 18 years of age, by a
fine of $500 or community service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and
completion of 8 hours of drug education or counseling.



         (b)   If the person is at least 18 years of age, by a
fine of $500 and forfeiture of the marihuana.



      (3)   For a third or subsequent violation committed by a
person less than 18 years of age, is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction punishable by a fine of $1,000 and community service, forfeiture
of the marihuana, and completion of 16 hours of drug education or
counseling.  For a third or subsequent violation committed by a person at
least 18 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in
§ 1-10 of the City Code, community service, forfeiture of the marihuana, and
completion of drug education or counseling ordered by the court.



   (F)   Except for a person who engaged in conduct described by
subsection (A), or as otherwise provided in the Act, a person who possesses,
cultivates, or delivers without receiving any remuneration to a person who is
at least 21 years of age more than twice the amount of marihuana allowed by
subsection (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows:



      (1)   A fine up to $500 if the violation was not habitual,
willful, and for a commercial purpose, and the violation did not involve
violence.



      (2)   A fine up to $500 and up to 90 days in jail if the
violation was habitual, willful, and for a commercial purpose, or if the
violation involved violence.



(1978 Code, § 25-65; Ord. No. 122-A, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 436, § 2,
8-19-14; Ord. No. 461, § 4, 12-18-18) Penalty, see § 1-9



35-66.  PROBATION WITHOUT JUDGMENT OF GUILT; DISCHARGE AND DISMISSAL;
INSTRUCTION OR PROGRAM ON DRUG MISUSE.



   (A)   When an individual who has not previously been convicted of an
offense under Article III or this article, or under any statute of the United
States or of any state relating to narcotic drugs, coca leaves, marijuana, or
stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic drugs, pleads guilty to or is found
guilty of possession or use of a controlled substance under this article, the
court, without entering a judgment of guilt with the consent of the accused,
may defer further proceedings and place the individual on probation upon
terms and conditions that shall include, but are not limited to, payment of a
probation supervision fee as prescribed in Section 3c of Chapter XI of the
state Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, M.C.L. § 771.3c.  The terms
and conditions of probation may include participation in a drug treatment
court under Chapter 10A of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, 1961 PA 236,
M.C.L. §§ 600.1060 to 600.1084.  Upon violation of a term or condition,
the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise
provided.  Upon fulfillment of the terms and conditions, the court shall
discharge the individual and dismiss the proceedings. Discharge and dismissal
under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and, except as
otherwise provided by law, is not a conviction for purposes of this section
or for purposes of disqualifications or disabilities imposed by law upon
conviction of a crime.  There may be only one discharge and dismissal under
this section as to an individual.



   (B)   All court proceedings under this section shall be open to the
public.  Except as provided in subsection (e), if the record of proceedings
as to the defendant is deferred under this section, the record of proceedings
during the period of deferral shall be closed to public inspection.



   (C)   Unless the court enters a judgment of guilt under this
section, the Department of State Police shall retain a nonpublic record of
the arrest, court proceedings, and disposition of the criminal charge under
this section.  However, the nonpublic record shall be open to the following
individuals and entities for the purposes noted:



      (1)   The courts of this state, law enforcement personnel, the
Department of Corrections, and prosecuting attorneys for use only in the
performance of their duties or to determine whether an employee of the court,
law enforcement agency, Department of Corrections, or prosecutor's office has
violated his or her conditions of employment or whether an applicant meets
criteria for employment with the court, law enforcement agency, Department of
Corrections, or prosecutor's office.



      (2)   The courts of this state, law enforcement personnel, and
prosecuting attorneys for the purpose of showing either of the following:



         (a)   That a defendant has already once availed himself
or herself of this section or the corresponding state law.



         (b)   Determining whether the defendant in a criminal
action is eligible for discharge and dismissal of proceedings by a drug
treatment court under Section 1076(5) of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961,
1961 PA 236, M.C.L. § 600.1076.



      (3)   The Department of Human Services for enforcing child
protection laws and vulnerable adult protection laws or ascertaining the
preemployment criminal history of any individual who will be engaged in the
enforcement of child protection laws or vulnerable adult protection laws.



   (D)   If an individual is convicted of a violation of Article III or
this article, the court as part of the sentence, during the period of
confinement or the period of probation, or both, may require the individual
to attend a course of instruction or rehabilitation program approved by the
state on the medical, psychological, and social effects of the misuse of
drugs.  The court may order the individual to pay a fee for the instruction
or program.  Failure to complete the instruction or program shall be
considered a violation of the terms of probation.



(1978 Code, § 25-66; Ord. No. 122-A, § 1, 11-1-83; Ord. No. 436, § 2,
8-19-14)



Statutory reference:



   Deferral of proceedings, see M.C.L. § 333.7411



35-67.  MEDICAL MARIJUANA.



   (A)   Individuals who are "qualifying patients" or "primary
caregivers" as those terms are used in the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act
shall comply with the requirements set forth in the Act and the requirements
set forth herein.



   (B)   The term "enclosed, locked facility" means a closet, room, or
other comparable, stationary, and fully enclosed area equipped with secured
locks or other functioning security devices that permit access only by a
registered primary caregiver or registered qualifying patient. Marijuana
plants grown outdoors are considered to be in an enclosed, locked facility if
they are not visible to the unaided eye from an adjacent property when viewed
by an individual at ground level or from a permanent structure and are grown
within a stationary structure that is enclosed on all sides, except for the
base, by chain-link fencing, wooden slats, or a similar material that
prevents access by the general public and that is anchored, attached, or
affixed to the ground; located on land that is owned, leased, or rented by
either the registered qualifying patient or a person designated through the
state registration process as the primary caregiver for the registered
qualifying patient or patients for whom the marijuana plants are grown; and
equipped with functioning locks or other security devices that restrict
access to only the registered qualifying patient or the registered primary
caregiver who owns, leases, or rents the property on which the structure is
located. Enclosed, locked facility includes a motor vehicle if both of the
following conditions are met:



      (1)   The vehicle is being used temporarily to transport
living marijuana plants from one location to another with the intent to
permanently retain those plants at the second location.



      (2)   An individual is not inside the vehicle unless he or she
is either the registered qualifying patient to whom the living marijuana
plants belong or the individual designated through the departmental
registration process as the primary caregiver for the registered qualifying
patient.



   (C)   A person who has been issued and possesses a lawful registry
identification card as a qualifying patient as set forth in the Act shall
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)    A qualifying patient who has been issued and possesses
a registry identification card shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution,
or penalty for the medical use of marijuana in accordance with state law,
provided that the qualifying patient possesses an amount of marijuana that
does not exceed 2.5 ounces of usable marijuana, and, if the qualifying
patient has not specified that a primary caregiver will be allowed under
state law to cultivate marijuana for the qualifying patient, 12 marijuana
plants kept in an enclosed, locked facility.  Any incidental amount of
seeds, stalks, and unusable roots shall also be allowed and shall not be
included in this amount.  The privilege from arrest under this subsection
applies only if the qualifying patient presents both his or her registry
identification card and a valid driver license or government-issued
identification card that bears a photographic image of the qualifying patient.



      (2)   A qualifying patient may grow and process medical
marijuana in compliance with the Act in one enclosed, locked facility within
or upon an owner-occupied, detached single-family residential
dwelling/premises where the qualifying patient lives and which is the
qualifying patient's residence pursuant to Michigan law, or in another
location specifically permitted by law or ordinance, so that growing and
processing does not occur in multiple locations. 



      (3)   Storage of medical marijuana by a qualifying patient
shall only occur within one enclosed, locked facility at the primary
residence of the qualifying patient or in another location specifically
permitted by law or ordinance so that storage does not occur in multiple
locations.



      (4)   No person other than the qualifying patient shall be
engaged or involved in the growing, processing, or handling of medical
marijuana, except as permitted by law or ordinance for primary caregivers.



      (5)   Use of the qualifying patient's residential dwelling for
medical marijuana related purposes shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for single-family residential purposes.  Not more
than 25% of the gross finished floor area of the dwelling or 200 square feet
of floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less, shall be used for the
growing, processing, and handling of medical marijuana.  Any modifications
to the dwelling made for the purpose of cultivating medical marijuana shall
comply with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, and fire safety
code requirements, including all requisite permit applications and related
inspections.  No part of an accessory building, detached garage, pole barn,
or similar building or structure shall be used for the growing, processing,
or distribution of medical marijuana unless such building or structure has
been inspected and approved for the building, electrical, mechanical, and
fire safety requirements of such use and fits the definition of an enclosed,
locked facility.



      (6)   A qualifying patient may possess on his or her person
and under the qualifying patient's exclusive control an amount of medical
marijuana deemed medically necessary to alleviate the condition that gave
rise to the qualifying patient's registration with the state.



      (7)   Should a qualifying patient wish to dispose of any
usable marijuana as defined in the Act, the usable marijuana shall be removed
by a commercial drug disposal carrier registered with the United States Drug
Enforcement Administration and/or the state for proper disposal in a manner
prescribed by law and regulation.  Under no circumstance shall a qualifying
patient dispose of any usable marijuana through a regular garbage receptacle,
public waste retrieval service, public sewer system, or by burning. 
Unusable material and paraphernalia relating to medical marijuana may be
discarded with other household waste for pickup by the public waste retrieval
service, but shall be securely within a proper garbage bag or other
receptacle and shall not be visible or exposed at any time prior to retrieval
by the service.



      (8)   There shall be no visible change to the outside
appearance of the qualifying patient's residential property or other visible
evidence of the conduct of the medical marijuana operation occurring on the
property.



      (9)   No marijuana, marijuana plants, marijuana paraphernalia,
or plant growing apparatus shall be visible from the exterior of the dwelling.



      (10)   No sign in the form of a device, structure, fixture, or
placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically
for the purpose of advertising or identifying a particular dwelling or
property as being associated with the use or cultivation of medical marijuana
or marijuana in general shall be visible from any location outside of the
residential dwelling.



      (11)   No equipment or process shall be used in growing,
processing, or handling medical marijuana which creates noise, vibration,
glare, light, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses at or beyond the property line of the qualifying patient's
residential property.  In case of electrical interference, no equipment or
process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference with any
radio, television, or similar receiver off the premises or causes fluctuation
of line voltage off the premises.



      (12)   The growing, processing, distribution, sale, and
handling of medical marijuana shall comply at all times with the Act and any
applicable regulations or requirements by the Michigan Department of
Community Health or any other Michigan agency.



   (D)   A person who has been issued and possesses a lawful registry
identification card as a primary caregiver as set forth in the Act shall
comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   A primary caregiver who has been issued and possesses a
registry identification card shall not be subject to arrest, prosecution, or
penalty for assisting a qualifying patient to whom he or she is connected
through the state's registration process with the medical use of marijuana in
accordance with state law.  The privilege from arrest under this subsection
applies only if the primary caregiver presents both his or her registry
identification card and a valid driver license or government-issued
identification card that bears a photographic image of the primary
caregiver.  This subsection applies only if the primary caregiver possesses
an amount of marijuana that does not exceed:



         (a)   2.5 ounces of usable marijuana for each qualifying
patient to whom he or she is connected through the state's registration
process; and



         (b)   For each registered qualifying patient who has
specified that the primary caregiver will be allowed under state law to
cultivate marijuana for the qualifying patient, 12 marijuana plants kept in
an enclosed, locked facility; and



         (c)   Any incidental amount of seeds, stalks, and
unusable roots.



      (2)   A primary caregiver may grow and process medical
marijuana in compliance with the Act in one enclosed, locked facility within
or upon an owner-occupied, detached single-family residential
dwelling/premises where the primary caregiver lives and which is the primary
caregiver's residence pursuant to Michigan law, or in another location
specifically permitted by law or ordinance, so that growing and processing
does not occur in multiple locations.



      (3)   No person other than the primary caregiver shall be
engaged or involved in the growing, processing, dispensing, delivery, or
handling of marijuana, except to the extent that the primary caregiver
lawfully transfers medical marijuana to a qualifying patient to whom the
primary caregiver is linked through the state registration system.



      (4)   Use of the primary caregiver's residential dwelling for
medical marijuana related purposes shall be clearly incidental and
subordinate to its use for single-family residential purposes.  Not more
than 25% of the gross finished floor area of the dwelling or 200 square feet
of floor area of the dwelling, whichever is less, shall be used for the
growing, processing, and handling of medical marijuana.  Any modifications
to the dwelling made for the purpose of cultivating medical marijuana shall
comply with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, and fire safety
code requirements, including all requisite permit applications and related
inspections.  No part of an accessory building, detached garage, pole barn,
or similar building or structure shall be used for the growing, processing,
or distribution of medical marijuana unless such building or structure has
been inspected and approved for the building, electrical, mechanical, and
fire safety requirements of such use and fits the definition of an enclosed,
locked facility.



      (5)   No qualifying patient shall visit, come to, or be
present at the primary caregiver's residence to purchase, smoke, consume,
obtain, or receive possession of any marijuana.  Rather, the primary
caregiver must personally deliver the marijuana to his/her qualifying
patient.  No person may deliver medical marijuana to a qualifying patient
other than the primary caregiver linked through the state registry system to
that qualifying patient.



      (6)   There shall be no visible change to the outside
appearance of the primary caregiver's residential property or other visible
evidence of the conduct of the medical marijuana operation occurring on the
property.



      (7)   No marijuana, marijuana plants, marijuana paraphernalia,
or plant growing apparatus shall be visible from the exterior of the dwelling.



      (8)   No equipment or process shall be used in growing,
processing, or handling medical marijuana which creates noise, vibration,
glare, light, fumes, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the
normal senses at or beyond the property line of the primary caregiver's
residential property.  In case of electrical interference, no equipment or
process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference with any
radio, television, or similar receiver off the premises or causes fluctuation
of line voltage off the premises.



      (9)   The growing, processing, distribution, sale, and
handling of medical marijuana shall comply at all times with the Act and any
applicable regulations or requirements by the Michigan Department of
Community Health or any other Michigan agency.



      (10)   All medical marijuana shall be contained within the
primary caregiver's enclosed, locked facility, except when being lawfully
delivered by the primary caregiver to a qualifying patient off site or being
used by the primary caregiver as a qualifying patient.  Manufacturing and
storage of medical marijuana shall only be allowed inside one enclosed,
locked facility at any given time so that manufacturing and storage does not
occur in multiple locations.



      (11)   No on-site consumption or smoking of marijuana is
allowed on a primary caregiver's residential property except for any medical
marijuana consumption in compliance with the Act by qualifying patients who
reside at that location.



      (12)   No sign in the form of a device, structure, fixture, or
placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically
for the purpose of advertising or identifying a particular dwelling or
property as being associated with the use or cultivation of medical marijuana
or marijuana in general shall be visible from any location outside of the
residential dwelling.



      (13)   Under no circumstances shall any third parties have
access to the enclosed, locked facility where medical marijuana is being
manufactured and/or stored.



      (14)   The residential premises upon which a primary caregiver
cultivates medical marijuana shall not be a location at which any other
commodity, product, or service is also sold, distributed, or otherwise
available.  It shall be a violation of this section for any person to
participate as a primary caregiver in a jointly operated facility where
primary caregivers jointly share building space which is used in common to
dispense medical marijuana to qualifying patients or assist qualifying
patients with the medical use of marijuana.  Use "in common," as that phrase
is used in this subdivision, shall include a shared or common reception area
or shared or common customer service area.



      (15)   Medical marijuana dispensaries and cooperatives are
prohibited.



      (16)   Should a primary caregiver wish to dispose of any
usable marijuana as defined in the Act, the usable marijuana shall be removed
by a commercial drug disposal carrier registered with the United States Drug
Enforcement Administration and/or the state for proper disposal in a manner
prescribed by law and regulation.  Under no circumstance shall a primary
caregiver dispose of any usable marijuana through a regular garbage
receptacle, public waste retrieval service, public sewer system, or by
burning.  Unusable material and paraphernalia relating to medical marijuana
may be discarded with other household waste for pickup by the public waste
retrieval service, but shall be securely within a proper garbage bag or other
receptacle and shall not be visible or exposed at any time prior to retrieval
by the service.



   (E)   This section shall not permit any person to do any of the
following:



      (1)   Undertake any task under the influence of marijuana,
when doing so would constitute negligence or professional malpractice.



      (2)   Possess marijuana, or otherwise engage in the medical
use of marijuana:



         (a)   In a school bus;



         (b)   On the grounds of any preschool or primary or
secondary school; or



         (c)   In any correctional facility.



      (3)   Smoke marijuana:



         (a)   On any form of public transportation; or



         (b)   In any public place.



      (4)   Operate, navigate, or be in actual physical control of
any motor vehicle, aircraft, or motorboat while under the influence of
marijuana.



      (5)   Use marijuana if that person does not have a serious or
debilitating medical condition.



   (F)   There shall be a presumption that a qualifying patient or
primary caregiver is engaged in the medical use of marijuana in accordance
with the Act and this section if the qualifying patient or primary caregiver:



      (1)   Is in possession of a registry identification card; and



      (2)   Is in possession of an amount of marijuana that does not
exceed the amount allowed under the Act or this section.  The presumption
may be rebutted by evidence that conduct related to marijuana was not for the
purpose of alleviating the qualifying patient's debilitating medical
condition or symptoms associated with the debilitating medical condition, in
accordance with this section.



   (G)   Fraudulent representation to a law enforcement official of any
fact or circumstance relating to the medical use of marijuana to avoid arrest
or prosecution shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500, which
shall be in addition to any other penalties that may apply for making a false
statement or for the use of marijuana other than use undertaken pursuant to
this section or state law.



   (H)   No person shall transport or possess usable marijuana as
defined in the Act in or upon a motor vehicle or any self-propelled vehicle
designed for land travel unless the useable marijuana is either:



      (1)   Enclosed in a case that is carried in the trunk of the
vehicle; or



      (2)   Enclosed in a case that is not readily accessible from
the interior of the vehicle in vehicles which do not have a trunk.



   (I)   A person who violates division (H) is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both.



(Ord. No. 436, § 2, 8-19-14)



Statutory reference:



   Medical Marihuana Act, see M.C.L. §§ 333.26421 et seq.



   Transportation of medical marijuana, see M.C.L § 750.474.



35-68.  LOCATION REGISTRATION.



   (A)   Findings.



      (1)   Under the Act, law enforcement officers and city
officials are prevented from securing the information necessary to determine
whether the cultivation, distribution, and use of marijuana are being
conducted lawfully and whether all codes and regulations associated with such
activities are being followed.  Accordingly, the registration of a
particular location as the site of cultivation, which need not undermine the
privacy and confidentiality of the patient-caregiver relationship, could be
critical to law enforcement and city officials in order to identify and
distinguish sites of lawful activity from sites of unlawful and potentially
hazardous activity. 



      (2)   The experience in the State of California, a state that
approved the medical use of marijuana in 1996, is that concentrations of
marijuana distribution activity lead to serious secondary effects,
including:  resales of medical marijuana, sharing of "just-purchased"
marijuana, street dealers lurking in neighborhoods to offer a lower price for
marijuana to arriving patients, marijuana smoking in public and in front of
children in the vicinity of medical marijuana locations, acquiring marihuana
and/or money by means of robbery of patients going to or leaving a
caregiver's location, and loitering and an increase in burglaries at or near
such locations.



      (3)   Unauthorized installations of plumbing and electrical
equipment relating to the cultivation of marijuana plants may create mold
conditions and/or a fire risk, or may interfere with neighboring properties
and create nuisance conditions in a residential neighborhood.



   (B)   For these reasons, no growing, cultivation, or harvesting of
medical marijuana shall be lawful at a location within the city until the
location has been registered under this chapter. 



      (1)   Exception:  Registration is not required for the
principal residence or homestead of a qualifying patient where marijuana is
cultivated for such patient's personal use.



   (C)   A registration form shall be submitted to the City Clerk for
any location where medical marijuana will be grown, cultivated, harvested,
and stored.  The registration form shall be in a form approved by the City
Clerk and shall require the emergency and non-emergency contact information
for the owner of the property and a proxy in the event of the owner's lack of
availability during an emergency.  The completed registration form must be
accompanied by the following:



      (1)   A photocopy of the current and valid caregiver registry
card issued by the state to the person who is permitted to grow, cultivate,
harvest, and store medical marijuana and who will be doing so at the
registered location.  Upon expiration of the card, the registration form
shall be updated and a new copy of the renewed card shall be provided to the
City Clerk. 



      (2)   A floor plan, with dimensions, illustrating the enclosed
and locked location in the building where marijuana will be grown,
cultivated, harvested, and stored, and detailing the security measures
related to that location and the building.



      (3)   Specification of the number of qualifying patients for
whom marijuana will or may be grown, cultivated, harvested, and stored.



      (4)   Details regarding electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and
any other code-related improvements and installations or facilities that will
be used for growing, cultivating, harvesting, and storing the marijuana.



      (5)   Any additional information that the Police Chief, Fire
Chief, Building Official, or their designees deems necessary for evaluating
code compliance and public safety associated with the proposed growing,
cultivating, harvesting, and storing of marijuana at the registered location
in the manner proposed in the registration materials.



      (6)   Payment of the registration fee established by the
city's annual appropriations ordinance.



   (D)   All information provided to the city pursuant to this section
shall be deemed confidential due to the confidentiality requirements of the
Act and shall not be subject to public disclosure unless required by law or
court order.



   (E)   Upon submission of all required documents, information, and
payment, the individual submitting the form shall be provided with a copy of
the requirements of this section relating to medical marijuana.



   (F)   Upon receipt of all required documents, information, and
payment, the City Clerk shall circulate the documents and information to the
Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Building Official, or their designees, for
review.  If, after review, the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and/or Building
Official or their designees require any additional information relating to
security measures, fire safety, code compliance, or compliance with this
chapter, the property owner shall be advised in writing of the additional
information required and the owner shall provide such information before any
growing, cultivation, harvesting, or storage of marijuana may occur at the
proposed location. 



   (G)   When the Police Chief, Fire Chief, and Building Official or
their designees have sufficient information about the marijuana operations
proposed for the registered property, the police department, fire department,
and building department shall each schedule an inspection of the proposed
operations unless they advise the City Clerk in writing that no inspection is
required.  Upon successful completion of all inspections and the issuance of
all required permits, the City Clerk shall issue a registration certificate
for the property, which shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed on
or within the enclosed, locked facility approved during the review process
and where medical marijuana will be grown, cultivated, harvested, and/or
stored.



   (H)   All marijuana-related uses of the registered property
subsequent to issuance of the registration certificate shall be in accordance
with the information upon which the reviews and inspections were based, and
any material changes to the operations, facilities, or information shall
first be reviewed and, if necessary, inspected by the appropriate city
official within 14 days of advising the City Clerk of the proposed change. 
Annual inspections may be scheduled by the city to ensure ongoing code and
ordinance compliance.



   (I)   Properties within the city that are being utilized for
growing, cultivating, harvesting, and/or storing of medical marijuana on the
effective date of this section must file the completed registration form,
required information, and payment with the City Clerk within 30 days.



   (J)   Appeals of any code-related compliance deemed necessary by any
city official as part of the registration process shall be made to the Board
of Code Appeals.  However, appeals of any law enforcement security
requirements imposed as part of the registration process shall be to a court
of competent jurisdiction.



   (K)   A property owner shall not be deemed to have any vested rights
or nonconforming use rights that would serve as a basis for failing to comply
with the requirements of this chapter.



   (L)   The owner of the property, as identified by the city's
property tax rolls, shall be presumed to be the party responsible for
compliance with the registration and regulatory requirements of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 436, § 2, 8-19-14)



35-69.  NO IMMUNITY.



   (A)   The Act authorizes a narrow exception to the prosecution under
state laws that otherwise criminalize the cultivation, distribution,
possession and use of marijuana.  Outside the purview of the Act, the
possession and use of marijuana in the State of Michigan remains a
misdemeanor offense, and possession with intent to deliver, and delivery and
manufacture of marijuana, remain felonies.  Marijuana is also classified
federally as a Schedule I Drug under the Controlled Substances Act and is
illegal to possess, manufacture, distribute, or dispense under federal law.



   (B)   Nothing in this chapter, or in any companion regulatory
provision adopted in any other provision of this code, is intended to grant,
nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal prosecution
for the cultivation, sale, consumption, use, distribution, or possession of
marijuana not in strict compliance with the Act.  Also, because federal law
is not affected by that Act, nothing in this chapter, or in any companion
regulatory provision adopted in any other provision of this code, is intended
to grant, nor shall they be construed as granting, immunity from criminal
prosecution under federal law.  The Act does not protect users, caregivers,
or the owners of properties on which the medical use of marijuana is
occurring from federal prosecution, or from having their property seized by
federal authorities under the Federal Controlled Substances Act.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing
persons to engage in conduct that endangers others or causes a public
nuisance, or to allow any cultivation, distribution, or use of marijuana
contrary to the express authorizations of the Act and this chapter. 



(Ord. No. 436, § 2, 8-19-14)



35-70.  PROHIBITION OF MARIHUANA ESTABLISHMENTS.



   The Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act was initiated by
the voters of the State of Michigan pursuant to Proposal 1, the Marijuana
Legalization Initiative, on November 6, 2018.  The Act authorizes cities,
villages, and townships to completely prohibit marihuana establishments
within their boundaries.  Pursuant to that authority, marihuana
establishments as defined in the Act are hereby prohibited within the City.



(Ord. No. 460, § 1, 12-4-18)



35-71-35-80.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  YOUTH CURFEWS



35-81.  CURFEW.



   (A)   No child under 12 years of age may be in any public place
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless accompanied by his or
her parent or guardian or by some other adult delegated by the parent or
guardian to accompany such child.



   (B)   No child under 17 years of age may be in any public place
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless such minor is:



      (1)   Accompanied by a parent or guardian or some other adult
delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany such minor;



      (2)   In any such public place in connection with some
legitimate work, trade, profession or occupation in which such minor is
engaged;



      (3)   On an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian;
or



      (4)   Returning home from a social, athletic or other event
held under the auspices of a public or private school, recreation department
or other organization approved by the Police Department.



(1978 Code, § 25-81; Ord. No. 280, § 1, 12-6-89)



35-82.  AIDING OR ABETTING VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   No person shall assist, aid or abet any child under 17 years
of age in violating this article.



   (B)   The parent or guardian having the care and custody of a child
under 17 years of age is rebuttably presumed to have assisted, aided or
abetted the child’s violation of this article.



(1978 Code, § 25-82; Ord. No. 280, § 1, 12-6-89)



35-83-35-90.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  TOBACCO AND VAPOR PRODUCTS



35-91. TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "Sterling Heights Tobacco
Products and Vapor Products Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



35-92.  PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of the property and persons in the city by prohibiting
persons under 18 years of age from possessing tobacco products and vapor
products, and prohibiting the sale of tobacco products and vapor products to
persons under 18 years of age.



   (B)   Persons under age 18 are prohibited by law from purchasing or
possessing cigarettes and other tobacco products, and retailers are
prohibited from selling them to minors.  However, tobacco-less products -
commonly referred to as "electronic cigarettes," "e-cigarettes," "e-cigars,"
"e-cigarillos," "e-pipes," "e-hookahs," or "electronic nicotine delivery
systems" - allow the user to simulate cigarette smoking and ingest
nicotine.  These products may be purchased by minors and are being marketed
without age restrictions or health warnings and come in different flavors
that appeal to young people.



   (C)   Studies by the FDA have determined that e-cigarettes can
increase nicotine addiction among young people and contain chemical
ingredients known to be harmful, which may expose users and the public to
potential health risks.  The use of e-cigarettes and similar devices has
increased significantly in recent years, as evidenced by the fact that:



      (1)   Between 2011 and 2012 the percentage of all youth in
grades 6 to 12 who had tried electronic smoking devices doubled;



      (2)   6.8% of all youth between 6th and 12th grade report
trying electronic smoking devices;



      (3)   10% of high school students have tried electronic
smoking devices;



      (4)   9.3% of youth who have used electronic smoking devices
have never smoked conventional cigarettes; and



      (5)   Between 2010 and 2011, rates of both awareness and use
of unregulated electronic smoking devices by adults also increased
significantly.



      (6)   The 2014 survey conducted by Monitoring the Future,
released on December 16, 2014 by the National Institute on Drug Abuse,
revealed recent use by 8.7% of eighth graders, 16.2% of tenth graders, and
17.1% of twelfth graders.



   (D)   Existing studies on electronic smoking devices' vapor
emissions and cartridge contents have found a number of dangerous substances
including:



      (1)   Chemicals known to cause cancer such as formaldehyde,
acetaldehyde, lead, nickel, and chromium;



      (2)   PM2.5, acrolein, tin, toluene, and aluminum, which are
associated with a range of negative health effects such as skin, eye, and
respiratory irritation, neurological effects, damage to reproductive systems,
and even premature death from heart attacks and stroke;



      (3)   Inconsistent labeling of nicotine levels in electronic
smoking device products; and



      (4)   In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used
in antifreeze and toxic to humans.



   (E)   Some cartridges used by electronic smoking devices can be
re-filled with liquid nicotine solution, creating the potential for exposure
to dangerous concentrations of nicotine, and as a result:



      (1)   In one instance, diethylene glycol, an ingredient used
in antifreeze and toxic to humans. 



      (2)   Poisonings from electronic smoking devices have
increased dramatically in the last three and half years from "one [a month]
in September 2010 to 215 a month in February 2014."



      (3)   Analysis of reports of poisonings from electronic
smoking devices finds that calls reporting exposure to electronic smoking
devices are much more likely to involve adverse health effects when compared
to calls reporting exposure to conventional cigarettes.



   (F)   Clinical studies about the safety and efficacy of these
products have not been submitted to the FDA for the over 400 brands of
electronic smoking devices that are on the market and for this reason,
consumers currently have no way of knowing:



      (1)   Whether electronic smoking devices are safe;



      (2)   What types or concentrations of potentially harmful
chemicals the products contain; and



      (3)   What dose of nicotine the products deliver.



   (G)   The World Health Organization has strongly advised consumers
against the use of electronic smoking devices until they are "deemed safe and
effective and of acceptable quality by a competent national regulatory body."



   (H)   The World Medical Association has determined that electronic
smoking devices "are not comparable to scientifically-proven methods of
smoking cessation" and that "neither their value as therapeutic aids for
smoking cessation nor their safety as cigarette replacements is established."



   (I)   In September of 2013, 40 state attorneys general (including
Michigan's) signed a letter to the Commissioner of the United States Food and
Drug Administration, outlining their concerns with e-cigarettes and
requesting the implementation of regulations that would address the
advertising, ingredients, and sale to minors of e-cigarettes at the federal
level.



   (J)   It is the intent of the City Council, in enacting this
article, to provide for the public health, safety, and welfare by
facilitating uniform and consistent enforcement of smoke-free air laws; by
reducing the potential for re-normalizing smoking in public places and places
of employment; by reducing the potential for children to associate the use of
electronic smoking devices with a normative or healthy lifestyle; and by
prohibiting the sale or distribution of electronic smoking devices to minors.



   (K)   Therefore, the City Council determines that prohibiting the
sale, giving, or furnishing of e-cigarettes to minors and prohibiting the
purchase, possession, or use of e-cigarettes by minors is in the City's best
interests and will promote the public health, safety, and welfare.  For
purposes of this article, the City is adopting the term "vapor product" to
address e-cigarettes and all similar devices, because this term has been
defined by the Michigan House and Senate in Senate Bills 667 and 668,
enrolled in June of 2014, as part of proposed amendments to the Youth Tobacco
Act, being Public Act 31 of 1915.



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



35-93.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of construction and application of this article, the
following definitions shall apply:



   MINOR.   An individual who is less than 18 years of age.



   PERSON WHO SELLS VAPOR PRODUCTS AT RETAIL.   A person whose ordinary
course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of vapor
products.



   PERSON WHO SELLS TOBACCO PRODUCTS AT RETAIL.   A person whose ordinary
course of business consists, in whole or in part, of the retail sale of
tobacco products subject to state sales tax.



   POSSESS A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR VAPOR PRODUCT. Shall mean either actual
physical control of the tobacco product or vapor product without necessarily
owning that product, or the right to control the product even though it is in
a different room or place than where the person is physically located.



   PUBLIC PLACE.   A public street, sidewalk, or park or any area open to
the general public in a publicly owned or operated building or premises, or
in a public place of business.



   TOBACCO PRODUCT.   A product that contains tobacco and is intended for
human consumption, including but not limited to cigarettes, non-cigarette
smoking tobacco, or smokeless tobacco, as those terms are defined in Section
2 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act, cigars, chewing tobacco, and flavored
tobacco (shisha).  Tobacco product does not include a vapor product or a
product regulated as a drug or device by the United States Food and Drug
Administration.



   USE A TOBACCO PRODUCT OR VAPOR PRODUCT.   To smoke, chew, suck,
inhale, or otherwise consume a tobacco product or vapor product.



   VAPOR PRODUCT.   A noncombustible product containing nicotine that
employs a heating element, power source, electronic circuit, or other
electronic, chemical, or mechanical means, regardless of shape or size, that
can be used to produce vapor from nicotine in a solution or other form. 
Vapor product includes an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device and a vapor
cartridge or other container of nicotine in a solution or other form that is
intended to be used with or in an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic cigarillo, electronic pipe, or similar product or device.  Vapor
product does not include a product regulated as a drug or device by the
United States Food and Drug Administration.



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



35-94.  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   Subject to division (C), a minor shall not do any of the
following:



      (1)   Purchase or attempt to purchase a tobacco product or
vapor product.



      (2)   Possess or attempt to possess a tobacco product or vapor
product.



      (3)   Use a tobacco product or vapor product in a public place.



      (4)   Present or offer to an individual a purported proof of
age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually his or her own proof of age
for the purpose of purchasing, attempting to purchase, possessing, or
attempting to possess a tobacco product or vapor product.



   (B)   An individual who violates division (A) is subject to the
following:



      (1)   The first violation is a municipal civil infraction,
punishable by a fine of $500 for each violation, except that the fine will be
$50 for each violation cited on a single municipal civil infraction citation
if the individual completes a health promotion and risk reduction program
approved by the police department, either within 30 days of receiving the
citation or prior to entering a plea of responsibility at the district court.



      (2)   A second violation or subsequent violation shall be a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine up to $500.  The court may order the
individual to complete a health promotion and risk reduction program and
perform not more than 40 hours of community service in a hospice, nursing
home, or long-term care facility.



   (C)   Division (A) does not apply to a minor participating in any of
the following:



      (1)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives a tobacco product or vapor product under the direction of the
minor's employer and with the prior approval of the local prosecutor's office
as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action.



      (2)   An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or
receives a tobacco product or vapor product under the direction of the state
police or a local police agency as part of an enforcement action, unless the
initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of the tobacco product or
vapor product by the minor was not under the direction of the state police or
the local police agency and was not part of the undercover operation.



      (3)   Compliance checks in which the minor attempts to
purchase tobacco products for the purpose of satisfying federal substance
abuse block grant youth tobacco access requirements, if the compliance checks
are conducted under the direction of a substance abuse coordinating agency as
defined in the Public Health Code, 1978 PA 368, MCL 333.6103, and with the
prior approval of the state police or a local police agency.



   (D)   Division (A) does not apply to the handling or transportation
of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under the terms of that
minor's employment.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit an individual from being
charged with, convicted of, or sentenced for any other violation of law that
arises out of the violation of division (A).



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Tobacco, see MCL 722.641 et seq.



35-95.  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   A primary caretaker having custody or control of a minor who violates
§ 35-94 shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and a fine of
$500 for knowingly allowing or, through lack of supervision, allowing the
minor to violate § 35-94.  The fine will be $50 if the primary caretaker
completes a health promotion and risk reduction program approved by the
police department, either within 30 days of receiving the citation or prior
to entering a plea of responsibility at the district court.



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



35-96.  SALES OF INDIVIDUAL CIGARETTES.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B), a person who
sells tobacco products at retail shall not sell a cigarette separately from
its package.



   (B)   Division (A) does not apply to a person who sells tobacco
products at retail in a tobacco specialty retail store or other retail store
that deals exclusively in the sale of tobacco products and smoking
paraphernalia.



   (C)   A person who violates division (A) is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each offense.



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   MCL 722.642a



35-97.  FURNISHING TO MINORS.



   (A)   A person shall not sell, give, or furnish a tobacco product or
vapor product to a minor, including, but not limited to, through a vending
machine.  A person who violates this subsection or division (H) is guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50 for each violation.



   (B)   A person who sells tobacco products or vapor products at
retail shall post, in a place close to the point of sale and conspicuous to
both employees and customers, a sign that includes the following statement:



   "The purchase of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under 18
years of age and the provision of a tobacco product or vapor product to a
minor are prohibited by law. A minor who unlawfully purchases or uses a
tobacco product or vapor product is subject to criminal penalties."



   (C)   If the sign required under division (B) is more than six feet
from the point of sale, it shall be 5-1/2 inches by 8-1/2 inches and the
statement required under division (B) shall be printed in 36-point boldfaced
type. If the sign required under division (B) is six feet or less from the
point of sale, it shall be two inches by four inches and the statement
required under division (B) shall be printed in 20-point boldfaced type.



   (D)   The signs required by division (C) may be procured from the
Department of Community Health pursuant to state law.  The seller may add
the "vapor product" language to the sign if the Department of Community
Health does not or will not include it.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)
that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have
in force a written policy to prevent the sale of tobacco products and vapor
products to persons under 18 years of age and that the defendant enforced and
continues to enforce the policy.  A defendant who proposes to offer evidence
of the affirmative defense described in this subsection shall file and serve
notice of the defense, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the
notice on the city attorney.  The defendant shall serve the notice not less
than 14 days before the date set for trial.



   (F)   If the City Attorney proposes to offer testimony to rebut the
affirmative defense described in division (E), the City Attorney shall file a
notice of rebuttal, in writing, with the court and serve a copy of the notice
on the defendant.  The City Attorney shall serve the notice not less than
seven days before the date set for trial and shall include in the notice the
name and address of each rebuttal witness.



   (G)   Division (A) does not apply to the handling or transportation
of a tobacco product or vapor product by a minor under the terms of the
minor's employment.



   (H)   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a
vapor product to an individual, a person shall verify that the individual is
at least 18 years of age by doing one of the following:



      (1)   If the individual appears to be under 27 years of age,
examining a government-issued photographic identification that establishes
that the individual is at least 18 years of age.



      (2)   For sales made by the internet or other remote sales
method, performing an age verification through an independent, third-party
age verification service that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that are
regularly used by government agencies and businesses for the purpose of age
and identity verification to the personal information entered by the
individual during the ordering process that establishes that the individual
is 18 years of age or older.



(Ord. No. 439, § 4, 2-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Tobacco, see MCL 722.641



35-98-35-100.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VII.  ATTEMPTS; AIDING AND ABETTING; CONSPIRACY



35-101.  ATTEMPTS; ACCESSORY; CONSPIRACY; AIDING AND ABETTING.



   (A)   Any person who shall attempt to commit, act as an accessory to
the commission of, or conspire to commit a misdemeanor offense prohibited by
this Code shall be subject to the penalties set forth in § 1-9 of the Code.



   (B)   Every person concerned in the commission of an offense,
whether he or she directly commits the act constituting the offense or
procures, counsels, aids, or abets in its commission, shall be punished as if
he or she had directly committed such offense.



(Ord. No. 328, § 7, 11-5-97; Ord. No. 439, § 5, 2-17-15)



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see MCL 750.157a



   Aiding and abetting, see MCL 767.39.



CHAPTER 36:  FALSE ALARMS



36-1.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   When a fire detection system, burglar alarm, or other alarm
device is activated, the city's Fire Department and/or Police Department
respond to protect the lives and property of the citizens and businesses of
the city.  This rapid response requires the Fire Department and/or Police
Department to place numerous emergency vehicles on the streets, which
inherently increases the dangers to members of the Fire and/or Police
Departments, and to the citizens of the city.  Although the city supports
and encourages the use of alarm systems to discover fires and detect
intruders, malfunctions of such systems result in increased dangers and
unnecessary expense.



   (B)   Therefore, the purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm
users throughout the city to maintain operational reliability and properly
use alarm systems in a manner which will reduce false alarm responses by the
Police Department and Fire Department, thereby reducing and preventing the
misuse of police and fire resources at taxpayer expense.  Communities
throughout the nation have found that the use of a regulatory ordinance
designed to first encourage remedial measures, with progressively increased
penalties imposed for failure to implement such measures, reduces the overall
number of false alarms by significant percentages.  Therefore, in order to
further public safety and welfare, and to reduce the undue burden incurred by
taxpayers for false alarm responses, the City Council hereby enacts this
Chapter 36, which shall be known as "The City of Sterling Heights False Alarm
Ordinance."



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)



36-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:



   ALARM SYSTEM. A detection device or an assembly of equipment and
devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent
attention or to which police and/or firefighters are expected or requested to
respond.  The term includes any system that can electronically cause an
expected response by a law enforcement agency or fire/emergency services
agency to a premises by means of the activation of an audible signal, visible
signal, electronic notification, or video signal, or any combination of these
signals.  ALARM SYSTEM shall include, but shall not be limited to, the
following types of devices:  automatic holdup alarm, burglar alarm, local
alarm, intrusion alarm, holdup alarm, panic alarm, personal emergency
response alarm, temperature fire alarm, manual fire alarm, fire alarm,
automatic sprinkler, and/or water flow alarm.  Alarm systems designed solely
to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is
located shall not be regulated by this chapter, unless such alarm systems
employ an audible signal emitting sounds, or flashing lights or beacons, or
silent signals to emergency officials or monitoring agencies, designed to
signal persons outside the premises.



   ALARM USER. The person, partnership, corporation, company, or other
entity who requested the installation of the alarm system, or who has either
an ownership interest in the premises, a leasehold interest, or who occupies
the premises, or who has some dominion and control over the premises, where
the alarm system is installed and operating.  In the event the premises are
owned or occupied by a partnership, corporation, or other entity, each owner,
officer, partner, or operator shall be deemed to be an ALARM USER .  For
purposes of prosecuting violations of the penal provisions of this chapter,
and for purposes of collecting fees incurred for false alarms, the person or
entity whose name appears as being associated with the property protected by
the alarm system on the most recent assessment roll approved by the board of
review, as updated, and/or whose name appears in the city's business
registration records, shall be presumed to be the ALARM USER .



   COST OF FIRE RESPONSE. The fee established by the annual appropriations
ordinance adopted by the City Council which is reasonably calculated by the
Fire Department and the Finance Department to recover all or a portion of the
actual cost to the city for fire response to false alarms and related
investigation.  The COST OF FIRE RESPONSE may include costs for the use of
Fire Department equipment, the expenditure of Fire Department resources, the
cost of contracted assistance or services, and the wages and benefits for
each Fire Department employee who responds or assists with the response to
the false alarm in accordance with lawful and established fire safety
protocol.  The fee may be incrementally increased by the City Council, not
to exceed the city's actual cost, for repeat or subsequent violations within
a 12-month period of time.  The incremental fee for repeat or subsequent
violations may be calculated to include the COST OF FIRE RESPONSE to the
first false alarm for which no fee was imposed.



   COST OF POLICE RESPONSE.   The fee established by the annual
appropriations ordinance adopted by the City Council which is reasonably
calculated by the Police Department and the Finance Department to recover all
or a portion of the actual cost to the City for police response to false
alarms and related investigation.  The COST OF POLICE RESPONSE may include
costs for the use of Police Department equipment, the expenditure of Police
Department resources, the cost of contracted assistance or services, and the
wages and benefits for each Police Department employee who responds or
assists with the response to the false alarm in accordance with lawful and
established 9-1-1 or related police response protocol.  The fee may be
incrementally increased by the City Council for repeat or subsequent
violations within a 12-month period of time.  The incremental fee for repeat
or subsequent violations may be calculated to include the COST OF POLICE
RESPONSE to the first two false alarms for which no fee was imposed.



   FALSE ALARM.  The activation of an alarm system causing a sound or
visual signal through mechanical failure, faulty equipment, malfunction,
improper installations, and/or lack of prudent maintenance, or the negligence
of the alarm user or of his, her, or its employees, agents, guests,
residents, or invitees.  False alarms that are intentionally activated shall
not constitute a FALSE ALARM for purposes of this chapter, but may be
prosecuted as criminal offenses.  An alarm triggered by an animal shall
constitute a FALSE ALARM .  A false alarm shall be presumed when an alarm is
tested without prior written notice to the city, and when a Police Department
investigation reveals no evidence of criminal activity, or illegal entry or
an attempt thereof, or in the case of a false fire alarm, when a Fire
Department investigation reveals no fire or potential fire, or need for
medical attention, upon the activation of the alarm system, with the
following exceptions:



      (1)   Activation by tornadoes, storms, or other violent
condition beyond the control of the alarm user;



      (2)   False alarms activated by disruption or disturbance of
telephone or public utility company facilities;



      (3)   Utility pole accidents;



      (4)   Testing of the alarm system after prior notification has
been received by the Police Department and/or Fire Department;  or



      (5)   Intentional and non-malicious activation of an alarm or
emergency response system due to a real or perceived need for fire, police,
or medical assistance, regardless of whether fire, police, or medical
assistance was actually necessary.



      (6)   This chapter and the definition of FALSE ALARM are
intended to facilitate the more efficient use of police and fire resources
for true emergencies and for people who genuinely believe they need police or
fire assistance.  The focus of this chapter is on mechanical failure, faulty
equipment, improper installations, and the negligence of alarm users.  The
chapter is not intended to discourage or otherwise inhibit the use of alarms
or 9-1-1 systems to seek emergency assistance.  Therefore, this chapter
shall always be construed in a manner that serves to prompt residents and
businesses to correct mechanical and operational alarm system deficiencies,
but which does not discourage residents and businesses from seeking emergency
help.



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)



36-3.  LIABILITY.



   Alarm users shall be jointly and severally responsible for violations
of this chapter.  The payment of false alarm response costs, fines, or fees
shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or reduce any civil
or criminal liability of the person or entity billed for the response costs,
except to the extent that such responsibility arises out of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)



36-4.  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   The occurrence of a false alarm shall constitute a violation
of this chapter.  To ensure that all alarm systems are properly maintained
in good operating order and to minimize the cost to the city for false
alarms, alarm users shall be held responsible as provided in this section. 
Notwithstanding any penalties provided for convictions for violation of this
chapter, and notwithstanding the fact that a prosecution for violation of
this chapter has or has not been commenced, alarm users shall pay to the city
a fee or fine as provided in this section, for each false alarm, and shall
also be held responsible as follows:



      (1)   First false alarm requiring a police and/or fire
response within a 12-month period of time:  Warning notice pursuant to
division (F); no fine or fees.



      (2)   Second false alarm requiring a police response only
(i.e., burglar alarms) within a 12-month period of time:  Progressive
warning notice pursuant to division (G); no fine or fees.



      (3)   Second, third, and fourth false alarm requiring a fire
response (i.e., fire alarms) within a 12-month period of time:  Assessment
of a portion or all of the cost of fire response, as established by the
annual appropriations ordinance.



      (4)   Third, fourth, and fifth false alarm requiring a police
response only (i.e., burglar alarms) within a 12-month period of time: 
Assessment of a portion or all of the cost of police response, as established
by the annual appropriations ordinance.



      (5)   Fifth or subsequent false alarm requiring a fire
response, or sixth or subsequent false alarm requiring a police response,
within a 12-month period of time:  Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to
$500, up to 90 days in jail, or both, and mandatory restitution to the city
for the cost of police response and/or the cost of fire response.



   (B)   The City Treasurer shall administer the invoicing for
assessment of the false alarm fees established by this chapter.  The City
Treasurer shall promptly prepare and deliver to the alarm user who is deemed
liable pursuant to § 36-3 for the payment of the cost of the police and/or
fire response, a detailed invoice by first class mail or personal service. 
The amount of the invoice shall constitute a debt in favor of the city and
the obligation of the alarm user.  The invoice shall also include the
following provision:  "A person aggrieved by this false alarm determination
may submit a letter of appeal to the City Manager for review of the
determination or penalty being appealed, as provided in Section 36-5 of the
City Code of Ordinances."



   (C)   An alarm user who is liable for the payment of the cost of
police response and/or the cost of fire response shall make payment in full
to the City Treasurer within 30 days of the invoice date.



   (D)   A person or entity liable for the payment of the cost of
police response and/or the cost of fire response who fails to make payment in
full to the City Treasurer within 30 days of the invoice date shall be
responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be responsible for
fines as set forth in Chapter 1 of the City Code, and for full payment of the
cost of police response and/or the cost of fire response, and for a late
payment penalty established by the annual appropriations ordinance, to
reimburse the city for a portion of its administrative costs incurred for
pursuing and processing the overdue invoice.  This provision shall be tolled
in the event that the alarm user appeals pursuant to the appeal provisions of
this chapter, but such payment shall be due to the City Treasurer within 10
days of the date of the appeal decision.



   (E)   When payment of the City Treasurer's invoice is not timely
made, the city shall have the following recourse:



      (1)   The city may commence a civil action against a person
who is liable for the payment of the cost of police response and/or the cost
of fire response and who fails to make payment in full to the City Treasurer
as required by this chapter.  The city shall be entitled to recover the
expenses, statutory interest, court costs, and reasonable attorney fees
incurred for pursuing the civil action.



      (2)   (a)   Any invoice, including the late payment
penalty, which remains unpaid for 90 days from the invoice date, and which is
not being reviewed pursuant to the appeal provisions of this chapter, shall
constitute a lien against the premises to which the Police Department and/or
Fire Department responded.  The City Manager may certify the delinquency to
the City Assessor and in such case the fee shall be entered upon the next tax
roll as a lien against the premises which shall be collected in the same
manner with the same interest and penalties as special assessments against
such premises, including the tax roll penalty set forth in the annual
appropriations ordinance.



         (b)   Exception:  When the premises to which the Police
Department and/or Fire Department responded are not owned by the alarm user
responsible for the alarm system which generated a false alarm (i.e.,
leaseholders), the invoice shall not constitute a lien against the premises,
nor shall it be entered upon the tax roll as set forth in division (F). 
Instead, the individual or entity shall be cited for a municipal civil
infraction as set forth in division (D).  The individual(s), or the owner(s)
and operator(s) of entities, who fails to respond to a municipal civil
infraction citation shall be ordered to show cause why he, she, or they
should not be held in contempt of court for failure to respond or otherwise
appear for court.  Such show cause proceedings shall be conducted in
accordance with the applicable rules of court promulgated by the Michigan
Supreme Court.



      (3)   The City Treasurer may cite the alarm user for a
municipal civil infraction pursuant to division (D) of this section. 



   (F)   For a first false alarm requiring a police and/or fire
response within a 12-month period of time, the City Treasurer shall mail a
false alarm warning notice to the alarm user at his, her, or its last known
address by first class mail following the false alarm occurrence.  The
notice shall indicate the occurrence of the false alarm and the potential
penalties, as set forth in this chapter, for future false alarm
occurrences.  The letter shall also include the following provision:  "A
person aggrieved by this false alarm determination may submit a letter of
appeal to the City Manager, within 20 days, for review of the determination
or penalty being appealed, as provided in § 36-5 of the City Code of
Ordinances."



   (G)   For a second false alarm requiring a police response only
(i.e., burglar alarms) within a 12-month period of time, the City Treasurer
shall mail a second false alarm warning notice to the alarm user at his, her,
or its last known address by first class mail following the false alarm
occurrence.  The letter shall indicate the occurrence of a second false
alarm within a 12-month period of time and shall emphasize the potential
penalties, as set forth in this chapter, for failure to correct the problem
which has resulted in two false alarm occurrences.  The letter shall also
include the following provision:  "A person aggrieved by this false alarm
determination may submit a letter of appeal to the City Manager, within 20
days, for review of the determination or penalty being appealed, as provided
in § 36-5 of the City Code of Ordinances."



   (H)   The occurrence of six or more false alarms requiring a police
response only (i.e., burglar alarms) within a 12-month period is deemed to be
a public nuisance.  After the occurrence of a sixth such false alarm within
a 12-month period, the City Attorney is authorized to seek abatement of the
nuisance in conjunction with a misdemeanor prosecution in the district court
for a violation of division (A)(5).  In the event that the district court
action does not result in an order requiring abatement of the nuisance, the
City Council may authorize the City Attorney to initiate civil proceedings in
the Macomb County Circuit Court for court-ordered abatement of the nuisance.



   (I)   The occurrence of six or more false alarms requiring a fire
response (i.e., fire alarms) within a 12-month period is deemed to be a
public nuisance.  After the occurrence of a sixth such false alarm within a
12-month period, the City Attorney is authorized to seek abatement of the
nuisance in conjunction with a misdemeanor prosecution in the district court
for a violation of division (A)(5).  In the event that the district court
action does not result in an order requiring abatement of the nuisance, the
City Council may authorize the City Attorney to initiate civil proceedings in
the Macomb County Circuit Court for court-ordered abatement of the nuisance
and recovery of the expenses, statutory interest, court costs, and reasonable
attorney fees incurred for pursuing the civil action.



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)  Penalty, see § 1-9



36-5.  APPEAL.



   (A)   Alarm users or persons otherwise aggrieved by receipt of a
warning letter for the occurrence of a false alarm, or by a false alarm
determination that results in the imposition of a fee for the cost of police
response and/or the cost of fire response, may submit a letter of appeal to
the City Manager for review of the determination of a false alarm
occurrence.  Such appeal letters must be submitted within 20 days of the
date of the warning letter or fee invoice.  Persons or entities who are
cited for a municipal civil infraction or charged with a misdemeanor may not
avail themselves of this appeal provision, but may instead defend against the
charge in the district court if desired.  The fees prescribed by the City
Council may not be appealed or modified by appeal; only the actual
determination of a false alarm occurrence may be appealed pursuant to this
section.



   (B)   The following appeal process shall be afforded upon receipt of
an appeal letter:



      (1)   Upon receipt of an appeal letter, the City Manager shall
forward a copy of the letter (and supporting documentation provided with the
letter, if any) to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief for review.



      (2)   The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall independently
review the letter and, within 30 days, advise the City Manager in writing
whether, after reasonable investigation, the appeal should be granted.  In
order to recommend that an appeal be granted, the independent review must
result in the conclusion that the original false alarm determination was
clearly erroneous.  To reach such a conclusion, irrefutable evidence must
support the finding that the occurrence did not fit the definition of FALSE
ALARM set forth in this chapter.



      (3)   In the event that the Police Chief and the Fire Chief
both agree that the appeal has no merit, or that the appeal should be
granted, such unanimous decision shall be final.  In the event that the
Police Chief and Fire Chief disagree about the merit of the appeal, and
thereby render opposing recommendations, the City Manager shall decide the
matter based upon his or her review of the conclusions of the Police Chief
and Fire Chief, subject to the standards set forth in division (B)(2).  The
City Manager's decision shall be rendered in writing no later than 60 days
from the date the appeal was received by the city, unless the City Manager
issues a written notice that the review is subject to extraordinary
circumstances that require up to an additional 30 days in order to complete
the review.  The City Manager's decision shall be final, and if fees must be
paid by the alarm user pursuant to § 36-4, such fees shall be paid within 10
days of the date the City Manager forwards the final decision to the
appellant via first class mail or personal service.



      (4)   If an appeal is granted, the result shall be that the
determination of a false alarm shall be overturned, and the alarm occurrence
shall not be counted with future false alarm occurrences for purposes of the
progressive penalties in § 36-4(A).  If the appeal is denied, the result
shall be that the determination of a false alarm shall stand, and the false
alarm occurrence may be counted with future false alarm occurrences for
purposes of the progressive penalties in § 36-4(A).



      (5)   False alarm determinations may not be appealed after a
subsequent false alarm occurrence is determined by the Police Department
and/or the Fire Department to have occurred, nor may they be appealed upon
the passage of 12 months from the date of the occurrence.



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)



36-6.  DEFECTIVE ALARMS; INSPECTION.



   (A)   An alarm system signaling more than five false alarms within a
12-month period of time shall be inspected and modified to be more false
alarm resistant.  Upon written notice, the owner or alarm user of the
building or residence shall have the alarm system inspected and modified, at
the owner or user's expense, by a licensed alarm system contractor within 14
days of the date of the notice, and shall forward to the Police Department
and/or Fire Department the contractor's report of the probable cause of the
false alarms and the measures instituted to eliminate same.



   (B)   Failure to have an alarm system inspected after the written
notice is issued pursuant to division (A) shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in Chapter 1.



(Ord. No. 376, § 1, 3-15-05)  Penalty, see § 1-9



CHAPTER 37:  PARKING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



37-1-37-10.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  COMMERCIAL VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT STORAGE AND PARKING



37-11.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights Commercial
Vehicle and Equipment Storage and Parking Ordinance" and may be cited as such.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-11; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-12.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to preserve the health, safety and
general welfare of the citizens of the city, motorists and pedestrians by the
regulation of traffic, parking and storage of commercial vehicles and
equipment therein and to preserve the health, safety and general welfare of
persons and property in residential areas designed and utilized for
residential use by regulating the parking of certain large motor vehicles and
commercial equipment which impede crime prevention in residential areas,
which detract from the appearance and residential character of the
neighborhoods of the city and which frequently are impediments to the ingress
and egress of emergency and fire protection vehicles and equipment.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-12; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-13.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BUS. A motor vehicle with mode of power, except a trailer, designed to
carry more than 12 persons.



   COMMERCIAL EQUIPMENT. Any construction equipment or large equipment
used primarily in the course of conducting a trade or business.



   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Includes buses, mobile structure trailers, pickup
trucks in excess of three-quarter-ton capacity used for commercial purposes,
pole trailers, semitrailers, stepvans, trailers, trucks and truck tractors as
defined herein.



   CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT. Bulldozers, front-end loaders, power shovels
and other heavy construction equipment or trailers designed for the
transportation of such equipment.



   MOBILE STRUCTURE TRAILER. A trailer that has a roof and walls and is at
least ten feet wide and which may be used off-road for commercial purposes.



   OWNER. Any person in whose name the legal title of a motor vehicle or
article of equipment is registered, or in the event such vehicle is the
subject of a lease or conditional sales agreement, the lessee or person with
the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with the immediate right of possession.



   POLE TRAILER. A vehicle without mode of power designed to be drawn by
another vehicle and attached to the towing vehicle by means of a reach or
pole or by being boomed or otherwise secured to the towing vehicle for
transporting long or irregularly shaped loads such as poles, pipes or
structural members capable generally of staying themselves as beams between
the supporting connections.



   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any one family residential, two family
residential, multiple family residential or residential mobile home park
district as defined and delineated in the zoning ordinance and maps of the
city.



   SEMITRAILER. A trailer other than a pole trailer so constructed that a
substantial part of its weight rests upon or is carried by another motor
vehicle.



   SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any one family residential district as
defined and delineated in the zoning ordinance and zoning maps of the city.



   TRAILER. A vehicle other than a utility trailer with or without mode of
power designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by
another motor vehicle.



   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle in
order to carry property, including but not limited to snowmobiles, boats,
motorcycles and other recreational equipment used periodically for travel,
recreational or vacation purposes.



   TRUCK. A motor vehicle in excess of one-ton capacity with mode of
power, except a trailer, designed primarily for the transportation of
property or special purpose equipment.



   TRUCK-TRACTOR. A truck designed primarily for drawing another motor
vehicle and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the
weight of vehicle and of the load so drawn.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-13; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-14.  REGULATION OF PARKING AND STORAGE.



   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, no
person shall park or store any commercial vehicle or commercial equipment
upon any public property located in any district, including but not limited
to public streets, stub streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks and planting areas
between sidewalks and curbs.



   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (D), no person shall park or
store any commercial vehicle or equipment on private property in a
residential district other than in an enclosed building.



   (C)   Except as provided in subsection (D), no person shall park or
store any commercial vehicle or commercial equipment on private property in
any nonresidential district unless such vehicle or equipment is used in
conjunction with the principal use or an accessory use of the property. In
such event, the parking or storage must comply with all other codes and
ordinances of the city.



   (D)   The parking of commercial vehicles and/or commercial equipment
in any district shall be limited to use of such vehicles or equipment in the
performance of a service to the adjacent property for the period of time
necessary to complete such service.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-14; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-15.  RESPONSIBILITY.



   The owner of the commercial vehicle or commercial equipment sought to
be stored or parked in a single family residential district and the owner of
the single family residential property upon which the equipment is being kept
shall each be responsible for compliance with the terms of this article. In
any proceeding for violation of any parking or storage provision of this
article, the person to whom a commercial vehicle or article of commercial
equipment is registered, as determined from the registration plate displayed
on the vehicle or equipment, shall be presumed in evidence to be the owner of
such commercial equipment. For purposes of determining the ownership of
property, it shall be presumed that the person whose name appears on the most
recent tax assessment roll of the city is the owner of the property.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-15; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-16.  VARIANCE.



   The requirements of this article may be modified or varied by the City
Council of Sterling Heights, provided evidence is presented establishing that
because of topography or other physical conditions of the property not caused
by the applicant, enforcement of the provisions hereunder would create
unusual or undue hardship.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-16; Ord. No. 225, § 1, 3-31-81)



37-17-37-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKING AND STORAGE



37-21.  SHORT TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights
Recreational Vehicle Parking and Storage Ordinance" and may be cited as such.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-21; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-22.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this recreational vehicle parking and storage ordinance
is to provide for the regulation of the parking and storing of recreational
vehicles, camper enclosures, boats, utility trailers and snowmobiles in
single family residential zoned areas. The regulation of storing and parking
of recreational vehicles as prescribed in this article will promote the
public safety, health and welfare by reducing traffic hazards; by maintaining
healthful standards of sanitation; by maintaining unobstructed access to
public sidewalks, thoroughfares and rights-of-way; and by preserving the
residential character of the neighborhoods of the community.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-22; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-23.  TERMS AND DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOAT. Any vessel for traveling in or on water, including an unpowered
unit, a unit powered by oars, paddles, sail or motor and a raft, whether
rigid or inflatable.



   CAMPER ENCLOSURE. Any structure or enclosure designed for mounting on a
pickup truck or truck chassis in such a manner as will provide temporary
sleeping or living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use,
including but not limited to a slide-in camper or a camper cap.



   ESTABLISHED DRIVEWAY. A private access intended to serve as ingress and
egress for vehicular traffic between a public right-of-way and other areas of
a site.



   FRONT YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the front setback line.



   REAR YARD. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth
of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the
rear setback line.



   REASONABLE ACCESS. The physical ability to park or store a unit in
either the rear yard, the side yard or in the case of a corner lot, the front
yard which is not parallel to the residential address of the property without
having to disrupt the topography, landscaping, structure(s) or fencing.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicular unit originally designed, permanently
altered or in process of alteration in such a manner as will provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping or travel use. A
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE may have its own motive power or may be designed to be
drawn by a motor vehicle. The term RECREATIONAL VEHICLE shall include but is
not limited to a motor home, a truck camper, a travel trailer, a folding
camper trailer, a converted van or a converted bus.



   SIDE YARD. An open space extending from the front yard to the rear
yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of
the side lot line to the side setback line.



   SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL AREA. Any one family residential district as
defined in the zoning ordinance and on zoning maps of the city and any
property used for single family residential purposes.



   SNOWMOBILE. A motor-driven vehicle designed for travel primarily on
snow or ice of a type which utilizes sled-type runners or skis, an endless
belt tread or any combination of these or other similar means of contact with
the surface on which it is operated.



   UNIT. Any recreational vehicle, camper enclosure, boat, utility trailer
or snowmobile as described in these terms and definitions.



   UTILITY TRAILER. A vehicle without motive power designed to be drawn by
a motor vehicle, to be used for carrying property, including but not limited
to a boat, motor cycle, snowmobile or other equipment for recreational,
camping or travel use.



   UTILITY TRAILER, ENCLOSED.  Any utility trailer with an interior that
is fully or partially enclosed.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-23; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 448, § 1,
8-3-16)



37-24.  REGULATION OF PARKING AND STORAGE.



   No person shall park or store any unit upon public or private property
in any single family residential area, except in strict conformance with the
conditions set forth hereunder:



   (A)   Any unit shall be parked or stored, unless otherwise permitted
hereafter:



      (1)   In an enclosed building, such as a garage; or



      (2)   In the rear yard, the side yard or in the case of a
corner lot, the front yard, which is not parallel to the residential address
of the property, subject to the following limitations:



         a.    The unit shall be parked or stored no closer than
three feet from any window or door of any residential building, and



         b.   The unit shall be parked or stored no closer than
eight feet from any public sidewalk or no closer than seven feet from the
front lot line where no public sidewalk exists.



            (i)   Exception: Effective January 1, 2017, an
enclosed utility trailer shall not be parked or stored any closer than 15
feet from any public sidewalk and no closer than 14 feet from the front lot
line where no public sidewalk exists.



   (B)   Any unit may be parked or stored upon an established driveway
in the front yard, provided parking or storage in an enclosed building is not
possible and there is no parking or storage space available in the rear yard
or side yard or there is no reasonable access to either the rear yard or side
yard, subject to the following limitations:



      (1)   The unit shall be parked or stored no closer than eight
feet from any public sidewalk or no closer than seven feet from the front lot
line, where no public sidewalk exists;



         (a)   Exception: Effective January 1, 2017, an enclosed
utility trailer shall not be parked or stored any closer than 15 feet from
any public sidewalk and no closer than 14 feet from the front lot line where
no public sidewalk exists.



      (2)   No more than one unit shall be permitted to be parked or
stored upon any established driveway at one time. For purposes of this
limitation, units used in conjunction with one another, such as a boat
mounted on a boat trailer, shall be considered as one unit.



      (3)   At no time shall any unmounted camper enclosure or any
boat not mounted on a boat trailer be permitted to be parked or stored in the
front yard or upon any established driveway.



   (C)   Parking or storage of units shall be limited to a lot or a
parcel upon which a single family residence is located. Parking or storage
shall be limited to units owned by any of the occupants of such residence.



   (D)   All units parked or stored outside of a building shall be kept
in a state of proper repair and shall be secured to prevent unauthorized
entry. In addition, no unit shall be allowed to become unsightly or unkempt.



   (E)   No unit parked or stored in a single family residential area
shall be connected to electricity, gas, water or sanitary sewer facilities,
except that a temporary electrical connection may be made for the purposes of
recharging batteries.



   (F)   No unit shall at any time be used for living or housekeeping
purposes. Use for overnight sleeping only is permitted.



   (G)   Other than in an enclosed building, no person shall park or
store more than two units upon any single family residential lot or parcel in
a single-family residential area. For purposes of this limitation, units used
in conjunction with one another such as a boat mounted upon a boat trailer
shall be considered as one unit.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained
herein, a unit may be parked or stored on a public street or on an
established driveway for a period not to exceed 48 hours for purposes of
loading, unloading, trip preparation and routine maintenance and repair.



   (I)   Except as provided in subparagraph (H) of this section, no
person shall park or store any unit upon any public property located in a
single family residential area, including public streets, stop streets,
rights-of-way, sidewalks and planting areas between sidewalks and curb lines.



   (J)   Effective January 1, 2017, units shall at all times be parked
or stored on a surface consisting of asphalt, concrete, pavers, or an
alternative material approved by the Building Official as suitable for
ensuring proper maintenance of the area where the specific unit is being
parked or stored.  The surface must be maintained in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code, including any applicable provisions
of the International Property Maintenance Code, as may be adopted and locally
amended from time to time.



   (K)   For purposes of this section, distance limitations shall be
measured from any part of the unit closest from a direct line to the location
from which it must be set back, including the body of the unit, the tongue of
the unit, and any other protrusion of or from the unit, and length
limitations shall include the body of the unit, the tongue of the unit,
fender, wheel, and any other protrusion of or from the unit.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-24; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83; Ord. No. 448, §§ 2, 3,
4, 5, 8-3-16)



37-25.  RESPONSIBILITY FOR COMPLIANCE.



   The owners of a unit parked or stored in a single family residential
area and the owners of such property upon which the unit is parked or stored
shall be responsible for compliance with the terms of this article. In any
proceeding for violation of any provision of this article based upon unit
ownership, the person or persons to whom the unit is registered, as
determined from the registration plate displayed on such unit, shall be
presumed in evidence to be the owner of the unit. In any proceeding for
violation of any provision of this article based upon property ownership, the
person to whom the property is assessed as determined from the most recent
tax assessment roll of the city shall be presumed in evidence to be the owner
of the property.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-25; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-26.  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   A notice of violation shall be served upon the person or persons in
violation of the provisions of this article directing the discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and abatement of the violation within 24
hours. For purposes of this notification upon a unit owner, it shall be
sufficient to affix in a conspicuous place the notice of violation to the
unit parked or stored in violation of the provisions of this article.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-26; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-27.  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.



   If the notice of violation is not complied with within 24 hours, a
citation shall be issued to the person or persons violating the provisions of
this article.



(1978 Code, §  25.5-27; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-28.  ENFORCEMENT.



   It shall be the duty of the Police Department of the city along with
any other official designated by the City Manager to enforce the provisions
of this article and to issue notices and citations for violations of the
provisions contained herein.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-28; Ord. No. 240, § 1, 1-4-83)



37-29-37-30.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE



37-31.  RESTRICTION ON PARKING OF VEHICLES FOR SALE.



   No person shall park a vehicle on private property for the purpose of
advertising it "For Sale" or "For Trade."



   (A)   In any proceeding for a violation of this section, proof that
a sign was in or on the parked vehicle, which drew attention to said motor
vehicle and was clearly visible by any person operating a motor vehicle on or
along a major thoroughfare with a right-of-way width of 86 feet or greater,
as established by the Master Thoroughfare Plan, adopted in accordance with
Public Act 285 of 1931, being M.C.L.A. §§ 125.31 through 125.45, as
amended, and which sign contained language, such as "For Sale," "For Trade"
or information pertaining to the vehicle, along with a telephone number,
shall constitute in evidence a presumption that the vehicle was parked for
the purposes of advertising the vehicle "For Sale" or "For Trade."



   (B)   This section shall not apply if the written consent of the
property owner is placed in the vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly
visible without having to enter or inspect the interior of the vehicle.



   (C)   This section shall not apply to properly licensed automobile
dealerships and used car lots.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-31; Ord. No. 247, § 1, 6-4-85)



37-32.  PRESUMPTION AS TO RESPONSIBILITY FOR PARKING VIOLATIONS; PROBABLE
CAUSE FOR ISSUANCE OF WARRANT.



   (A)   In any proceeding for a violation of this article relating to
the parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the
complaint was parked in violation of this article, together with proof that
the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the
registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a presumption
that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed
such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred.



   (B)   Except as provided in subsection (C) of this section involving
leased vehicles in any proceeding relating to violation of this article,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in
violation of this article, together with proof, by verifying ownership of the
vehicle with the Secretary of State, that the defendant named in the
complaint was, at the time of the parking, the registered owner of the
vehicle, creates in evidence a presumption that the registered owner of the
vehicle was the person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where,
and for the time during which, the violation occurred.



   (C)   In a proceeding for a violation of this article relating to
the parking of a vehicle involving a leased motor vehicle, proof that the
particular vehicle described in the citation was used in the violation,
together with proof that the defendant named in the citation was the lessee
of the vehicle at the time of the violation, constitutes in evidence a
presumption that the lessee of the vehicle, not the registered owner, was the
person who parked or placed the vehicle at the point where, and for the time
during which, the violation occurred.



(1978 Code, § 25.5-32; Ord. No. 247, § 1, 6-4-85)



37-33-37-50.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  SNOW EMERGENCIES.



37-51.  PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   (A)   Inclement winter weather impedes the movement of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic and creates public safety concerns.  To address these
concerns, the city engages in various efforts to reduce or eliminate the
accumulation of snow and ice upon public roadways.  The primary method by
which the city engages in such efforts is through the use of roadway snow
plowing equipment.



   (B)   In order for the city's snow plowing efforts to be effective,
the public roadways must be clear of parked vehicles, which constitute an
obstruction of the city's efforts and contribute to the public safety
concerns caused by inclement winter weather when such vehicles cause portions
of the public roadways to remain unplowed.  Although the city has utilized a
traffic control order since 1978 to require the removal of parked vehicles
from public roadways during snow emergencies, this article is designed to
ensure increased public awareness of the problem and to require motor vehicle
owners and operators to remove their vehicles from public roadways when a
snow emergency occurs.



   (C)   Therefore, in order to further public safety and welfare, and
to reduce the undue roadway safety risks caused by the accumulation of snow
and ice around parked vehicles, the City Council hereby enacts this Article V
of Chapter 37, which shall be known as "The City of Sterling Heights Snow
Emergency Article."



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-52.  PROHIBITED PARKING.



   No person shall park or allow to remain parked any vehicle on any
portion of any street or highway within the city during a snow emergency, or
park or allow to remain parked any vehicle in violation of any parking
restriction instituted as part of a declared snow emergency as provided in
this article.  The registered owner of any such vehicle shall be responsible
for the cost of removal.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-53.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of interpretation and enforcement of this article, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.



   DIRECTOR.   The Director of Public Services, or in his or her absence,
his or her duly authorized representative.



   DITCH SLOPE.   The portion of the highway adjacent to the shoulder if
one exists or adjacent to the roadway on roads without shoulders, extending
to the bottom of the roadside ditch and is not constructed or maintained for
the use of any vehicles except those engaged in construction or maintenance.



   ROADWAY.   The portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.



   SHOULDER.   The portion of the highway contiguous to the roadway
generally extending the contour of the roadway, not designed for vehicular
travel but maintained for the temporary accommodation of disabled or stopped
vehicles otherwise permitted on the roadway.



   SNOW EMERGENCY.   A parking prohibition declared by the Director due
to inclement weather and pursuant to the provisions of this article.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.   The entire width between the boundary lines of
every way that is publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.  Shoulders and ditch
slopes are included within the meaning of STREET or HIGHWAY for purposes of
this article.  STREETS or HIGHWAYS that are not owned, maintained, or
snowplowed by the city or other governmental entity shall be excluded from
this definition.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-54.  SNOW EMERGENCY IMPLEMENTATION; AUTOMATIC EFFECT.



    Whenever the Director finds, on the basis of falling snow, sleet, or
freezing rain, or on the basis of a forecast by the United States Weather
Bureau or other weather service, that weather conditions will make it
necessary that motor vehicle traffic be expedited and that parking on city
streets be prohibited or restricted for snow plowing and other purposes, the
Director shall put into effect a parking prohibition on some or all city
streets, or parts thereof, by declaring it in a manner prescribed in this
article.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-55.  NOTICE.



   (A)   The Director, upon declaring a snow emergency, shall cause
public announcement of such parking prohibitions and/or restrictions and the
affected areas by means of broadcasts and/or telecasts from various
commercial television and radio stations serving the city, and on the city's
cable television channel and website, and through the use of the emergency
alert notice system of any cable television franchisee servicing the city. 
The parking prohibitions triggered by the declaration of a snow emergency
shall become effective two hours after the declaration has been announced in
accordance with this section.



   (B)   The Director shall also be authorized to publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by posting in conspicuous
places upon city properties, notice that parking shall be prohibited on
streets and highways when a snow emergency is declared.  Any such notices
will serve as sufficient notice for purposes of subsection (A) in the event
of sudden or unexpected snowfalls and accumulations, and may be published or
posted prior to or during any winter season.  However, any notice under this
subsection shall contain the date of its issuance, shall make reference to
this article or any other applicable ordinance, and shall only be effective
for a period of one year from the date of the posting or publication.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-56.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
remove or cause the removal and/or impounding of any vehicle that is found
parked on any street in the city during a snow emergency.  Such vehicle may
be removed and conveyed by or under the direction of a member of the Police
Department by means of towing to a vehicle impound lot.  The Police Chief is
authorized to engage the services of the city's primary vehicle towing
company to remove vehicles under the direction of a member of the Police
Department where the same are found in violation of this article or other
traffic ordinances and regulations of the city, except that if such company
is not available or unable to tow the vehicle(s), the Police Chief may
utilize any other licensed and reputable towing company to assist with
clearing the streets to ensure snow plow accessibility. 



   (B)   Whenever this article is alleged to have been violated, and
regardless of whether the offending vehicle is impounded, police officers and
code enforcement officials shall have the authority to issue and serve a
municipal civil infraction citation upon the registered owner of a vehicle
found parked in violation of this article.  Such citation shall be in the
form prescribed by state law, and may be either mailed to the registered
owner via first class mail, or conspicuously affixed to the offending
vehicle. A municipal civil infraction citation may be issued for each 24-hour
period during which a vehicle is parked in violation of this article.



   (C)   The registered owner or lessee of a vehicle is presumed, for
purposes of this article, to be responsible for the operation and parking of
that vehicle.  In any prosecution with regard to a vehicle parked or left in
a place or in a condition in violation of any provision of this article,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked or
left in violation of a provision of this article, together with proof that
the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the registered owner or
lessee of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
defendant is responsible for violating this article.



   (D)   This article shall be supplemental to any other provisions of
law granting members of the Police Department the authority to impound
vehicles.  The rules and regulations governing abandoned automobiles and the
impoundment of vehicles, adopted by reference in Chapter 49 from the Michigan
Vehicle Code, shall be followed when impounding a vehicle under this article,
except that no advance notice prior to impoundment shall be required other
than the public notice specifically required by this article.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-57.  STALLED VEHICLES.



   Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled for any reason, whether or not in
violation of this article, on any roadway within the city, the person
operating such vehicle shall take immediate action to have the vehicle towed
or pushed off the roadway.  No person shall abandon or leave a vehicle on a
street or highway, regardless of whether the person indicates that the
vehicle is stalled by raising the hood or otherwise, except for the purpose
of securing assistance during the actual time necessary to go to a nearby
telephone or to a nearby garage, gasoline station, or other place of
assistance and return without delay.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-58.  TERMINATION.



   Once in effect, a prohibition under this article shall remain in effect
until terminated by announcement of the Director in accordance with this
article, except that if significant snowing, sleeting, or freezing rain has
ceased and a street area has become substantially clear of snow and ice from
curb to curb for the length of the entire block, such street area shall be
automatically excluded from the snow emergency parking prohibitions of this
article.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-59.  EXEMPTIONS.



   In all areas of the city, an owner of a motor vehicle who resides at
premises which do not have a driveway shall be exempted from the requirement
to move the motor vehicle in the event of a snow emergency; however,
residents in the area are required to park their vehicles as close to the
curb as possible to make room for snow plows and other emergency vehicles. 
Owners of exempt vehicles will be issued identifying stickers or placards,
upon request, which shall be displayed in the rear side window on the
driver's side of the vehicle.  Motor vehicles with properly displayed
disabled parking placards or license plates shall also be exempt from the
provisions of this article.  In addition, vehicles parked on streets or
portions of streets specifically excepted from the Director's declaration of
emergency, if any, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-60.  RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.



   Any provision of this article which becomes effective by declaration of
the Director or upon the occurrence of certain weather conditions shall,
while temporarily in effect, take precedence over other conflicting
provisions of law normally in effect, except that it shall not take
precedence over provisions of law relating to traffic accidents, emergency
travel of authorized emergency vehicles, or emergency traffic directions by a
police officer.  However, nothing in this article shall be construed to
permit parking at any time or place where it is forbidden by any other
provision of law.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-61.  PENALTY.



   A person who violates this article is responsible for a municipal civil
infraction and shall pay a civil fine as prescribed by Chapter 1.  It shall
not be a defense that a person was not personally or otherwise advised in
advance of the issuance of the violation that his or her vehicle could not be
parked upon the roadway, so long as the public notice procedures of this
article were followed by the city.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



37-62.  TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDERS.



   This article shall repeal and nullify any traffic control orders that
were previously enacted and in effect pursuant to the authority granted in
the Uniform Traffic Code, including but not limited to Traffic Control Order
No. 6-10, enacted November 20, 1978.  However, nothing in this article shall
eliminate or otherwise limit the authority of the Police Chief to issue
future traffic control orders as permitted by the Uniform Traffic Code, so
long as such orders are approved by the City Manager as necessary to
supplement the provisions of this article during inclement weather events.



(Ord. No. 378, § 1, 5-3-05)



CHAPTER 38:  PARKS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



38-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BICYCLE. A device propelled by human power upon which a person may
ride, having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.



   CONVEYANCE. Any wheeled form of conveyance, whether motor-powered,
animal-drawn, or self-propelled.  The term shall include, but not be limited
to, skateboards, roller skates, roller blades, roller shoes, mopeds, and
trailers of any size, kind, or description.  Conveyances in the service of
the city parks or the police department shall be exempt from the regulations
of this chapter.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of Parks and Recreation of the city or his or
her designate.



   OPERATE or OPERATING. The physical control, or attempted control, of a
bicycle, conveyance, or vehicle.



   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other area in the city owned or used by the city and devoted to active or
passive recreation.



   VEHICLE. Any wheeled and motor-powered conveyance.  Vehicles in the
service of the city parks or the police department shall be exempt from the
vehicle regulations of this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 26-1)  (Ord. No. 391 § 1, 4-17-07)



38-2.  ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.



   The Director, park attendants and the Police Department shall, in
connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the
provisions of this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 26-2)



38-3.  GENERAL OPERATING POLICIES.



   (A)   Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks
shall be open to the public between 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. during the months
of April through September and between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
during the months of October through March. No person shall loiter or remain
in any park during the hours when the park is closed. The above restrictions
shall not apply to employees of the city engaged in their occupation or to
the conduct of any activity under the direction or supervision of the
Director.



   (B)   Closed areas. Any park or any part or section of any park may
be declared closed to the public by the City Manager at any time and for any
interval of time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals
(daily or otherwise), and either entirely or merely to certain uses, as the
City Manager shall find reasonably necessary.



   (C)   Lost and found articles. The finding of lost articles by park
attendants shall be reported to the Director who shall make every reasonable
effort to locate the owners. The Director shall make every reasonable effort
to find articles reported as lost. All articles having an apparent value of
$25 or more, which are found by any city employee shall be turned over to the
Police Department within 24 hours after the article is found.



(1978 Code, § 26-3; Ord. No. 159-B, § 2, 5-18-82; Ord. No. 159-D, § 1,
12-17-96)



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to operate system of public recreation and
playgrounds, see M.S.A. § 5.2421; M.C.L. § 123.51



38-4.  ENTERING CLOSED AREAS; VIOLATION OF NOTICES OR ORDERS.



   No person in a park shall enter an area posted as "Closed to the
Public," nor shall any person use or abet the use of any area in violation of
a posted notice or fail to follow any lawful order or request of the Director
or Chief of Police.



(1978 Code, § 26-4)



38-5.  ERECTION OF BUILDINGS OR INSTALLATION OF UTILITIES.



   No person shall construct or erect any building or structure of
whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in character, or run or string
any public service utility into, upon or across such park lands, except on
special written permit issued under this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 26-5)



38-6-38-7.  RESERVED.



38-8.  CLIMBING TREES; WALKING, STANDING OR SITTING ON PROPERTY NOT
DESIGNATED FOR SUCH PURPOSES.



   No person in a park shall climb any tree or walk, stand or sit upon
monuments, vases, fountains, railing, fences, gun carriages or any other
property not designated or customarily used for such purposes.



(1978 Code, § 26-8)



38-9.  REMOVAL OF SAND, SOIL AND THE LIKE; EXCAVATIONS.



   No person in a park shall dig or remove any beach sand, whether
submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, down-timber or other wood or
materials or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means
or agency.



(1978 Code, § 26-9)



Cross reference:



   Excavations generally, see §§ 17-15 et seq.



38-10.  POLLUTION OF WATERS; CONTROL OF WASTE MATERIALS.



   (A)   No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause
to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm
sewer or drain flowing into such waters any substance matter or thing, liquid
or solid, which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.



   (B)   No person shall bring into a park or dump, deposit or leave in
a park, any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish,
waste, garbage, refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash shall be
placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park or left anywhere on the
grounds thereof but shall be placed in the proper receptacle, where those are
provided. Where receptacles are not so provided, all such rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its
presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.



(1978 Code, § 26-10)



Cross reference:



   Anti-litter ordinance, see §§ 23-31 et seq.;



   Further provisions prohibiting littering in parks, see § 23-38



38-11.  USE OF FACILITIES DESIGNATED FOR OPPOSITE SEX GENERALLY.



   No person in a park shall occupy any seat or bench or enter into or
loiter or remain in any pavilion or other park structure or section thereof
which may be reserved and designated by the Director for the use of the
opposite sex. Exception is made for children under five years of age.



(1978 Code, § 26-11)



38-12.  MAINTENANCE OF RESTROOMS AND WASHROOMS; USE OF SUCH ROOMS DESIGNATED
FOR OPPOSITE SEX.



   No person shall fail to cooperate in maintaining restrooms and
washrooms in a park in a neat and sanitary condition. No person over the age
of five years shall use park restrooms and washrooms designated for the
opposite sex.



(1978 Code, § 26-12)



38-13.  TRAFFIC REGULATIONS GENERALLY.



   No person in a park shall:



   (1)   Fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state
motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles,
together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and other
ordinances;



   (2)   Fail to obey all police officers and park employees, such
persons being authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and
wherever needed in the parks and on the highways, streets or roads
immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of these
regulations and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently
by the Director;



   (3)   Fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed,
direction, caution, stopping or parking and all others posted for proper
control and to safeguard life and property;



   (4)   Ride or drive a vehicle at a rate of speed exceeding 15 miles
an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may designate, by posted
signs, for speedier travel;



   (5)   Drive any vehicle on any area except the paved park roads or
parking areas or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically
designated as temporary parking areas by the Director;



   (6)   Park a vehicle in other than an established or designated
parking area.



(1978 Code, § 26-13)



Cross reference:



   Traffic, see Ch. 49



38-14.  BICYCLE REGULATIONS.



    The following activities are prohibited in a park:



   (1)    Riding a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or a
path designated for  the purpose of operating bicycles in the park. A
bicyclist shall, however, be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand
over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for
pedestrian use;



   (2)    Riding a bicycle or operating a conveyance other than on the
right side of the road  or path pavement as close as conditions permit.
Bicyclists and other persons operating conveyances shall, at all times,
operate their bicycles and conveyances with reasonable regard  for the
safety of others;



   (3)    Leaving a bicycle or conveyance unattended in a place other
than a bicycle rack, when  a bicycle rack is provided  at the park;



   (4)    Leaving a bicycle or conveyance laying on the ground or
pavement or set against a tree or at any place or position where other
persons may trip over or be injured by such bicycle or conveyance.



   (5)   Failing to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian,
bicyclist, or similarly situated person while operating a bicycle, or any
other conveyance, on a paved road or path.  Bicyclists and operators of
other conveyances shall give an audible signal before overtaking and passing
any such pedestrian, bicyclist, or similarly situated person.  By way of
example, but without limitation, a "similarly situated person" for purposes
of this subsection includes a child on a tricycle, a person on an electric
personal assistive mobility device, a person on a skateboard, a person on
roller skates or roller blades, a person in a wheelchair, and/or a person on
or utilizing any other form of conveyance or wheeled device;



   (6)    Ride or operate a bicycle or conveyance at a rate of speed
exceeding ten miles an hour, except upon such roads as the Director may
designate, by posted signs, for speedier travel;



   (7)   Operate any bicycle or conveyance on any area where the
operation of bicycles or conveyances has been specifically prohibited by the
Director.



   (8)    A person who violates this section is responsible for a
municipal civil infraction.  Only city police officers are authorized to
issue a municipal civil infraction to a person who violates this section.



(1978 Code, § 26-14)  (Ord. No. 391 § 2, 4-17-07)



Cross reference:



   Bicycles, see Ch. 9;



   Provisions of traffic ordinance relative to bicycles, see §§  et
seq. and §§ 49-255 et seq.



Statutory reference:



   Authority of city to regulate bicycles, see M.C.L. § 257.606



   Parental responsibility, see M.C.L. § 257.656



   Applicability of Michigan Vehicle Code regulations to bicycle paths,
see M.C.L. § 257.656



   Right-of-way and audible signal requirements, see M.C.L. § 257.660(5)



38-15.  CLEANING, SERVICING OR REPAIRING VEHICLES.



   No person shall clean, wash, polish or repair, or in any manner
service, any motor vehicle or trailer in any park or cause the same to be
done. For the purpose of this section, the term REPAIR shall be deemed to
mean the replacement of parts of the vehicle with new or used parts, and the
term SERVICE shall be deemed to mean the draining of oil, sludge, gasoline,
water or other engine cooling fluids for the purpose of replacing same with a
new supply. This prohibition shall not apply to the changing of deflated
tires or the performing of necessary emergency work on a disabled car for the
purpose of immediate movement.



(1978 Code, § 26-15)



38-16-38-17.  RESERVED.



38-18.  PICNIC REGULATIONS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (1)   Picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for
that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities
in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum
use for the comfort and convenience of all. Park visitors shall comply with
any directions given to achieve this end;



   (2)   Violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces,
together with tables and benches, follows generally the rule of "first come,
first served;"



   (3)   Use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings
or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of
other persons or use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time, if
the facilities are crowded;



   (4)   Leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished
and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage
and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no
such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried
away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.



(1978 Code, § 26-18)



38-19.  GOING ONTO ICE.



   No person shall go onto the ice of any of the waters in a park, except
in such areas as are designated as skating fields and provided a safety
signal is displayed.



(1978 Code, § 26-19)



38-20.  CERTAIN GAMES AND RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES CONFINED TO DESIGNATED
AREAS.



   No person in a park shall take part in or abet the playing of any games
involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones,
arrows, javelins or model airplanes, except in areas set apart for such forms
of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games, such as
football, baseball and quoits, is prohibited, except on the fields, courts or
areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas
specifically designated for such pastime.



(1978 Code, § 26-20)



38-21.  DOMESTIC ANIMALS CONFINED TO DESIGNATED AREAS; DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE.



   No person shall be responsible for or permit the entry of a dog or
other domestic animal into a park, other than automobile parking concourses
and walks immediately adjacent thereto and in such other areas as may be
clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals Permitted in this
Area." Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running of dogs at
large. All dogs in those areas where such animals are permitted shall be
restrained at all times on adequate leashes not greater than six feet in
length.



(1978 Code, § 26-21)



Cross reference:



   Animals generally, see Ch. 8;



   General prohibition against dogs running at large, see § 8-4



38-22.  SOLICITING ALMS OR CONTRIBUTIONS.



   No person shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether
public or private, in a park.



(1978 Code, § 26-22)



38-23.  GAMBLING.



   No person shall gamble or participate in or abet any game of chance in
a park.



(1978 Code, § 26-23)



38-24.  BUILDING FIRES OR DROPPING MATCHES, CIGARETTES AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall build or attempt to build a fire in any park, except in
such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director.
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco, paper or other inflammable material within any
park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.



(1978 Code, § 26-24)



Cross reference:



   Fire prevention and protection, see Ch. 20



38-25-38-26.  RESERVED.



38-27.  MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.



   No person in a park shall:



   (1)   Expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or station or
place any stand, cart or vehicle for the transportation, sale or display of
any such article or thing. Exception is here made as to any regularly
licensed concessionaire by and under the authority and regulation of the city;



   (2)   Announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to
any article or service for sale or hire;



   (3)   Paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard,
advertisement or inscription whatever or erect or cause to be erected any
sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.



(1978 Code, § 26-27)



Cross reference:



   Advertising, see Ch. 3



38-28-38-37.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  PERMIT FOR CERTAIN ACTIVITIES



38-38.  WHEN REQUIRED; APPLICATION.



   (A)   A permit shall be obtained from the city before participating
in specialized, organized recreational activities, musical festivals,
extension of park hours and any other reason which shall be deemed necessary
for a permit in accordance with subsequent rules and regulations.



   (B)   A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an
application with the Director. The application shall state:



      (1)   The name and address of the applicant;



      (2)   The name and address of the person sponsoring the
activity, if any;



      (3)   The day and hours for which the permit is desired;



      (4)   The park or portion thereof for which such permit is
desired;



      (5)   An estimate of the anticipated attendance;



      (6)   Any other information which the Director shall find
reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued hereunder.



(1978 Code, § 26-38)



38-39.  STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.



   The Director shall issue a permit hereunder when he or she finds:



   (1)   That the proposed activity or use of the park will not
unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of
the park;



   (2)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation;



   (3)   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably
anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;



   (4)   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense or police operation by the city;



   (5)   That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other
use at the day and hour required in the application.



(1978 Code, § 26-39)



38-40.  APPEAL FROM REFUSAL.



   Within three days after receipt of an application for a permit under
this article, the Director shall apprise an applicant, in writing, of his or
her reasons for refusing a permit and any aggrieved person shall have the
right to appeal, in writing, within three days, to have the City Council,
which shall consider the application under the standards set forth in §
38-39, sustain or overrule the Director’s decision within ten days. The
decision of the City Council shall be final.



(1978 Code, § 26-40)



38-41.  INTERFERING WITH PERMITTEE.



   No person shall disturb or interfere unreasonably with any person or
party occupying any area in a park or participating in any activity in a park
under the authority of a permit.



(1978 Code, § 26-41)



38-42.  PERMITTEE BOUND BY RULES, REGULATIONS AND ORDINANCES.



   A permittee shall be bound by all park rules and regulations and all
applicable ordinances as fully as though the same were inserted in the permit
issued under this article.



(1978 Code, § 26-42)



38-43.  PERMITTEE’S LIABILITY FOR NEGLIGENCE.



   The person to whom a permit is issued under this article shall be
liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained by any person whatever by
reason of the negligence of the person to whom such permit shall have been
issued.



(1978 Code, § 26-43)



38-44.  EXHIBITION.



   No person in a park shall fail to produce and exhibit any permit from
the city he or she claims to have, upon request of any authorized person who
shall desire to inspect same, for the purpose of enforcing compliance with
any ordinance or rule.



(1978 Code, § 26-44)



38-45.  REVOCATION.



   The director shall have the authority to revoke a permit issued under
this article upon a finding or violation of any rule or ordinance or upon
good cause shown.



(1978 Code, § 26-45)



CHAPTER 39:  PEDDLERS, ITINERANT MERCHANTS AND THE LIKE



39-1.  PURPOSE.



   To prevent fraud, crime, undue annoyance and harassment and to protect
the privacy, safety, health and welfare of the citizens of Sterling Heights,
all transient or itinerant merchants, commercial solicitors, peddlers and
hawkers shall be licensed by the city and be subject to the regulations set
forth herein.



(1978 Code, § 27-1; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



39-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any person traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle
or other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house or from street
to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise,
meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, farm products or provisions, offering and
exposing the same for sale or making sales and delivering articles to
consumers or who takes or attempts to take orders from consumers for sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, books or magazines, personal property of any
nature whatsoever for future delivery or for services to be furnished or
performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is
collecting advance payments on such sales or not. Any person who solicits
orders and, as a separate transaction, makes deliveries to consumers as part
of an itinerant merchant scheme or design to evade the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed an ITINERANT MERCHANT. The word ITINERANT MERCHANT
shall not include agents of utility companies or firms franchised by the city
nor the operator of a vending unit licensed under Chapter 22, Article III of
this Code, nor any person registered under Chapter 41 of this Code.



   PARENT ORGANIZATION. The person or organization that the itinerant
merchant is employed by or represents, the principal manufacturer and
distributor of goods and the principal provider of services being sold or for
which solicited.



(1978 Code, § 27-2; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



Statutory reference:



   Transient merchants, see M.S.A. §§ 19.691 et seq.; M.C.L. §§
445.371 et seq.



39-3.  LICENSE-REQUIRED.



   No person shall engage in the business of an itinerant merchant without
first obtaining an annual license therefor from the City Clerk, expiring on
December 31 of each year.



(1978 Code, § 27-3; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



39-4.  SAME-APPLICATION; CONTENTS.



   Before the issuance of a license, an itinerant merchant shall apply for
a license upon forms prescribed and furnished by the City Clerk. The
application shall include the following information:



   (1)   Personal information. The name of the individual or
individuals who will sell or solicit within the city, including resident
address, telephone number, driver’s license number, date of birth and a
physical description, including height, weight, color of hair and eyes.



   (2)   Parent organization. The complete name, address and telephone
number of the parent organization and where and when the parent organization
was established or incorporated and the form of its organization.



   (3)   Method of solicitation. An outline of the method and methods
to be used in conducting the sales or solicitations (for example,
door-to-door, street corners, sidewalks and the like).



   (4)   Details of sales. The dates and times when and location where
sales or solicitations will be made, giving the proposed dates for the
beginning and ending of such sales or solicitations and the hours of the days
thereof.



   (5)   Types of goods. The types of goods or services to be sold or
for which solicitations will be made.



   (6)   Previous restraint. Whether the parent organization or the
itinerant merchant has ever been enjoined from soliciting.



   (7)   Convictions. Whether the itinerant merchant or an officer or
director of the parent organization has been convicted of a felony or any
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude and, if so, a brief description of the
case.



   (8)   Photograph. A photograph of each individual or individuals who
will sell or solicit taken within 60 days immediately prior to the date of
the filing of the application, which picture shall be two inches by two
inches showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.



(1978 Code, § 27-4; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



39-5.  SAME-STANDARDS; CONTENTS AND THE LIKE.



   (1)   Issuance. The City Clerk shall issue a license whenever the
Clerk shall find the following facts to exist:



      (a)   The applicant has not been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude;



      (b)   There has been compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, including payment of the applicable fee;



      (c)   There have been no violations of this chapter in the
past by the applicant, which would form a basis of a reasonable belief of
further violations of this chapter.



   (2)   Appeal on denial. Whenever the City Clerk shall deny issuance
of a license the applicant may appeal in writing to the City Council, which
shall make the final determination. The City Council shall base its
determination on the criteria set forth in subsection (1).



   (3)   License. Licenses issued under this chapter shall bear the
name and address of the parent organization, if any, and the name, address
and photograph of the itinerant merchant, the date issued, the time periods
during which the license holder may solicit, and a statement that the license
does not constitute an endorsement by the city of the purpose or products
involved or of the persons or of the parent organization conducting the
solicitation. All licenses shall be signed by the City Clerk.



   (4)   License fee. The fee for a license shall be as specified by 
the annual appropriations ordinance. No fee for a license shall be so applied
as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case, where a
license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an
undue burden upon interstate commerce, he or she may apply to the City Clerk
who shall have the authority to make an adjustment of the fee so that it
shall not be discriminatory unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. The
application may be made before, at or within 90 days after payment of the
prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting
testimony show the method of business and gross volume or estimated gross
volume of business and such other information as the Clerk may deem necessary
in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such
commerce.



   (5)   Carrying license. While carrying on solicitations, an
itinerant merchant shall display the license issued under this chapter so
that it shall be visible to any person dealing with the itinerant merchant.



   (6)   Nontransferable. Any license issued under this chapter shall
be nontransferable.



   (7)   Misrepresentation of endorsement by city. No person shall
represent that the granting of a license under this chapter is an endorsement
by the city and any such representation is declared to be a misrepresentation
of fact, a violation of this chapter and subject to revocation of the license.



   (8)   Revocation. If any license holder or any agent or
representative of the license holder is misrepresenting or making untrue
statements with regard to the solicitation, has made untrue statements in the
application or in any other way the solicitation is being conducted in a
manner inimical to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of
the citizens of the city, in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or of any statute of the state or any other ordinance of the city or
is representing in any way that any license granted hereunder is endorsement
of such solicitation, then the City Clerk shall suspend the license or revoke
same and shall cause notice thereof to be mailed to the licensee, who shall
have a right to appeal within 30 days and a hearing by the City Council
within 30 days thereafter.



(1978 Code, § 27-5; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88; Ord. No. 388, § 20, 1-3-07)



39-6.  REGULATIONS.



   (1)   New information. While a license is in effect, an itinerant
merchant shall, within seven calendar days, report to the City Clerk in
writing any material change in any information previously provided on the
application form.



   (2)   No endorsement by city. A license under this chapter shall not
be used or represented in any manner as an endorsement by the city or by any
department, officer or employee thereof.



   (3)   No obstructions. An itinerant merchant shall not block,
obstruct, impede or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic upon a public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or within
public buildings and other public areas within the City of Sterling Heights
by means of a barricade, object or device or with his or her person.



   (4)   No interference. An itinerant merchant shall not, without
permission, accost, interfere with or  touch any member of the public in any
manner.



   (5)   Noise. An itinerant merchant shall not unreasonably disturb
the peace and quiet of the city and to this end itinerant merchants shall not
shout or cry out their solicitation or blow any horn, ring any bell or use
any other similar device to attract the attention of the public.



   (6)   Misrepresentation. No fraudulent or misleading representations
to any person shall be made in connection with any sale or solicitation,
including but not limited to any misleading representation concerning the
true product or service involved, the name of the itinerant merchant, the
trade name and the nature of the parent organization.



   (7)   No solicitation. No door-to-door sales or solicitations nor
sales or solicitations on private property shall be permitted at any time
where a "No Solicitors," "No Trespassing" or similar notice is posted, except
by invitees.



   (8)   Asked to leave. No itinerant merchant shall remain on private
property after having been directed to quit the premises by any person
lawfully in possession of the premises.



   (9)   Application information. It shall be a violation of this
chapter or any person knowingly to file or cause to be filed an application
for a license containing one or more false statements.



   (10)   Fixed stands prohibited. No license holder shall stop or
remain in any one place upon any street, alley or public place in violation
of any other ordinance of the city, including zoning, parking, stopping and
standing traffic regulations or any longer than necessary to make a sale to a
customer wishing to buy. Any itinerant merchant using a vehicle, when
stopped, shall place his or her vehicle parallel to and within 12 inches of
the curb and shall depart from such place as soon as he or she has completed
sales with customers actually present.



   (11)   Prohibited areas. No itinerant merchant shall engage in
peddling on any street, alley or public place after having been requested to
desist by any Sterling Heights police officer because of congested or
dangerous traffic conditions. No itinerant merchant shall engage in business
in a commercially zoned district outside of any building.



   (12)   Curb service prohibited. No person shall operate or maintain
any stand, vehicle, store or place of business on or near to any highway in
such a manner that the customers or traders with such person occupy or
congregate within the limits of any street, lane, highway or public place
within the city. No person shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys,
lanes or public places of the city for the service of customers or for the
transaction of business or to use any stands, stores or other places of
business in any manner that shall require the customer, when transacting the
business, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or
public places of the city.



(1978 Code, § 27-6; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



39-7.  EXEMPT PERSONS.



   The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this
chapter but shall be subject to the other provisions hereof:



   (1)   Any itinerant merchant otherwise licensed under this Code;



   (2)   Newspaper delivery service;



   (3)   Any person exempt under law from local regulation.



(1978 Code, § 27-7; Ord. No. 262, § 1, 5-3-88)



CHAPTER 40:  POLITICAL AND CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS



40-1.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to prevent fraud, crime, undue annoyance
and harassment and to protect the privacy, safety, health and welfare of the
citizens of Sterling Heights and all persons and organizations soliciting for
charitable, religious and political purposes shall register with the city and
all such persons and organizations shall be subject to the regulations set
forth herein.



(1978 Code, § 27A-1; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



40-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CHARITABLE, RELIGIOUS OR POLITICAL ORGANIZATION. A not-for-profit
organization of persons which solicits or obtains contributions from the
public for charitable, religious or political purposes.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company,
association or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, political party or
organization and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, agent or other
similar representative thereof.



   SOLICIT, SOLICITATION and SOLICITING. The request of money, credit,
property, financial assistance or other thing of value by personal interview
or otherwise on the plea or representation other than by telephone or mail
that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of
value, or any part thereof, will be used for charitable, religious or
political purpose. The words shall also mean and include the sale or offer to
sell any article, tag, ticket, emblem, publication, advertisement,
subscription or other thing, whether of value or not, on the pleas or
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or
other thing of value, or any part thereof, whether received by the solicitor
or purchased by the buyer, will be used for a charitable, religious or
political purpose.



   SOLICITOR. A person or organization that solicits.



(1978 Code, § 27A-2; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



40-3.  REGISTRATION.



   Prior to solicitation in the city, a charitable, religious or political
organization or person who solicits or intends to solicit or receives or
intends to receive contributions from persons in the city shall register and
obtain a certificate of registration expiring on December 31 of each year.
Registration by an organization or person under this chapter shall be with
the City Clerk on forms to be furnished by the Clerk. The registration shall
contain the following information, or in lieu thereof, a statement of the
reason why such information cannot be furnished:



   (1)   Personal information. Name, address, telephone number and
headquarters of the person registering;



   (2)   Organization. If the registrant is not an individual, the
names and addresses of the registrant and the principal officers and
solicitors;



   (3)   Purpose. The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made
and the use or disposition to be made of any receipts therefrom;



   (4)   Person in charge. The names and addresses of the person or
persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitations;



   (5)   Methods to be used. An outline of the method or methods to be
used in conducting the solicitations;



   (6)   Time for solicitation. The time period during which such
solicitation shall be made, giving the proposed dates for the beginning and
ending of such solicitations and the hours of the days thereof;



   (7)   Nature of organization. Where and when the organization was
established, the form of its organization and its tax exempt status under the
Internal Revenue Code, if any.



(1978 Code, § 27A-3; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



40-4.  CERTIFICATE.



   (1)   Issuance. The City Clerk shall issue an appropriate number of
certificates of registration upon the filing of the registration form as set
forth therein. No fee shall be charged in connection with the registration or
the certificates of registration.



   (2)   Contents. The certificates of registration issued under this
chapter shall bear the name and address of the person by whom the
solicitation is made, the date issued, the dates within which the registrant
will be soliciting and a statement that the certificate does not constitute
an endorsement by the city of the purpose of the solicitation or of the
persons or group conducting the solicitation.



   (3)   Nontransferable. Any certificate of registration issued under
this chapter shall be nontransferable; provided, however, each solicitor and
representative of any organization which has registered shall carry a
facsimile copy of such registration while engaged in solicitation.



   (4)   Misrepresentation of endorsement by city. No person shall
represent that the granting of a certificate of registration under this
chapter is an endorsement by the city of the particular organization
involved, and any such representation is declared to be a misrepresentation
of fact and subject to the provisions for revocation of the license.



   (5)   Revocation. If any registration holder or any agent of the
registration holder is misrepresenting or making untrue statements with
regard to the solicitation or has made untrue statements in the application
or in any other way the solicitation is being conducted in a manner inimical
to the protection of the public health, safety or welfare of the citizens of
the city or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or of any
statute of the state or any other ordinance of the city or is representing in
any way that any license granted hereunder is endorsement of such
solicitation, then the City Clerk shall suspend the license or revoke same
and shall cause notice thereof to be mailed to the licensee, who shall have a
right to appeal within 30 days and a hearing by the City Council within 30
days thereafter.



(1978 Code, § 27A-4; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



40-5.  REGULATIONS.



   (1)   Change in information. While a certificate of registration is
in effect, a soliciting person or organization shall within three calendar
days report to the City Clerk in writing any material change in any
information previously provided on the registration form.



   (2)   False information. No person shall knowingly file or cause to
be filed a registration form containing one or more false statements.



   (3)   Residency or certificate. A solicitor shall carry on his or
her person at all times while soliciting the certificate of registration and
shall show same whenever requested to do so by a person solicited or by a
city representative.



   (4)   No obstruction. A solicitor shall not block, obstruct, impede
or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic upon a public highway, street, alley or sidewalk or within public
buildings and other public areas within the city by means of a barricade,
object or device or with his or her person.



   (5)   No interference. A solicitor shall not, without permission,
accost, interfere with or touch any member of the public in any manner.



   (6)   Noise. A solicitor shall not unreasonably disturb the peace
and quiet of the city and to this end solicitors shall not shout or cry out
their solicitation or use any device or means of amplification to draw
attention to the solicitation.



   (7)   No misrepresentation. A solicitor shall not make any
fraudulent or misleading representations to any person in connection with any
solicitation, including but not limited to any misleading representation
concerning the true name and nature of the soliciting organization, the
purpose for which the soliciting organization was organized and the purposes
for which contributions solicited will be used.



   (8)   No solicitors. No door-to-door solicitations or solicitations
on private property shall be permitted at any time where a "No Solicitors,"
"No Trespassing" or similar notice is posted, except by invitees. A member of
an organization is presumed to be an invitee of other members of that
organization.



   (9)   Requested to leave. No solicitor shall remain on private
property after having been directed to quit the premises by any person
lawfully in possession or control of the premises.



   (10)   Request to cease. If any person being solicited indicates in
any manner a desire that the solicitation cease, the solicitor shall
immediately and peacefully cease the solicitation.



(1978 Code, § 27A-5; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



40-6.  EXEMPTIONS.



   The following are exempt from §§ 40-3 and 40-4 of this chapter:



   (1)   From members. The solicitation for charitable, religious and
political purposes by any organization from its members;



   (2)   On premises. The solicitation of funds for charitable,
religious and political purposes by a person or organization when such
solicitation occurs on premises owned or in lawful possession of the person
or organization soliciting funds or with the permission of the person or
organization who owns or is in lawful possession of the premises;



   (3)   Announcements. The issuance of any announcement or
advertisement that such solicitation as described in subsections (1) and (2)
above will occur or which announces or advertises an event at which
unannounced solicitation as described in subsections (1) and (2) above occurs;



   (4)   Telephone, mail or mass media. Telephone, mail or mass media
solicitations;



   (5)   Solicitations. Solicitations conducted under a license or
registration under state or federal law;



   (6)   Organization. Any organization or person exempt under law from
local regulation.



(1978 Code, § 27A-6; Ord. No. 262-A, § 1, 5-3-88)



CHAPTER 41:  PENSIONS AND RETIREMENT



ARTICLE I:  DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLAN



41-1.  ESTABLISHMENT OF DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLAN.



   There is created and established the City of Sterling Heights
Employee’s Defined Contribution Pension Plan for all individuals employed
by the city who are members of or eligible to become members of the General
Employee’s Retirement System or the Police and Fire Retirement System.



(Ord. No. 322, § 1, 4-15-97 ; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-2.  ADOPTION OF DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PENSION PLAN.



   The provisions of the Defined Contribution Pension Plan shall be
adopted from time to time by the City Council by resolution or as part of a
collective bargaining agreement between the city and the recognized
bargaining units of the employees of the city.



(Ord. No. 322, § 1, 4-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05))



Charter reference:



   Retirement system, see Ch. 19



41-3.  FUNDING OF DEFINED CONTRIBUTION PLAN.



   Upon a member of the General Employee’s Retirement System or the
Police and Fire Retirement System becoming a member of the Defined
Contribution Pension Plan, and within 60 days from the final day of the
period granted to the individual eligible employee to elect to participate in
the Defined Contribution Plan, the value of his or her vested retirement
benefits, as actuarially determined, shall be transferred from the
appropriate plan to the Defined Contribution Pension Plan for the benefit of
the employee.



(Ord. No. 322, § 1, 4-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-4-41-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II:  EMPLOYEES DEFINED BENEFIT RETIREMENT SYSTEM



41-16.  CITATION OF ARTICLE.



   This article may be cited as the "Sterling Heights Retirement System
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 28-16)



41-17.  ESTABLISHED; EFFECTIVE DATE; GOVERNING LAW.



   (A)   There is created and established the City of Sterling Heights
Employees Retirement System.



   (B)   The effective date of the Retirement System is July 1, 1969. 
Any amendments to this article will apply to individuals employed by the city
on and after the effective date of the amendment.  The retirement rights of
an individual whose city employment terminated before the effective date of
any amendment will be governed by the provisions of the retirement system in
effect on the date the individual terminated employment.



   (C)   Governing law.



      (1)   The Plan and Trust shall be construed pursuant to the
laws of the State of Michigan.  The Board shall administer this pension
trust consistent with the trust provisions, Article 9, Section 24 of the
State of Michigan Constitution and other applicable law.  The Board shall
have the fiduciary obligations, limitations, and authority as provided by the
Public Employee Retirement System Investment Act, being Public Act 314 of
1965 (MCL § 38.1132 et seq.), as amended.  The Board shall administer this
pension trust in accordance with applicable collective bargaining agreements.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Plan, any
matter relating to the Plan applicable to current employees represented by a
collective bargaining agent is a mandatory subject of bargaining under the
Public Employment Relations Act (Public Act 336 of 1947), being §§ 
423.201 through 423.216 of the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended.  The
provisions contained in the collective bargaining agreements shall supersede
any conflicting provisions contained in this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 28-17) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Statutory reference:



   Public Employee Retirement System Investment Act, see MCL § 38.1132 et
seq.



   Public Employment Relations Act (PERA), see MCL § 423.201 et seq.



Charter reference:



   Duty of Council with respect to Employees Retirement System, see §§
19.05, 19.06



Cross reference:



   Administrative service, see §§ 2-16 et seq.



41-18.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCUMULATED CONTRIBUTIONS. The sum of all amounts deducted from the
compensations of a member, as provided in this article, the administrative
ordinance, or the applicable labor agreement, credited to his or her
individual account in the  Employee Reserve Fund account, together with
regular interest on that account.



   ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT. The equivalence in the present value of various
forms of payment, as determined by the retirement system’s actuary based on
the mortality table(s) and interest rate(s) established by the Board from
time to time.



   BENEFICIARY. Any person, except a retirant, who is in receipt of or who
is designated to receive a pension or other benefit payable by the Retirement
System.



   BOARD OF TRUSTEES or BOARD. The Board of Trustees provided for in this
article.



   COMPENSATION. All taxable income, subject to applicable labor agreement
restrictions, earned by an employee for personal services rendered by him or
her to the city. The term COMPENSATION shall not include any allowances for
clothing, equipment, travel expense or other similar items.



   CREDITED SERVICE. The service credited a member to the extent provided
in this article.



   EMPLOYEE. Any person in the employ of the city except any person who
holds an elective position in the government of the city.



   FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION. All compensation shall be used in computing
Final Average Compensation in compliance with the applicable union contract
or the administrative ordinance provisions of Chapter 2 of the City Code. 
If there are no applicable provisions then the highest consecutive 36 months
out of the last ten years on a retirement date basis shall be used to compute
Final Average Compensation.



   MEMBER. Any employee who is included in the membership of the Defined
Benefit Retirement System.



   PENSION. A monthly amount payable by the Retirement System throughout
the future life of a person, or for a temporary period, as provided in this
article.



   PENSION RESERVE. The present value of all future payments to be made by
the Retirement System on account of any pension. Such pension reserve shall
be computed upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience
and regular interest as the Board shall from time to time adopt.



   REGULAR INTEREST. The rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded
annually, as the Board shall from time to time adopt.



   RETIREE. Any member who retires with a pension payable by the
Retirement System.



   RETIREMENT. A member’s withdrawal from the employ of the city with a
pension payable by the Retirement System.



   RETIREMENT SYSTEM or SYSTEM or DEFINED BENEFIT RETIREMENT SYSTEM or
PLAN or PLAN AND TRUST. The City of Sterling Heights General Employees
Retirement System created and established by this article.



   SERVICE. Personal service rendered to the city by an employee of the
city.



(1978 Code, § 28-18; Ord. No. 132-D, § 1, 1-3-84; Ord. No. 132-H, § 1,
11-29-88; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-19.  BOARD OF TRUSTEES GENERALLY.



   (A)   There is created a Board of Trustees in which is vested the
power and authority to administer, manage and operate the Retirement System
and to construe and make effective the provisions of this article. The Board
is a quasi-judicial body and shall consist of five trustees, as follows:



      (1)   The Treasurer of the city, to serve by virtue of the
position;



      (2)   The Finance and Budget Director of the city, to serve by
virtue of the position;



      (3)   A citizen, who is an elector of the city, to be
appointed by the Council for a term of three years. If a vacancy occurs in
the office of the citizen trustee, the Council shall fill the vacancy for the
unexpired portion of the term;



      (4)   Two members of the system, who are electors of the city
to be elected by the other members of the system under such rules and
regulations as the Board of Trustees shall adopt to govern the election. Each
such member shall serve for a term of three years, except that in the first
instance, the candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall serve for
two years and the candidate receiving the second highest number of votes
shall serve for one year. If a vacancy occurs in either of these trustee
offices, the members of the system shall elect a qualified person to fill the
vacancy for the unexpired portion of the term. In addition to any other
grounds for vacancy, a vacancy shall be deemed to occur in either of these
trustee offices if the trustee ceases to be an elector of the city or to be a
member of the Retirement System.



   (B)   Three trustees shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of the
Board. Each trustee attending a meeting of the Board shall be entitled to one
vote on each question before the Board. At least three concurring votes shall
be necessary for a decision by the Board.



   (C)   The Board shall hold regular meetings monthly and shall
designate the time and place thereof. All meetings shall comply with the Open
Meetings Act, being MCL § 15.261 et seq.



   (D)   The Board shall adopt its own rules or procedures unless
superseded by city ordinance and shall keep a record of its proceedings.



   (E)   The Treasurer and the Finance and Budget Director, with the
approval of the City Manager, may designate a subordinate employee to serve
in their place during absence and/or disability on the Board of Trustees.



   (F)   The Board shall exercise its fiduciary responsibilities for
the exclusive benefit of the retirement system’s participants and their
beneficiaries and shall exercise the care, skill, and diligence under the
circumstances then prevailing that a prudent person acting in a like capacity
and familiar with such matters would use in the conduct of an enterprise of
like character and similar objectives.



   (G)   The Board shall be held harmless by the city, to the extent
authorized or permitted by law, against any and all liabilities, including
legal fees and expenses, arising out of any act or omission made in good
faith pursuant to the provisions of the Plan, other than a willful failure to
a discharge fiduciary obligation of which a Board member is aware.  There
shall be no indemnification where a Board member is judicially determined to
have incurred liability due to fraud, gross negligence, or malfeasance in the
exercise and performance of the Board member’s duties.



(1978 Code, § 28-19; Ord. No. 132-E, § 1, 3-18-86; Ord. No. 132-F, § 1,
10-7-86; Ord. No. 132-I, § 2, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 132, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-93; Ord.
No. 132-J, §§ 1, 2, 2-16-93; Ord. No. 132-L, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 358, § 1,
12-18-01; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Charter reference:



   Retirement system, see Chapter 19 of the City Charter



Cross reference:



   Boards and commissions generally, see §§ 2-95 et seq.



41-20.  BOARD CHAIRPERSON; SYSTEM OFFICERS AND SERVICES.



   (A)   The Board shall designate from its own number a Chairperson
and Vice-Chairperson.



   (B)   The officers of the Retirement System shall be:



      (1)   The Finance and Budget Director shall be Secretary to
the Board and he or she shall be the administrative officer of the system;



      (2)   The City Treasurer shall be Treasurer of the Retirement
System and he or she shall be the custodian of its assets, except that the
Board may select a custodial bank or trust company to provide custodial
service to the system;



      (3)   The Board may appoint an attorney to serve as legal
advisor to the Board, who shall be licensed to practice law in the State of
Michigan;



      (4)   The Board shall appoint an actuary who is a member of
the American Academy of Actuaries. He or she shall be the technical advisor
to the Board on matters regarding the operation of the Retirement System, and
he or she shall perform such other duties as are required of him or her in
this article.



      (5)   The Board shall appoint a physician or medical firm
licensed to practice medicine in the State of Michigan as medical director. 
The medical director shall arrange for, investigate, and pass upon all
medical examinations, essential statements and certificates of a medical
nature required under this article and shall report any conclusions in
writing to the Board.



   (C)   The attorney, actuary, medical director, and other persons
whose services are necessary for the proper operation of the Board shall be
engaged and compensated in the usual manner applicable to the hiring of such
individuals pursuant to Board policy and procedure, subject to the budgetary
appropriations by the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 28-20; Ord. No. 132, § 3, 2-6-93; Ord. No. 132-J, § 3,
2-16-93; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-21.  RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   The Secretary shall keep, or cause to be kept, such data as
shall be necessary for an actuarial valuation of the assets and liabilities
of the Retirement System.



   (B)   The Board shall annually render a report to the Council
showing the fiscal transactions of the Retirement System for the preceding
fiscal year and shall furnish such additional information regarding the
operation of the system as the Council shall from time to time adopt.



(1978 Code, § 28-21) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-22.  ADOPTION OF EXPERIENCE TABLES AND RATE OF REGULAR INTEREST;
OBTAINING PERIODIC ACTUARIAL COMPUTATIONS.



   The Board shall, from time to time, adopt such mortality and other
tables of experience and a rate or rates of regular interest as are required
for the operation of the Retirement System on an actuarial basis. In
addition, the Board annually, or more frequently, shall obtain actuarial
computations from an enrolled actuary as to the contributions necessary to
fund the benefits provided by the plan on a reasonable basis in accordance
with any applicable regulations, and such actuary shall certify such amounts
to the employer.  Contributions accumulated under the Plan, along with the
earnings thereon, will be distributed in accordance with the terms of the
Plan.



(1978 Code, § 28-22; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 363, § 1,
7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-23.  COMPOSITION OF MEMBERSHIP.



   (A)   The membership of the Retirement System shall include all
employees of the city, and all persons who become employees of the city,
except as provided in subsection (B) of this section.



   (B)   The membership of the Retirement System shall not include:



      (1)   The City Manager;



      (2)   Any person who is employed by the city in a position
normally requiring less than 1,000 hours of work per annum;



      (3)   Any person whose services rendered to the city are
compensated on a contractual or fee basis;



      (4)   Any police officer or firefighter in the employ of the
city who is a member of the City of Sterling Heights Police Officer and
Firefighter Retirement System;



      (5)   Any employee who is a member of the Defined Contribution
Plan; nor



      (6)   Any retiree rehired by the city per the provisions of §
41-30.



   (C)   In any case of doubt as to the Retirement System membership
status of any person, the Board shall decide the question.



(1978 Code, § 28-23; Ord. No. 132-L, § 2, 3-2-99; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-24.  TERMINATION OF MEMBERSHIP.



   Upon election to join and transfer of the value of a member’s vested
retirement benefits to the City of Sterling Heights Employees Defined
Contribution Pension Plan as provided in Article I of this chapter, the
employee as well as any beneficiaries shall cease to be a member of the
Retirement System and shall relinquish all rights to any benefits from the
Retirement System and to any claim to accumulated contributions.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, should any member cease
to be employed in a position covered by the Retirement System for any reason,
he or she shall thereupon cease to be a member and his or her nonvested
credited service in force at that time shall be forfeited by him or her. In
the event he or she is reemployed by the city in a position covered by the
system, he or she shall again become a member. If he or she is so reemployed,
his or her credited service last forfeited by him or her shall be restored to
his or her credit; provided, that:



      (a)   He or she returns to the Employee Reserve Fund account
the amount, if any, he or she withdrew therefrom, together with regular
interest from the date of withdrawal to the date of repayment; and



      (b)   He or she acquires at least two years of credited
service for service rendered by him or her from and after the date he or she
is last reemployed by the city.



   Upon a member’s retirement or death, he or she shall thereupon cease
to be a member.



(1978 Code, § 28-24; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 132-L, § 3,
3-2-99; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-25.  SERVICE CREDIT.



   The Board shall determine, by appropriate rules and regulations, the
amount of service to be credited any member. In no case shall less than ten
calendar days of service rendered by him or her  be credited as a month of
service, nor shall more than one year of service be credited any member for
all service rendered by him or her in any calendar year. Based upon such
rules and regulations adopted by the Board and the provisions of this
article, the Board shall credit each member with the number of years and
months of service to which he or she is entitled.



(1978 Code, § 28-25; Ord. No. 132, § 4, 2-6-93; Ord. No. 132-J, § 4,
2-16-93; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-26.  MILITARY SERVICE.



   Any person who, while employed by the city in a position covered by the
Retirement System, entered or enters any armed service of the United States
Government shall not have such armed service credited him as city service.
During the period of such armed service and until his or her return to the
employ of the city, his or her contributions to the system shall be suspended
and his or her balance, if any, in the Employee Reserve Fund account shall be
accumulated at regular interest.  Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan
to the contrary, contributions, benefits and service credit with respect to
qualified military service will be provided in accordance with IRC § 414(u)
and regulations thereunder.



(1978 Code, § 28-26; Ord. No. 363, § 2, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-27.  VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT.



   Subject to the provisions of the applicable labor agreement, any member
who has attained age 60 years and has ten or more years of credited service
may retire upon his or her written application filed with the Board setting
forth at what date, not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days subsequent to
the execution and filing thereof, he or she desires to be retired. The Board,
with the approval of the City Manager, may waive such 30 to 90 day
requirement for the filing of the pension application. Upon his or her
retirement, he or she shall receive a pension as provided in § 41-31.



(1978 Code, § 28-27; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



Charter reference:



   Age and years requirement, see § 19.06(B)



41-28.  VESTING.



   In accordance with IRC § 411(e), applicable to plans meeting the
vesting requirements in effect on September 1, 1974, a member shall be 100%
vested in his/her accrued benefit when he/she attains normal retirement age.



(Ord. No. 363, § 3, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-29.  DEFERRED RETIREMENT.



   If a member with ten or more years of credited service leaves the
employ of the city for any reason except his or her retirement or death, he
or she shall be entitled to a pension to be calculated in accordance with the
terms and conditions of this article in effect at the time of his or her
separation from employment. His  or her pension shall begin the first day of
the calendar month which is at least 30 days following the date his or her
written application for same is filed with the Board on or after his or her
attainment of age 60 years. If he or she withdraws his or her accumulated
contributions from the Employee Reserve Fund account, he or she shall
thereupon forfeit his or her right to a deferred pension as provided in this
section. He or she shall not be given service credit for the period of his or
her absence from city employment, unless otherwise provided in this article.
Until his or her pension begins, his or her balance in the Employee Reserve
Fund account shall be accumulated at regular interest.



(1978 Code, § 28-29; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-30.  REEMPLOYMENT AFTER RETIREMENT.



   (A)   Upon approval of the City Council, retirees may be reemployed
by the city in a temporary, part-time position for no more than 1,000 hours
per annum and during such reemployment pension payment shall not be
suspended. During the period of his or her temporary reemployment:



      (1)   He or she shall not be a member of the Retirement System;



      (2)   He or she shall not make contributions to the system; and



      (3)   He or she shall not be given credit for service rendered
by him or her while he or she is so employed.



   (B)   Except for temporary part-time employment, if a retirees is
reemployed by the city, payment of his or her pension shall be suspended
during the period of his or her reemployment. Upon termination of his or her
reemployment, payment of his or her pension shall be resumed without change.
During the period of his or her reemployment:



      (1)   He or she shall not be a member of the Retirement System;



      (2)   He or she shall not make contributions to the system; and



      (3)   He or she shall not be given credit for service rendered
by him or her while he or she is so reemployed.



   (C)   The application of this section may be superseded or suspended
by the terms and conditions of a collective bargaining agreement negotiated
between the city and bargaining units representing its employees or as
expressly specified otherwise in the city code.



(1978 Code, § 28-30; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05; Ord. No. 428, § 3, 6-18-13)



41-31.  STRAIGHT LIFE PENSION.



   Upon a member’s retirement, as provided in the applicable labor
agreement or this article, he or she shall receive a straight life pension
equal to the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his or her credited
service multiplied by 2% of his or her final average compensation, unless
otherwise provided in a collective bargaining agreement covering such member.
His or her straight life pension shall be subject to § 41-38. Prior to the
date of his or her retirement, he or she may elect to receive his or her
pension under an option provided in § 41-33 in lieu of a straight life
pension.



(1978 Code, § 28-31) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-32.  RESERVED.



41-33.  PENSION OPTIONS.



   (A)   Before the date of his or her retirement, but not thereafter,
a member may elect to receive his or her pension as a straight life pension
payable throughout his or her life or he or she may elect to receive the
actuarial equivalent, computed as of the date of his or her retirement of his
or her straight life pension in a reduced pension payable throughout his or
her life and nominate a beneficiary in accordance with the provisions of
Option A, B or C set forth below.



      (1)   Option A-100% survivor pension. Under Option A, upon the
death of a retiree, his or her reduced pension shall be continued throughout
the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest in his or
her life, as he or she shall have nominated by written designation duly
executed and filed with the Board prior to the date of his or her retirement.



      (2)    Option B-50% survivor pension. Under Option B, upon the
death of a retiree, one-half of his or her reduced pension shall be continued
throughout the life of and paid to such person, having an insurable interest
in his or her life, as he or she shall have nominated by written designation
duly executed and filed with the Board prior to the date of his or her
retirement.



      (3)   Option C-10 years certain and life thereafter. Under
Option C, a retiree shall receive a reduced pension payable throughout his or
her life with the provision that if he or she dies before he or she has been
paid 120 monthly pension payments, the payments shall be continued for the
remainder of the period of 120 months to such person or persons, in equal
shares, as the retiree shall have nominated by written designation duly
executed and filed with the Board. If there be no such designated person
surviving the retiree, the remaining monthly payments shall be continued and
paid to the estate of the survivor of the retiree and his or her last
surviving beneficiary.



   (B)   In the event a retiree, who elected Option A or B provided in
subsection (A) of this section, and his or her beneficiary both die before
they have received in pension payments a total amount equal to the
accumulated contributions standing to the retiree’s credit in the Employee
Reserve Fund account at the time of his or her retirement, the difference
between his or her accumulated contributions and the total amount of pension
payments received by them shall be paid to the estate of the survivor of the
retiree and his or her beneficiary.



   (C)   Withdrawal option.  Before the effective date of the
member’s retirement, a member may irrevocably elect to withdraw the
accumulated contributions in the Employee Reserve Fund account upon
retirement with interest, forfeiting any further claim under § 41-33(B) or
§ 41-41(C) and forfeiting that portion of the monthly pension and
survivor’s benefits payable from the member’s accumulated contributions
as determined on an actuarial basis.  Payment shall be made to the member
within the 120 days after the effective date of retirement.



(1978 Code, § 28-33) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-34.  DEATH IN SERVICE PENSIONS.



   (A)   Any member who continues in the employ of the city after the
date he or she either acquires 20 years of credited service or attains age 60
years and acquires ten or more years of credited service may, prior to the
date of his or her retirement, elect Option A provided in § 41-33(A)(1) and
nominate his or her spouse as a beneficiary or nominate a beneficiary whom
the Board finds to be dependent upon the member for at least 50% of his or
her support due to lack of financial means. Prior to the date of his or her
retirement, a member may revoke his or her election of Option A and
nomination of beneficiary and he or she may again, prior to the date of his
or her retirement, elect Option A and nominate a beneficiary as provided in
this subsection. Upon the death of a member, who has an Option A election in
force, his or her beneficiary, if living, shall immediately receive a pension
under Option A which is the actuarial equivalent of a pension computed
according to § 41-33. The pension shall be computed in the same manner as if
the member had retired the day preceding the date of his or her death,
notwithstanding that he or she might not have attained age 60 years and shall
be subject to § 41-38.



   (B)   If a member, who either has 20 or more years of credited
service or has attained age 60 years and has ten or more years of credited
service, and in either case does not have an Option A election in force as
provided in subsection (A) of this section, dies while in the employ of the
city, the following applicable pensions shall be paid:



      (1)   If the deceased member leaves a spouse, the spouse shall
receive a pension equal to 75% of the pension, computed according to §
41-31, earned by the member to the date of his or her death. The percent
shall be reduced by one for each full year in excess of five years the spouse
is younger than the member. The percent so reduced shall not be less than
50%. The pension shall terminate upon the spouse’s remarriage or death and
shall be subject to subsection (C) of this section and to § 41-38;



      (2)   If the deceased member does not leave a spouse, or if
the spouse dies or remarries subsequent to the member’s death, and the
member leaves his or her unmarried child or children under age 21 years, each
such child shall receive a pension of an equal share of 50% of the pension,
computed according to § 41-31, earned by the member to the date of his or
her death. A child’s pension shall terminate upon his or her adoption,
marriage, attainment of age 21 years or death, whichever occurs first. Upon
termination of a child’s pension, it shall be divided into equal shares and
added to the pensions being paid the deceased member’s surviving eligible
children, if any. Any pension payable under this paragraph shall be subject
to subsection (C) of this section and to § 41-38.



   (C)   If, upon termination of all pension payments payable under
this section on account of the death of a member, the total amount of the
pension payments made is less than the member’s accumulated contributions
standing to his or her credit in the Employee Reserve Fund account at the
time of his or her death, the difference between his or her accumulated
contributions and the total amount of pension payments made shall be paid to
the estate of the member’s last surviving beneficiary. No pension shall be
paid under this section if any benefit is payable or will become payable
under any other provision of this article on account of the member’s death.



(1978 Code, § 28-34; Ord. No. 132-I, § 4, 3-7-89; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-35.  DEATH IN LINE OF DUTY PENSIONS.



   If a member dies as the result of illness contracted or injuries
received arising out of and in the course of his or her city employment, and
his or her death or illness or injuries resulting in death be found by the
Board to have been the natural and proximate result of his or her actual
performance of duty in the employ of the city, the following applicable
pensions shall be paid, provided worker’s compensation is granted on
account of the member’s death:



   (1)   If the deceased member leaves a spouse, the spouse shall
receive a pension equal to 75% of the member’s pension computed according
to § 41-31 or, if the decreased member has elected Option A under § 41-33,
then the spouse shall be paid a pension calculated according to that
election, whichever is higher. The 75% shall be reduced by 1% for each full
year in excess of five years the spouse is younger than the member. If the
member’s death occurs prior to his or her attainment of age 60 years, the
service credit used in computing his or her pension shall be the sum of his
or her credited service in force at the time of his or her death, plus the
number of years, and fraction of a year, in the period from the date of his
or her death to the date he or she would attain age 60 years. A spouse’s
pension shall not be less than 15% of the member’s final average
compensation, shall terminate upon the spouse’s remarriage or death and
shall be subject to § 41-38.



   (2)   If the deceased member does not leave a spouse, or if the
spouse dies or remarries subsequent to the member’s death, and the member
leaves his or her unmarried child or children under age 21 years, each such
child shall receive a pension of an equal share of 50% of the member’s
pension, computed according to § 41-31. If the member’s death occurs prior
to his or her attainment of age 60 years, the service credit used in
computing his or her pension shall be the sum of his or her credited service
in force at the time of his or her death, plus the number of years, and
fraction of a year, in the period from the date of his or her death to the
date he or she would attain age 60 years. A child’s pension shall terminate
upon his or her adoption, marriage, attainment of age 21 years or death,
whichever occurs first. Upon termination of a child’s pension, it shall be
divided into equal shares and added to the pensions being paid the deceased
member’s surviving eligible children if any. A child’s pension shall not
be less than 10% of the member’s final average compensation and shall be
subject to § 41-38.



(1978 Code, § 28-35)



41-36.  DISABILITY RETIREMENT.



   (A)   Upon the application of a member or his or her department
head, a member who is in the employ of the city, has ten or more years of
credited service and becomes totally and permanently disabled for duty in the
employ of the city may be retired by the Board; provided that, after medical
examinations of the member made by or under the direction of a medical
committee, consisting of the Board’s Medical Director or its designee, a
physician named by the member and a third physician designated by the first
two physicians named, the medical committee, by a majority opinion, certifies
to the Board, in writing, (1) that the member is mentally or physically
totally disabled for duty in the employ of the



city and (2) that such disability will probably be permanent and (3) that the
member should be retired. Upon his or her retirement, he or she shall receive
the applicable pension provided in § 41-37.



   (B)   If a member has less than ten years of credited service, the
service requirement contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be
waived if the Board finds that his or her total and permanent disability is
the natural and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising
solely and exclusively out of and in the course of his or her actual
performance of duty in the employ of the city and that he or she is granted
worker’s compensation on account of his or her disability incurred as a
result of his or her city employment.



(1978 Code, § 28-36; Ord. No. 132-G, § 1, 12-21-87; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-37.  DISABILITY PENSIONS.



   (A)   Non-duty disability. Upon a member’s retirement on account
of disability, as provided in § 41-36, he or she shall receive a pension
computed according to § 41-31. Prior to the date of his or her retirement,
he or she may elect to receive his or her pension under an option provided in
§ 41-33 in lieu of a straight life pension. His or her disability pension
shall be subject to § 41-38.



   (B)   Duty disability.  If the member’s retirement on account of
disability, as provided in § 41-36, occurs prior to his or her attainment of
age 60 years, and the Board finds that his or her disability is the natural
and proximate result of a personal injury or disease arising out of and in
the course of his or her city employment and that he or she is in receipt of
worker’s compensation benefits on account of his or her disability, the
service credit used in computing his or her pension provided in subsection
(A) of this section shall be the sum of his or her credited service in force
at the time of his or her retirement, plus the number of years, and fraction
of a year, in the period from the date of his or her retirement to the date
he or she would attain age 60 years. His or her disability pension shall be
subject to § 41-38. For purposes hereof, a member who receives or who is in
receipt of a lump sum settlement or redemption of a worker’s compensation
claim shall not be deemed in receipt of worker’s compensation benefits for
purposes of eligibility for a duty disability pension, unless both the city
and the member as part of the settlement or redemption agreement acknowledge
in writing that the disability is the natural and proximate result of a
personal injury or disease arising out of and in the course of city
employment. Any member who redeems his or her worker’s compensation
benefits or obtains a lump sum payment subsequent to the award of worker’s
compensation benefits shall not be subject to the foregoing limitation.



(1978 Code, § 28-37; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-38.  PENSION MAXIMUM LIMIT.



   The total of the pensions payable under any provision of this article
on account of a member’s retirement or death shall not exceed 70% of the
member’s final average compensation, nor shall it exceed the difference
between 70% of final average compensation and the sum of the monthly
equivalent of any worker’s compensation payable on account of the
member’s city employment and any other benefit program, except social
security, financed in whole or in part by the city. If computation of a
member’s pension under § 41-31 would result in a pension in excess of 70%
of the member’s final average compensation, then and in that event only,
beginning the July 1 after the expiration of 12 months following the
beginning date of the pension and annually thereafter, the member’s final
average salary used to determine the maximum pension limit shall be increased
by 2% of the member’s initial final average compensation until the
member’s pension equates to that which he or she would have received using
the compensation in § 41-31 without a limitation of 70% of the member’s
initial final average compensation.



(1978 Code, § 28-38; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-39.  CONDITIONS FOR DISABILITY RETIREE.



   (A)   At least once each year during the first five years following
a member’s retirement on account of disability, and at least once in every
three year period thereafter, the Board may require a disability retiree, who
has not attained age 60 years, to undergo a medical examination to be made by
or under the direction of the Medical Director designated by the Board. If a
disability retiree refuses to submit to such medical examination in any such
period, his or her pension may be suspended by the Board until his or her
withdrawal of such refusal. Should such refusal continue for one year, his or
her pension may be revoked by the Board. If upon such medical examination of
a disability retiree the Medical Director reports to the Board that the
retiree is physically able and capable of resuming employment in a position
commensurate with his or her type of work at the time of his or her
retirement, his or her pension shall terminate, provided the report of the
Medical Director is concurred in by the Board.



   (B)   A disability retiree who returns to city employment, as
provided in subsection (A) of this section, shall again become a member of
the Retirement System. His or her credited service in force at the time of
his or her retirement shall be restored to full force and effect. He  or she
shall be given service credit for the period he or she was in receipt of a
disability pension provided for in § 41-37(B). He or she shall not be given
service credit for the period he or she was in receipt of a pension provided
for in § 41-37(A).



   (C)   In the event a disability retiree, who has not attained age 60
years, becomes engaged in a gainful occupation, business or employment,
paying him or her more than the difference between his or her annual rate of
compensation at the time of his or her retirement and his or her disability
pension converted to an annual amount, plus his or her worker’s
compensation benefits, his or her pension shall be reduced to an amount which
together with the amount so earned by him or her, plus his or her worker’s
compensation benefits, shall equal but not exceed such annual rate of
compensation. Beginning the July 1 after the expiration of 12 months
following the beginning date of his or her pension and annually thereafter,
his or her annual rate of compensation used to determine his or her pension
reduction shall be increased by 2% of his or her annual rate of compensation
at the time of his or her retirement.



(1978 Code, § 28-39; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-40.  EMPLOYEE RESERVE FUND ACCOUNT; MEMBERS’ CONTRIBUTIONS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Effective July 1, 1970, the Employee Reserve Fund account is
created. It shall be the financial statement account in which shall be
accumulated, at regular interest, the contributions deducted from the
compensation of members and from which shall be made refunds and transfers of
accumulated contributions as provided in this article.



   (B)   Unless otherwise provided in the applicable labor contract, a
A member’s contributions to the Retirement System shall be 5% of his or her
annual compensation. The officer or officers responsible for preparing the
payroll shall cause the contribution to be deducted from the compensation of
each member on each and every payroll, for each and every payroll period, so
long as he or she remains a member. Each of such amounts, when deducted,
shall be paid to the system and shall be credited to the Employee Reserve
Fund account of the member from whose compensation such deduction was made.
The member’s contributions provided herein shall be made notwithstanding
that the minimum compensation provided by law for any member shall be thereby
changed. Every member shall be deemed to consent and agree to the deductions
made and provided for herein. Payment of his or her compensation, less such
deduction, shall be a full and complete discharge and acquittance of all
claims and demands whatsoever for services rendered by him or her during the
period covered by such payment, except as to benefits provided by the system.



   (C)   In addition to the contributions deducted from the
compensation of a member, as hereinbefore provided, he or she shall return to
the Employee Reserve Fund account, by a single payment or by an increased
rate of contribution as approved by the Board, the amount, if any, he or she
withdrew therefrom, together with regular interest from the date of
withdrawal to the date of repayment. In no case shall any member be given
credit for service rendered prior to the date he or she withdrew his or her
accumulated contributions, until he or she returns to the Employee Reserve
Fund account all amounts due the fund by him or her.



   (D)   Upon the retirement of a member, or if a pension becomes
payable by the Retirement System on account of his or her death, his or her
accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the Employee
Reserve Fund account shall be transferred to the Retirement Reserve Fund
account. At the expiration of a period of four years from and after the date
an employee ceases to be a member, without entitlement to a deferred pension
provided for in § 41-29, any balance of accumulated contributions standing
to his or her credit in the Employee Reserve Fund account, unclaimed by the
member or his or her legal representative, shall be transferred to the Income
Reserve Fund account.



(1978 Code, § 28-40) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-41.  REFUND OF MEMBER’S CONTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Should any member leave the employ of the city for any reason,
except his or her retirement or death, before he or she has satisfied the age
and service requirements for retirement provided in § 41-27or the applicable
labor agreement, he or she shall be paid his or her accumulated contributions
standing to his or her credit in the Employee Reserve Fund account upon his
or her written request to the Board.



   (B)   Upon the death of a member, if no pension is payable or will
become payable by the Retirement System on account of his or her death, his
or her accumulated contributions standing to his or her credit in the
Employee Reserve Fund account at the time of his or her death shall be paid
to such person or persons as he or she shall have nominated by written
designation duly executed and filed with the Board. If there be no such
designated person surviving the member, or if he or she did not designate a
beneficiary, his or her accumulated contribution shall be paid to his or her
estate.



   (C)   Upon the death of a retiree before he or she has received in
pension benefit payments an aggregate amount equal to his or her accumulated
contributions standing to their credit in the Employee Reserve Fund account
at the time of their retirement, the difference between the accumulated
contributions and the aggregate amount of pension benefit payments received
by the retiree shall be paid to such person or persons as they shall have
nominated by written designation duly executed and filed with the Board.  If
no designated person survives the retiree, such difference, if any, shall be
paid to the retiree’s estate.  In no case shall any benefits be paid under
this section due to the death of a retiree, if they were receiving their
pension benefits under an option provided in § 41-33.



   (D)   Payment of accumulated contributions, as provided in this
section, may be made in installments, according to such rules and regulations
as the Board shall from time to time adopt.



(1978 Code, § 28-41; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-42.  EMPLOYER RESERVE ACCOUNT.



   (A)   The Employer Reserve account is created. It shall be the
account in which shall be accumulated the contributions made by the city to
the Retirement System and from which shall be made transfers as provided in
this section.



   (B)   Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of
experience and regular interest, as the Board shall from time to time adopt,
the actuary shall annually compute the pension reserves for service rendered
and to be rendered by members and the pension reserves for pensions being
paid retirees and beneficiaries. The pension reserve liabilities so
determined shall be financed by annual city contributions appropriated by the
Council and the contributions to be determined as provided below.



      (1)   The annual appropriation for members’ current service
shall be a percent of their annual compensation which will produce an amount
which, if paid annually by the city for the periods of their future service,
will be sufficient to provide, at the time of their retirement, the city
financed portions of the pension reserves for the pensions to be paid them
based upon their future service.



      (2)   The annual appropriations for members’ accrued service
shall be a percent of their annual compensation which will provide an amount
which, if paid annually by the city over a period of years, to be determined
by the Board, will amortize at regular interest the unfunded pension reserves
for the accrued service portions of the pensions to be paid them.



      (3)   The annual appropriation for pensions being paid 
retirees and beneficiaries shall be a percent of the annual compensation of
members which will produce an amount which, if paid annually by the city over
a period of years, to be determined by the Board, will amortize at regular
interest the unfunded pension reserves, if any, for pensions being paid 
retirees and beneficiaries.



   (C)   The difference between the pension reserve for a pension
payable by the Retirement System and a member’s accumulated contributions
standing to his or her credit in the  Employee Reserve Fund account shall be
transferred from the Employer Reserve  account to the Retirement Reserve 
account upon the retirement or death of a member.



(1978 Code, § 28-42; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-43.  RETIREMENT RESERVE ACCOUNT.



   The Retirement Reserve Account is created. It shall be the fund from
which shall be paid all pensions as provided in this article. If a disability
retiree returns to the employ of the city, his or her pension reserve, as of
the date of his or her return, shall be transferred from the Retirement
Reserve Fund to the Employee Reserve Fund account and Employer Reserve 
account in the same proportion as the pension reserve was originally
transferred to the  Employee Reserve Fund account and Employer Reserve 
account. The portion of his or her pension reserve transferred to the 
Employee Reserve Fund account shall be credited to his or her individual
account therein.



(1978 Code, § 28-43; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-44.  RESERVE ACCOUNT



   The Income Reserve account is created. It shall be the account to which
shall be credited all interest, dividends and other income from investments
of the Retirement System; all transfers from the Employee Reserve Fund
account by reason of lack of claimant; and all other monies received by the
system, the disposition of which is not specifically provided for in this
article. The Board may accept gifts and bequests and the same shall be
credited to the Income Reserve account. There shall be transferred from the
Income Reserve account to the  Employee Reserve Fund account, Employer
Reserve  account and Retirement Reserve account, the amounts required to
credit regular interest of the respective funds. Whenever the Board
determines that the balance of the Income Reserve account is more than
sufficient to cover the current charges to the account, such excess may be
used to provide contingency reserves or may be used to cover special needs of
the other accounts of the system, as the Board shall determine. If the
balance in the Income Reserve account is insufficient to meet the charges to
the account, the amount of such insufficiency shall be transferred to the
income account from the Employer Reserve  account. A member’s accumulated
contributions which were transferred to the Income Reserve account may be
returned upon a valid claim approved by the Board.



(1978 Code, § 28-44; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-45.  OTHER FUNDS.



   The Board may from time to time create such other  accounts, in
addition to the Employee Reserve Fund account, Employer Reserve  account,
Income Reserve account and Retirement Reserve  account as it deems necessary
for the proper operation of the Retirement System.



(1978 Code, § 28-45) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-46.  ALLOWANCE OF REGULAR INTEREST ON FUNDS.



   At the end of each fiscal year, the Board shall allow and credit
regular interest to each member’s individual account in the Employee
Reserve Fund account. The interest shall be computed upon the mean balances
in the accounts during the year. The interest so allowed and credited shall
be transferred from the Income Reserve accounts.



(1978 Code, § 28-46; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1, 7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1,
8-2-05)



41-47.  INVESTMENT OF ASSETS.



   The Board shall be the trustee of the assets of the Retirement System
and shall have full power to invest and reinvest such assets in accordance
with the provisions of Public Act 314 of 1965  MCL §§ 38.1132 et seq.), as
amended, and as it might from time to time be amended or superseded. The
Board shall have full power to hold, purchase, sell, assign, transfer and
dispose of any securities and investments of the system, as well as the
proceeds of such investments and any monies belonging to the system.



(1978 Code, § 28-47) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-48.  ASSETS NOT SEGREGATED.



   The Employee Reserve Fund account, Employer Reserve account, Retirement
Reserve  account and any other  accounts created by the Board shall be
interpreted to refer to the accounting records of the Retirement System and
not to the actual segregation of the assets of the system in the said 
accounts.



(1978 Code, § 28-48) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-49.  PROHIBITION AGAINST REVERSION; LIMITATION ON NON-INTEREST BEWARING
FORM.



   (A)   The Retirement System and trust have been created for the
exclusive benefit of the members and beneficiaries as set forth herein.  The
funds thereof have been established for the benefit of the members and for
the operation of the Retirement System.  No part of the principal and income
of any of the funds of the System and trust shall revert to or be returned to
the city prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities hereunder to all
members, beneficiaries and anyone claiming by or through them.



   (B)   Available cash in a non-interest bearing form shall not exceed
5% of the total assets of the System.



(1978 Code, § 28-49; Ord. No. 363, § 4, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-50.  METHOD OF MAKING PAYMENTS.



   All payments from  monies of the Retirement System shall be made only
upon written authority of two persons designated by the Board. A duly
attested copy of a resolution designating such persons shall be filed with
the custodial bank/paying agent used by the Board. No such written authority
to make payments from monies of the system shall be executed unless such
payment or payments shall have been previously authorized by a specific or
continuing motion or resolution adopted by the Board.



(1978 Code, § 28-50) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-51.  CITY’S RIGHT OF SUBROGATION AGAINST THIRD PARTIES.



   In the event a person becomes entitled to a pension or other benefit
payable by the Retirement System as the result of an accident or injury
caused by the act of a third party, the city shall be subrogated to the
rights of the said person against such third party to the extent of the
Retirement System benefits which the city pays or becomes liable to pay.



(1978 Code, § 28-51) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-52.  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no trustee and no
employee of the city shall have any interest, direct or indirect, in the
gains or profits arising from any investments made by the Board. No person,
directly or indirectly, for himself, herself or as an agent or partner of
others, shall borrow any  monies of the Retirement System nor shall he or
she in any manner use the same, except to make payments authorized by the
Board. No person shall become an endorser or surety or become in any manner
an obligor for moneys loaned by or borrowed from the system. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to impair the rights of any
member, retiree or beneficiary of the system to benefits provided by the
system.



(1978 Code, § 28-52)  (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-53.  RIGHTS AND FUNDS NOT SUBJECT TO LEGAL PROCESS OR ASSIGNMENT;
CITY’S RIGHT OF SETOFF; DEDUCTION OF INSURANCE PREMIUMS FROM PENSION.



   (A)   The right of a person to a pension, to the return of
accumulated contributions,  any pension option, and any other right accrued
or accruing to any member,  retiree or beneficiary, under the provisions of
this article, and all  monies belonging to the Retirement System, shall not
be subject to execution, garnishment, attachment, the operation or bankruptcy
or insolvency law or any other process of law whatsoever and shall be
unassignable, except as specifically provided in this article and in
accordance with Public Act 100 of 2002, as amended, being MCL § 38.1681 et
seq. and Public Act 350 of 1994, as amended being MCL § 38.2701 et seq.. The
city shall have the right of setoff for any claim arising from embezzlement
by or fraud of a member,  retiree or beneficiary.



   (B)   The right of a member or  retiree to a retirement allowance,
deferred retirement allowance, accumulated contributions or other benefit
under this article shall be subject to award by a court pursuant to  MCL §
552.18, and to any other order of a court pertaining to child support.



   (C)   If an award or order described in subsection (B) of this
section requires the Retirement System to withhold payment of a retirement
allowance, deferred retirement allowance, accumulated contributions or other
benefit from the person to whom it is due or requires the Retirement System
to make payment or requires the person to request that the Retirement System
make payment of a retirement allowance, deferred retirement allowance,
accumulated contributions or other benefit for the purpose of meeting the
person’s obligation to a spouse, former spouse or child, as provided in
subsection (B) of this section, the withholding or payment provisions of the
award or order shall be effective only against such amounts as they become
payable to the person receiving a retirement allowance.



   (D)   If a member is covered by a group insurance or prepayment plan
participated in by the city, and should he or she be permitted to and elect
to continue such coverage as a retiree, he or she may authorize the Board to
have deducted from his or her pension the payments required of him or her to
continue coverage under such group insurance or prepayment plan.



(1978 Code, § 28-53) (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-54.  CORRECTION OF ERRORS.



   (A)   Should any change or error in the records of the city or the
Retirement System result in any person receiving from the system more or less
than he or she would have been entitled to receive had the records been
correct, the Board shall correct such error and, as far as is practicable,
shall adjust the payment of the benefit in such manner that the actuarial
equivalent of the benefit to which such person was correctly entitled shall
be paid.  In the event that a person receives funds to which he or she was
no longer entitled due to a change of status (such as remarriage) or other
error, such person shall be liable to and shall repay the Retirement System
for the full amount of the overpayment.



   (B)   Fraud penalty.  Whoever with the intent to deceive shall make
any statement or report under this Plan which is untrue, or shall falsify or
permit to be falsified any record or records of the Plan, or who shall
otherwise violate the provisions of this Plan as it may from time to time be
amended, with intent to deceive, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable
as prescribed in Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances, and shall be
responsible reimbursement of any amounts overpaid by the System, and for the
costs of investigation and prosecution, such costs to be repaid to the city
and the Retirement System in such proportions as reflect the proportionate
costs to the city and the System to investigate and prosecute such fraud.



(1978 Code, § 28-54)  (Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-55.  NONUNION EMPLOYEE RETIREMENT BENEFITS.



   For purposes of determining member contributions and retirement
benefits only of members not subject to a collective bargaining agreement:



   (1)   COMPENSATION means the taxable income paid to the member for
personal services rendered by the member to the city. COMPENSATION shall not
include any allowance for clothing, equipment, travel expense or other
similar items.



   (2)   FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION means the monthly average of the
compensation paid to the member during the three one-year periods which
produce the highest average contained within the member’s last ten years of
credited service. If the member has less than three one-year periods of
credited service, then the member’s FINAL AVERAGE COMPENSATION shall be the
monthly average of the member’s compensation for the member’s total
period of service.



   (3)   Withdrawal option. Before the effective date of the member’s
retirement, a member may irrevocably elect to withdraw the accumulated
contributions in the Employee Reserve Fund account upon retirement with
interest of 2% per year, forfeiting any further claim under § 41-32 or §
41-33(B) and forfeiting that portion of the monthly pension and survivor’s
benefits payable from the member’s accumulated contributions as determined
on an actuarial basis. Payment shall be made to the member within the 120
days after the effective date of retirement.



(1978 Code, § 28-55; Ord. No. 132-H, § 3, 11-29-88; Ord. No. 132-K, § 1,
7-15-97; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-56.  INTERNAL REVENUE CODE QUALIFICATIONS.



   The Retirement System is intended and has been. administered to be a
qualified pension plan under § 401 of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended
("IRC" or "Code"), or successor provisions of law, including the Tax Reform
Act of 1986 (TRA'86); the Technical and Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988
(TAMRA); the Unemployment Compensation Amendments of 1992 (UCA); the
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (COBRA); the Uniformed
Service Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA); the Uruguay
Round Agreements Act of 1994 (GATT); the Small Business Job Protection Act of
1996 (SBJPA '96); the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 (TRA '97); the Internal
Revenue Service Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (RRA '98); the Economic
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001 (EGTRRA), and other
applicable laws, regulations and administrative authority.  The Retirement
System is a governmental plan under IRC § 414(d) and is administered for the
exclusive benefit of the Plan's members and their beneficiaries.  The
Retirement System trust is an exempt organization under IRC § 501. The Board
of Trustees may adopt such additional provisions to the Retirement System as
are necessary to fulfill this intent.



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-57.  LIMITATIONS ON BENEFITS AND CONTRIBUTIONS.



   The amount of annual benefits and contributions credited a member in
any given year shall be subject to the following limitations:



   (A)   Defined Benefit Plans.



      (1)   The maximum permissible annual pension benefit with
respect to any member shall be in accordance with IRC § 415(b) which
provides that such annual pension benefit shall not exceed $90,000, as
adjusted for inflation (the "Dollar Limit").



      (2)   Special Dollar Limitations. If the benefit is payable
prior to age 62, the Dollar Limit shall be reduced to the actuarial
equivalent of a benefit commencing at age 62. If the benefit is not payable
until after age 65, the Dollar Limit shall be increased to the actuarial
equivalent of a benefit commencing at age 65.



      (3)   In the case of a member who has less than ten  years of
participation in the Plan, the Dollar Limitation shall be reduced 1/10 for
each year of participation in accordance with IRC § 415(b)(5).



   (B)   Defined Contribution Plans.



      (1)   For limitation years beginning after December 31, 1986,
ANNUAL ADDITION means, for purposes of this section, the sum, credited to a
member's account for any limitation year, of:



         (a)   Employer contributions;



         (b)   Member contributions; and



         (c)   Forfeitures.



      (2)   Annual additions that may be contributed or allocated to
a member's account for a limitation year will not exceed the lesser of:



         (a)   100% percent of member's compensation, within the
meaning of IRC § 415(c)(3), or



         (b)   $40,000, as adjusted for increases in the cost of
living pursuant to IRC § 415(d).



      (3)   Valuation of Investments. Investments of the Plan shall
be valued as of the last day of each Plan year in accordance with the methods
consistently followed and uniformly applied to determine fair market value
and in accordance with the requirements of Revenue Ruling 80-155.
Contributions to the Plan, along with earnings thereon, shall be distributed
in accordance with the terms of the Plan.



   (C)   Excess Benefit Payment.  The Retirement System shall not pay
any benefit that would exceed the benefit limitations for governmental plans
as set forth in IRC § 415 and regulations, as amended.



   (D)   Compensation.  As defined by IRC § 415(c)(3)(D) and Treas.
Reg. § 1.415-2(d)(2)(i), com-pensation means amounts actually paid to the
member during the Limitation Year, including: wages, salary, professional
fees, percentage of profits, commissions, tips and bonuses paid or made
available to the member during the Limitation Year for personal services
actually rendered in the course of employment, any elective deferral, and any
amount which is contributed or deferred by the employer at the election of
the member and which is not includible in the gross income of the member by
reason of IRC §§ 125, 132(f), or 457.



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-58  DISTRIBUTIONS.



   (A)   Distributions from the Plan shall comply with the requirements
of IRC § 401(a)(9) and the regulations thereunder. A member's interest in
the trust must begin to be distributed by the later of (i) April 1 of the
calendar year following the calendar year that the member attains the age of
70½, or (ii) April 1 of the calendar year the member retires. With respect
to distributions under the Plan made for calendar years beginning on or after
January 1, 2001, the Plan will apply the minimum distribution requirements of
IRC § 401(a)(9) in accordance with the regulations under IRC § 401(a)(9),
notwithstanding any provision in the Plan to the contrary.  This amendment
shall continue in effect until the end of the last calendar year beginning
before the effective date of final regulations under § IRC 401(a)(9) or such
other date as may be specified in guidance published by the Internal Revenue
Service.



      (1)   Effective date.  Unless an earlier effective date is
specified in the Plan, the provisions of this section will apply for purposes
of determining required minimum distributions for calendar years beginning
with the 2003 calendar year.



      (2)   Precedence.  The requirements of this section will take
precedence over any inconsistent provisions of the Plan.



      (3)   Requirements of Treasury regulations incorporated.  All
distributions required under this section shall be determined and made in
accordance with the Treasury regulations under section 401(a)(9) of the
Internal Revenue Code.



      (4)   TEFRA section 242(b)(2) elections.  Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this section, other than section (A)(4), distributions
may be made under a designation made on or before January 1, 1984 in
accordance with section 242(b)(2) of the Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility
Act (TEFRA) and the provisions of the Plan that relate to section 242(b)(2)
of TEFRA.



   (B)   Time and manner of distribution.



      (1)   Required beginning date.  The member’s entire
interest will be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the member no
later than the member’s required beginning date.



      (2)   Death of member before distributions begin.  If the
member dies before distributions begin, the member’s entire interest will
be distributed, or begin to be distributed, no later than as follows:



         (a)   If the member’s surviving spouse is the
member’s sole designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the Plan,
distributions to the surviving spouse will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member
died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the member would have
attained age 70½, if later.



         (b)   If the member’s surviving spouse is not the
member’s sole designated beneficiary, then, except as provided in the Plan,
distributions to the designated beneficiary will begin by December 31 of the
calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which the member
died.



         (c)   If there is no designated beneficiary as of
September 30 of the year following the year of the member’s death, the
member’s entire interest will be distributed by December 31 of the calendar
year containing the fifth anniversary of the member’s death.



         (d)   If the member’s surviving spouse is the
member’s sole designated beneficiary and the surviving spouse dies after
the member but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, subsection
(b) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the member.



      (3)   For purposes of divsion (B)(2) and division (D),
distributions are considered to begin on the member’s required beginning
date (or, if division (B)(2)(d) applies, the date distributions are required
to begin to the surviving spouse under division (B)(2)(a)). If annuity
payments irrevocably commence to the member before the member’s required
beginning date (or to the member’s surviving spouse before the date
distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under division
(B)(2)(a)), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date
distributions actually commence.



      (4)   Form of distribution.  Unless the member’s interest
is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company
or in a single sum on or before the required beginning date, as of the first
distribution calendar year distributions will be made in accordance with
divisions (C) and (D) of this section.  If the member’s interest is
distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company,
distributions thereunder will be made in accordance with the requirements of
section 401(a)(9) of the IRC and the Treasury regulations.  Any part of the
member’s interest which is in the form of an individual account described
in section 414(k) of the IRC will be distributed in a manner satisfying the
requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the IRC and the Treasury regulations
that apply to individual accounts.



   (C)   Determination of amount to be distributed each year.



      (1)   General annuity requirements.  If the member’s
interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the Plan,
payments under the annuity will satisfy the following requirements:



         (a)   The annuity distributions will be paid in periodic
payments made at intervals not longer than one year;



         (b)   The distribution period will be over a life (or
lives) or over a period certain not longer than the period described in
division (D);



         (c)   Once payments have begun over a period certain,
the period certain will not be changed even if the period certain is shorter
than the maximum permitted



      (2)   Amount required to be distributed by required beginning
date.  The amount that must be distributed on or before the member’s
required beginning date or, if the member dies before distributions begin,
the date distributions are required to begin under division (B)(2)(a) or (b)
is the payment that is required for one payment interval.  The second
payment need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if
that payment interval ends in the next calendar year. Payment intervals are
the periods for which payments are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly,
semi-annually, or annually.  All of the member’s benefit accruals as of
the last day of the first distribution calendar year will be included in the
calculation of the amount of the annuity payments for payment intervals
ending on or after the member’s required beginning date.



      (3)  Additional accruals after first distribution calendar
year.  Any additional benefits accruing to the member in a calendar year
after the first distribution calendar year will be distributed beginning with
the first payment interval ending in the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which such amount accrues.



   (D)   Requirements for minimum distributions where member dies
before date distributions begin.



      (1)   Member survived by designated beneficiary.  Except as
provided in this article, if the member dies before the date distribution of
his or her interest begins and there is a designated beneficiary, the
member’s entire interest will be distributed, beginning no later than the
time described in divisions (B)(2)(a) or (b), over the life of the designated
beneficiary or over a period certain not exceeding:



         (a)   Unless the annuity starting date is before the
first distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated
beneficiary determined using the beneficiary’s age as of the
beneficiary’s birthday in the calendar year immediately following the
calendar year of the member’s death; or



         (b)   If the annuity starting date is before the first
distribution calendar year, the life expectancy of the designated beneficiary
determined using the beneficiary’s age as of the beneficiary’s birthday
in the calendar year that contains the annuity starting date.



      (2)   No designated beneficiary.  If the member dies before
the date distributions begin and there is no designated beneficiary as of
September 30 of the year following the year of the member’s death,
distribution of the member’s entire interest will be completed by December
31 of the calendar year containing the fifth anniversary of the member’s
death.



      (3)   Death of surviving spouse before distributions to
surviving spouse begin. If the member dies before the date distribution of
his or her interest begins, and the member’s surviving spouse is the
member’s sole designated beneficiary, and the surviving spouse dies before
distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this section will apply as if
the surviving spouse were the member, except that the time by which
distributions must begin will be determined without regard to division
(B)(2)(a).



   (E)   Definitions.



      (1)   Designated beneficiary.  The individual who is
designated as the beneficiary under the Plan and is the designated
beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the code and section 1.401(a)(9)–1,
Q&A-4, of the Treasury regulations.



      (2)   Distribution calendar year. A calendar year for which a
minimum distribution is required.  For distributions beginning before the
member’s death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year
immediately preceding the calendar year, which contains the member’s
required beginning date.  For distributions beginning after the member’s
death, the first distribution calendar year is the calendar year in which
distributions are required to begin pursuant to division (B)(2).



      (3)   Life expectancy.  Life expectancy as computed by use of
the single life table in section 1.401(a)(9)–9 of the Treasury regulations.



      (4)   Required beginning date.  The date specified in
subsection (A).



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Administrative regulations reference:



   Certain distribution rules, see 26 CFR 1.401(a)(9) and related
regulations



41-59.  ELIGIBLE ROLLOVER DISTRIBUTIONS.



   This section applies to distributions made on or after January 1, 1993.
Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary that would
otherwise limit a distributee's election under this section, a member may
elect, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Board, to have any
portion of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible
retirement plan specified by the member as a direct rollover. The following
definitions shall apply with regard to this section.



   (A)   Eligible Rollover Distribution.  An eligible rollover
distribution is any distribution of all or any portion of the balance to the
credit of the distributee, except that an eligible rollover distribution does
not include: any distribution that is one of a series of substantially equal
periodic payments (not less frequently than annually) made for the life (or
life expectancy) of the distributee or the joint lives (or joint life
expectancies) of the distributee and the distributee's designated
beneficiary, or for a specified period of ten years or more, and any
distribution to the extent such distribution is required under IRC §
401(a)(9).  For purposes of the direct rollover provision, a portion of a
distribution shall not fail to be an eligible rollover distribution merely
because the portion consists of after-tax employee contributions which are
not includible in gross income.  However, such portion may be paid only to
an individual retirement account or annuity described in IRC § 408(a) or
(b), or to a qualified plan described in IRC §§ 401 (a) or 403(b) that
agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred, including separately
accounting for the portion of such distribution which is includible in gross
income and the portion of such distribution which is not so includible.



   (B)   Eligible Retirement Plan.  An eligible retirement plan is an
individual retirement account described in IRC § 408(a), an individual
retirement annuity described in IRC § 408(b), an annuity plan described in
IRC § 403(a), an annuity contract described in IRC § 403(b), an eligible
plan under IRC § 457 which is maintained by a state or political subdivision
of a state and which agrees to separately account for amounts transferred
into such plan or a qualified trust described in IRC § 401(a), that accepts
the distributee's eligible rollover distribution.  The definition of
eligible retirement plan shall also apply in the case of a distribution to a
surviving spouse or to a spouse or former spouse who is the alternate payee
under a domestic relations order.



   (C)   Distributee.  A distributee includes a member or former
member. In addition, the employee's or former member's surviving spouse is a
distributee with regard to the interest of the surviving spouse.



   (D)   Direct rollover. A direct rollover is a payment bythe
Retirement System to the eligible retirement plan specified by the
distributee.



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-60.  MAXIMUM ANNUAL EARNINGS.



   For Plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1989 and before July 1,
1996, the annual compensation of each member taken into account for
determining all benefits provided under the Plan for any determination period
shall not include any amounts in excess of the annual compensation limit
(originally $200,000) provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17) prior to the
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ("COBRA '93") and
adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by IRC § 401(a)(17).  For
Plan Years beginning on or after July 1, 1996, the annual compensation of
each member taken into account shall not exceed the annual compensation limit
provided for in IRC § 401(a)(17), as amended by the Consolidated Omnibus
Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 ("COBRA '93") ($200,000 in 2002).  This
limit may be adjusted as required by federal law for qualified government
plans and shall be further adjusted for inflation in the manner provided by
IRC § 401(a)(17).  Annual compensation means compensation during the Plan
Year or such other consecutive 12 month period over which compensation is
otherwise determined under the Plan.  The cost-of-living adjustment in
effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the
determination period that begins with or within such calendar year.



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-61.  ACTUARIAL ASSUMPTIONS.



   Actuarial equivalence will be determined on the basis of the interest
rate and mortality tables adopted by the Board.  Actuarial assumptions that
will be used to determine the amount or level of any optional benefit forms
will be the actuarial equivalent of the Normal Retirement Benefit. Optional
benefits provided under the Plan shall be actuarial adjusted in relation to
the straight life annuity.  For purposes of determining the IRC § 415
limitations, the interest rate assumption will not be less than the greater
of 5% or the rate specified in the Plan for determining actuarial equivalence
for the particular form of retirement benefit.  The actuarial early
retirement reduction and reduction of the Dollar Limit if the member has less
than ten years of participation under IRC § 415 do not apply to income
received as a pension or annuity as a result of a member's personal injury,
sickness or death and shall be administered in accordance with IRC §
415(b)(2), as amended.



(Ord. No. 363, § 5, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-62.  RECIPROCAL RETIREMENT ACT.



   (A)   Pursuant to action by the City Council on November 4, 1969,
the city adopts and elects to come under the provisions of sections 1 through
5 of the Reciprocal Retirement Act, being Public Act 88 of 1961, as amended,
MCL 38.1101 through 38.1105, and the city is thereby a reciprocal unit under
the Act.



   (B)   Pursuant to action by the City Council on December 7, 1999,
the city adopts certain provisions of section 6 of the Reciprocal Retirement
Act, being Public Act 88 of 1961, as amended, MCL 38.1106, as follows:



      (1)   Transfers of service credit and assets from the
Retirement System to a succeeding reciprocal unit in accordance with section
6 of the Reciprocal Retirement Act shall be allowed subject to the succeeding
reciprocal unit’s pre-approval and acceptance of the service credit and the
amount of financial consideration to be transferred.



      (2)   The financial consideration being transferred shall be
based upon the actuarial present value of the retirement benefits payable by
the Retirement System and shall be calculated by the Retirement System’s
actuary in accordance with the Reciprocal Retirement Act.



      (3)   This approval of section 6 of the Reciprocal Retirement
Act is specifically limited to transfers from the Retirement System to a
succeeding reciprocal unit and does not authorize the Retirement System to
accept transfers from other retirement systems.



(Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Statutory reference:



   Reciprocal Retirement Act, MCL § 38.1101 et seq.



41-63.  APPEAL PROCESS.



   A benefit claimant shall be notified in writing within thirty (30) days
of the Board’s denial of a claim for benefits.  The notification shall
contain the basis for the denial.  The benefit claimant may appeal the
denial and request a hearing before the Board.  The appeal request shall be
in writing and filed with the retirement system within sixty (60) days of the
date of the notification of denial.  The request for appeal shall contain a
statement of the claimant’s reasons for believing the denial to be
improper.  The Board shall schedule a hearing of the appeal within sixty
(60) days of receipt of the request to appeal.



(Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-64.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  PENSION SYSTEM FOR POLICE OFFICERS AND FIREFIGHTERS



41-65.  ADOPTED.



   The city, in accordance with § 9.02 of the Charter, adopts Public Act
345 of 1937, as amended, being a retirement and pension system for employees
of the Police and Fire Departments.



(1978 Code, § 28-65; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Statutory reference:



   The 1937 Act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 5.3375(1)
through 5.3375(12); M.C.L. §§ 38.551 through 38.562



41-66.  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   The effective date of the pension system for the employees of the
Police and Fire Departments shall be July 1, 1969.



(1978 Code, § 28-66; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



41-67.  RECIPROCAL RETIREMENT ACT.



   Pursuant to action of the City Council on November 4, 1969, the city
adopts the provisions of Public Act 88 of 1961, as amended, and thereby
becomes a reciprocal unit under the Reciprocal Retirement Act.



(1978 Code, § 28-67; Ord. No. 379, § 1, 8-2-05)



Statutory reference:



   The 1961 Act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 4.1601
through 4.1605; M.C.L. §§ 38.1101  through 38.1105



CHAPTER 42:  RESERVED



CHAPTER 43:  RECREATIONAL WATERS



43-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Recreational Waters
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 28.5-1; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOAT. Any device of conveyance on the water, whether propelled by
motor, wind or human power. The term includes but is not limited to any
rowboat, canoe, raft, sailboat or other watercraft.



   CITY. The City of Sterling Heights, Macomb County, Michigan.



   CITY MANAGER. City Manager of the City of Sterling Heights, Macomb
County, Michigan.



   PERMIT. The written permission that must be obtained from the City
Manager or his or her designated agent to carry out a given activity.



   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   RECREATIONAL WATERS. Any waters, waterway, lake, river, tributary,
canal, drain, lagoon, retention basin or connecting waters within the
boundaries of the city, whether man-made or natural.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-2; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-3.  SWIMMING.



   No person shall:



   (1)   Swim, bath or wade in any recreational waters, except in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and any regulations that the City
Manager may promulgate;



   (2)   Frequent any recreational waters except during those hours
that the City Manager has established for such activities;



   (3)   Change into bathing clothes from street clothes or from
bathing clothes into street clothes, except in a bathhouse or other structure
designated for such use;



   (4)   Fail to wear bathing clothes that cover the genitals and
buttocks and, in the case of females, that also cover the areolae and nipples.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-3; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-4.  BOATING.



   (A)   With the exception of the Clinton River, no person shall bring
into or operate any boat upon any recreational waters, except in accordance
with the terms of this chapter and any regulations that the City Manager may
promulgate.



   (B)   Boats shall be operated in a manner that does not endanger the
occupants of the boat, the occupants of other watercraft or person in the
water or on shore.



      (1)   License compliance. No person shall operate a boat upon
any recreational waters, unless properly licensed as required by applicable
state and federal laws and regulations. Further, no person shall operate a
boat which does not meet all applicable equipment requirements of the United
States Coast Guard.



      (2)   Reckless operation. No person shall operate a boat in a
reckless manner so as to endanger, or be likely to endanger, the life or
property of any person having due regard for the presence of other boats,
persons or other objects.



      (3)   Motors prohibited. No person shall operate on any
recreational waters any boat propelled by any motor or engine.



   (C)   No person shall bring into or operate any radio-controlled
scale model boat upon any recreational waters except in accordance with the
terms of this chapter and any regulations that the City Manager may
promulgate.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-4; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-5.  FISHING.



   (A)   With the exception of the Clinton River, no person shall
engage in sport fishing by any means in recreational waters, except in waters
designated by the City Manager for sport fishing and under such regulations
as may be promulgated by the City Manager.



   (B)   No person shall engage in fishing for profit in any
recreational waters.



   (C)   No person shall engage in ice fishing in any recreational
waters, except in waters designated by the City Manager for ice fishing and
under such regulations as may be promulgated by the City Manager.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-5; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-6.  WINTER ACTIVITIES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a snowmobile, off-road vehicle (ORV),
motorcycle or motor vehicle upon any recreational waters.



   (B)   No person shall engage in sledding on or immediately adjacent
to any recreational waters, except in those areas specifically designated by
the City Manager.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-6; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87; Ord. No. 260-A, § 1, 5-2-89)



43-7.  DUMPING AND LITTERING.



   (A)   No person shall willfully throw, discharge or otherwise place
or cause to be placed in any recreational waters any substance, matter or
thing, liquid or solid, which will or may result in the obstruction of the
flow or the pollution of said recreational waters or waterways.



   (B)   No person shall throw or deposit litter, as defined in §
23-32 of the city’s code of ordinances, in any park or publicly owned land
abutting any recreational waters within the city, except in public
receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being
carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park, publicly
owned land, any recreational waters, any street, any sidewalk or other public
place.



   (C)   No person shall throw or deposit litter, as defined in §
23-32 of the city’s code of ordinances, on any occupied or vacant private
property which abuts any recreational waters within the city, whether owned
by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of the
private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection
in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any recreational waters, any street, sidewalk
or other public place or upon any private property.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-7; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-8.  DOCKS, RAFTS AND THE LIKE.



   No person shall construct, maintain or cause to be placed any dock,
pier or raft upon any recreational waters without first securing the approval
of the City of Sterling Heights Building Department in accordance with the
regulations promulgated by the City Manager.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-8; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



43-9.  DIVERSION OF WATER.



   (A)   No person shall cause the level of any recreational waters to
be lowered, except that adjacent property owners may utilize recreational
waters in such a manner as to maintain the growth of their lawns, gardens,
and shrubbery and for fire protection purposes. However, no person shall
utilize any recreational waters in any manner which violates the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act, Public Act 451 of 1994, as
amended, M.C.L. §§ 324.101 et seq.



   (B)   No person shall utilize any water obtained from recreational
waters for commercial activities.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly buy or sell any water obtained from
recreational waters.



   (D)   No person shall dredge or remove, or permit the dredging or
removal, of material or minerals from a recreational waterway, except that
governmental agencies may dredge or remove material from a recreational
waterway for maintenance, improvements, or other public purposes.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-9; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87; Ord. No. 407, § 21, 7-21-09)



43-10.  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   All rules and regulations promulgated by the City Manager in accordance
with this chapter shall be filed immediately upon adoption or amendment with
the City Clerk’s office and shall be available for public inspection in
accordance with Public Act 442 of 1976, being M.C.L. §§ 15.231 et seq, as
amended. The City Manager shall permit the activities regulated by this
chapter when he or she finds:



   (1)   That the proposed activity or use of the recreational waters
will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public
enjoyment of the recreational waters;



   (2)   That the proposed activity and use will not unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare,
safety and recreation;



   (3)   That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably
anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct;



   (4)   That the proposed activity will not entail unusual,
extraordinary or burdensome expense to the city.



(1978 Code, § 28.5-10; Ord. No. 260, 7-7-87)



CHAPTER 44:  SCHOOLS



44-1.  DEFACING OR DAMAGING SCHOOL BUILDINGS.



   No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface
or do damage to any building owned, occupied or otherwise used as a school
within the city.



(1978 Code, § 29-1)



Cross reference:



   General prohibition against damaging public property, see § 35-25



Statutory reference:



   Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, see M.S.A. §§ 26.609
et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 750.377 et seq.



44-2.  DEFACING OR DAMAGING FIXTURES ON SCHOOL LANDS.



   No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface
or do damage to any fence, tree, lawn or other fixture situated on lands
owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city.



(1978 Code, § 29-2)



Cross reference:



   General prohibition against damaging public property, see § 35-25



44-3.  DISTURBING SCHOOL SESSIONS.



   No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building
in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or
assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to
disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such school session or class
thereof.



(1978 Code, § 29-3)



44-4.  DISTURBING SCHOOL GATHERINGS OR FUNCTIONS.



   No person, while on public or private lands adjacent to any building or
lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city, in or on
which any gathering or function is in progress, whether in the daytime or
nighttime, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or
diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order
of such gathering or function.



(1978 Code, § 29-4)



44-5.  PROFANE, INDECENT OR IMMORAL LANGUAGE-IN SCHOOL BUILDINGS.



   No person, while in any building owned, occupied or otherwise used by a
school within the city, shall utter any profane, indecent or immoral language
towards any person or while within the hearing of any other person.



(1978 Code, § 29-5)



Cross reference:



   General prohibition against obscene and lewd language, see § 35-16(B)



Statutory reference:



   Cursing and swearing, see M.S.A. § 28.298; M.C.L. § 750.103;



   Indecent language in presence of women or children, see M.S.A. §
28.569; M.C.L. § 750.337



44-6.  SAME-ON SCHOOL LANDS.



   No person, while on any lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a
school within the city, shall utter any profane, indecent or immoral language
towards any person or while within the hearing of any other person.



(1978 Code, § 29-6)



44-7.  UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS-SCHOOL BUILDINGS OR LAND.



   (A)   Generally.  No person, except school employees, students
enrolled therein, parents or guardians of students enrolled therein, or
neighborhood children and their families, shall enter or remain in any school
building or on any lands owned, occupied, or used by any school for any
purpose other than a recreational use permitted by the school, unless that
person is attending an event which has been approved by the school principal
to which the person is invited, or is performing services during the normal
course of business at the request of the school principal, or has written
permission of the school principal.



   (B)   Congregating.  No person shall loiter, congregate, or
otherwise enter upon school buildings or school lands for any purpose other
than a recreational use permitted by the school at times when school is not
in session or when such presence is not under the supervision or permission
of authorized school officials or pursuant to participation, directly or
indirectly, in a school event or activity.  A violation of this subsection
is a municipal civil infraction, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the
City Code.



   (C)   Definition of student. The term STUDENT, as used in this
section, is defined as any person enrolled in the school at which he or she
is then present, or if present at another school, has written permission from
the principal of the school where the student is enrolled and the principal
of the school where the student is then present. The term STUDENT does not
include suspended or expelled persons during such suspension or expulsion or
persons enrolled for classes or programs during other hours than those during
which the person enters or remains in any school or on land owned, occupied
or used by any school.



(1978 Code, § 29-7; Ord. No. 135-A, § 1, 4-21-87; Ord. No. 407 § 22,
7-21-09)



Cross reference:



   Trespass and related offenses, see § 35-2



44-8.  FIGHTING.



   (A)   Any person who engages, participates, or is otherwise involved
in fighting on school property shall be responsible for a municipal civil
infraction, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the City Code, in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties for offenses committed during or related
to such fighting.



   (B)   Fighting is defined as a hostile encounter involving personal
violence or tumultuous behavior between two or more persons, but fighting
does not include defensive acts that are limited to protecting oneself or
others.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, the phrase “on school
property” is not limited to a physical presence on real property owned by a
school, and includes without limitation a person’s presence at
school-sponsored events, on a bus or other school-provided transportation, or
any location during transit to and from school.



(Ord. No. 407, § 23, 7-21-09)



44-8A.  HAZING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (D), a person who attends, is
employed by, or is a volunteer of an educational institution shall not engage
in or participate in the hazing of an individual.



   (B)   If a violation of division (A) results in physical injury, the
person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not more than $500, or both.  If a violation of subsection (A)
results in more serious injuries, the person is guilty of a felony punishable
as provided by state law. 



   (C)   A criminal penalty provided for under this section may be
imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other criminal
offense arising from the same conduct.



   (D)   This section does not apply to an individual who is the
subject of the hazing, regardless of whether the individual voluntarily
allowed himself or herself to be hazed.



   (E)   This section does not apply to an activity that is normal and
customary in an athletic, physical education, military training, or similar
program sanctioned by the educational institution.



   (F)   It is not a defense to a prosecution for a crime under this
section that the individual against whom the hazing was directed consented to
or acquiesced in the hazing.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      (1)   “Educational institution” means a public or private
school that is a middle school, junior high school, high school, vocational
school, college, or university.



      (2)   “Hazing” means an intentional, knowing, or reckless
act by a person acting alone or acting with others that is directed against
an individual and that the person knew or should have known endangers the
physical health or safety of the individual, and that is done for the purpose
of pledging, being initiated into, affiliating with, participating in,
holding office in, or maintaining membership in any organization or upon
admission to an educational institution.  Subject to subsection (E), hazing
includes any of the following that is done for such a purpose:



         (a)   Physical brutality, such as whipping, beating,
striking, branding, electronic shocking, placing of a harmful substance on
the body, or similar activity.



         (b)   Physical activity, such as sleep deprivation,
exposure to the elements, confinement in a small space, or calisthenics, that
subjects the other person to an unreasonable risk of harm or that adversely
affects the physical health or safety of the individual.



         (c)   Activity involving consumption of a food, liquid,
alcoholic beverage, liquor, drug, or other substance that subjects the
individual to an unreasonable risk of harm or that adversely affects the
physical health or safety of the individual.



         (d)   Activity that induces, causes, or requires an
individual to perform a duty or task that involves the commission of a crime
or an act of hazing.



      (3)   “Organization” means a fraternity, sorority,
association, corporation, order, society, corps, cooperative, club, service
group, social group, athletic team, or similar group whose members are
primarily students at an educational institution.



      (4)   “Pledge” means an individual who has been accepted
by, is considering an offer of membership from, or is in the process of
qualifying for membership in any organization.



      (5)   “Pledging” means any action or activity related to
becoming a member of an organization.



(Ord. No. 407, § 24, 7-21-09)



Statutory reference:



   Hazing, also known as Garret’s Law, see M.C.L. § 750.411t



44-9.  BORROWING FROM STUDENTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to borrow or attempt to borrow any
money or thing of value from any student in any public, private or parochial
school on any public, private or parochial school property in the city or
during any time when any such student is going to or returning from any
regularly scheduled session of any such school without first obtaining the
written approval of the principal of such school or other person designated
by the principal to issue such written approval.



(1978 Code, § 29-9) Penalty, see § 1-9



44-10.  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.



   No person shall consume or be in possession of alcoholic liquor, any
spirits, wine, beer, ale or other beverage containing more than 1/2% of
alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage purposes while in any school
building or on lands owned, occupied or used by any school.



(1978 Code, § 29-10; Ord. No. 135-A, § 3, 4-21-87)



Cross reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 5;



   Consumption of alcoholic liquor prohibited in certain places and the
like, see § 35-35



44-11.  WEAPONS.



   No person while in any school building or on land owned and occupied or
used by any school shall use, possess, carry or conceal firearms of any
description or any air rifles, spring guns, slings, knives, martial arts
weapons or any other form of weapon potentially dangerous to human safety.
This section does not apply to police officers acting in their normal course
of duty.



(1978 Code, §  29-11; Ord. No. 135-A, § 3, 4-21-87)



Cross reference:



   Carrying concealed weapons prohibited, see § 35-24



44-12.  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   No persons, while in any school building, shall use, possess, carry or
conceal any drug paraphernalia as defined in § 35-51 of this Code.



(1978 Code, § 29-12; Ord. No. 135-A, § 3, 4-21-87)



Cross reference:



   Drug paraphernalia, see §§ 35-50 et seq.



44-13.  USE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY-PROHIBITION.



   (A)   Generally. No person while in any buildings owned, occupied or
otherwise used by a school, or while on any lands owned, occupied or
otherwise used by a school, shall carry, inhale, chew or place within their
mouth any tobacco product.



   (B)   Definition of tobacco product. The term TOBACCO PRODUCT, as
used in this section, is defined as a preparation of tobacco to be inhaled,
chewed or placed in a person’s mouth, including but not limited to cigars,
cigarettes, pipes and chewing tobacco.



   (C)   Penalty. A person who violates this section shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50.



(Ord. No. 135-B, § 1, 4-5-94)



44-14.  USE OF TOBACCO ON SCHOOL PROPERTY-EXCEPTIONS.



   § 44-13 shall not apply to persons age 18 or older on outdoor areas
owned, used or otherwise occupied by a school, including but not limited to
an open air stadium, during either of the following time periods:



   (A)   Saturdays, Sundays and other days on which there are no
regularly scheduled school hours;



   (B)   After 6:00 p.m. on days during which there are regularly
scheduled school hours.



(Ord. No. 135-B, § 1, 4-5-94)



CHAPTER 45:  SOLID WASTE REDUCTION



45-1.  TITLE.



   This chapter shall be known and cited as "The Composting Ordinance".



(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 3-18-92)



45-2.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COMPOST. An accumulation of lawn debris, yard waste, coffee grounds,
tea leaves, raw vegetables or fruit scraps in a form suitable for composting.
Horse manure or commercial compost additives may be included in a compost
pile.



   COMPOSTING. Reduction of organic waste to humus.



   COMPOST BAN. A covered receptacle for a compost pile designed and
constructed to facilitate composting.



   COMPOST PILE. An accumulation of compost.



(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 3-18-92)



45-3.  COMPOSTING OF LAWN DEBRIS.



   Lawn debris may be stored in a compost pile or compost bin meeting the
requirements of § 45-4.



(Ord. No. 302, § 2, 3-18-92)



45-4.  PERMITTED COMPOSTING.



   (A)   Compost piles shall be permitted only in accordance with the
following:



      (1)   Compost piles shall be located only in a rear yard a
minimum of three feet from any lot line and 15 feet from any residence
located on adjacent property as depicted on Diagram A; (See diagram following
§ 45-4.)



      (2) Compost piles and compost bins shall not exceed five feet in
height and 125 cubic feet in volume. On lots smaller than 12,500 square feet,
the total volume of compost shall not exceed 125 cubic feet;



      (3)   Compost may contain only lawn debris, yard waste, coffee
grounds, tea leaves, raw vegetables or fruit scraps in a form suitable for
composting. Horse manure or commercial compost additives may be included as
part of a compost pile. Compost shall not contain meat, poultry, fish, dairy
products, manure (except horse manure), oils, fats or any of the permitted
items in a form unsuitable for composting;



      (4)   Compost containing any coffee grounds, tea leaves, raw
vegetables, fruit scraps or horse manure shall be kept in a compost bin;



      (5)   Compost piles and compost bins shall be maintained to
prevent the attraction and harborage of rodents and pests and to prevent
unpleasant odors.



   (B)   Compost piles and compost bins which do not conform to this
section shall constitute a nuisance per se and may be abated by order of a
court of competent jurisdiction in addition to any other applicable penalties.



   (C)   Compost piles and compost bins which constitute a nuisance may
be abated in accordance with an applicable nuisance abatement procedure set
forth in the City Code.



(Ord. No. 302, § 3, 3-18-92)



CHAPTER 46: RESERVED



CHAPTER 47: SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS



47-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COST. Includes the cost of surveys, plans, right-of-way, spreading of
rolls, notices, advertising, financing and construction, legal and all other
costs incident to the making of such improvement, the special assessments
therefor and the financing thereof.



   IMPROVEMENT. Any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is
to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially
benefitted thereby in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom.



(1978 Code, § 30-1)



47-2.  GENERAL AUTHORITY OF COUNCIL.



   The Council shall have the power to make public improvements within the
city and, as to public improvements which are of such a nature as to
especially benefit any property or properties within a district, the Council
shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part
of the expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special
assessments in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived.



(1978 Code, § 30-2)



47-3.  AUTHORITY TO MAKE ASSESSMENTS FOR BOULEVARD LIGHTING SYSTEM.



   In addition to other improvements which the city may make and finance,
in whole or in part, by special assessments, the city may install a boulevard
lighting system on any street and finance the same, in whole or in part, by
special assessments upon land abutting thereon, provided the property owners
of a majority of the frontage on such street or part thereof to be so
improved shall petition therefor.



(1978 Code, § 30-3)



47-4.  PROPERTY OWNERS’ OBJECTION TO IMPROVEMENT.



   If, at or prior to final confirmation of any special assessment, more
than 50% of the number of owners of privately owned real property to be
assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or similar improvements,
more than 50% of the number of owners of frontage to be assessed for any such
improvement, shall object in writing to the proposed improvement, the
improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by this chapter
without a five-sevenths vote of the members of the Council. This section
shall not apply to sidewalk construction.



(1978 Code, § 30-4)



47-5.  REJECTION OF IMPROVEMENT BY COUNCIL.



   Even though more than 50% of the number of owners of privately owned
real property to be assessed for any improvement, or in case of paving or
similar improvements, more than 50% of the number of owners of frontage to be
assessed for any such improvement, shall favor, through petition, the
proposed improvement, the Council may, by five-sevenths vote of its members,
reject the petition for such improvement.



(1978 Code, § 30-5)



47-6.  PRELIMINARY PROCEEDINGS GENERALLY.



   Before determining to make any improvement any part of the cost of
which is to be defrayed by special assessment, the Council shall require the
City Engineer to ascertain the assessed valuation of all property affected by
the proposed improvement, the number of parcels which show tax delinquencies,
the number of parcels owned by public authorities and the number of parcels
which are vacant and to prepare or cause to be prepared plans and
specifications therefor and an estimate of the cost thereof and to file the
same with the City Clerk, together with his or her recommendation as to what
proportion of the cost should be paid by special assessment and what part, if
any, should be a general obligation of the city, the number of annual
installments in which assessments may be paid, not to exceed 30 in number and
the lands which should be included in the special assessment district.



(1978 Code, § 30-6)



47-7.  PUBLIC HEARING ON PROPOSED IMPROVEMENT.



   (A)   After the filing referred to in § 47-6, a public hearing
shall be held before the Council, which hearing shall be held not less than
ten days after notice of the time and place thereof has been published in a
newspaper with general circulation in the city and published in Macomb County
and sent by the Clerk, by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, to all property owners in the proposed district, as shown by the
current assessment roll of the city.



   (B)   At the time and place specified in such notice for the public
hearing, the Council shall meet and hear any person to be affected by the
proposed public improvement. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time
by the Council.



   (C)   Cost estimates, as prepared by the City Engineer as provided
in § 47-6, shall be open to inspection at the public hearing, along with
proof of certified or registered mailing as provided in subsection (A) of
this section.



(1978 Code, § 30-7)



47-8.  COUNCIL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   After the public hearing, the Council may, by resolution,
determine to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of the
cost of the improvement by special assessment upon the property especially
benefitted in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. By such
resolution, the Council shall approve the plans and specifications for the
improvement; determine the estimated cost thereof; determine what proportion
of such cost shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially
benefitted and what part, if any, shall be a general obligation of the city;
determine the number of installments in which assessments may be paid;
determine the rate of interest to be charged on installments, not to exceed
6% per annum; designate the district or land and premises upon which special
assessments shall be levied; and direct the Assessor to prepare a special
assessment roll in accordance with the Council’s determination.



   (B)   No public improvement to be financed, in whole or in part, by
special assessment shall be made before the Council determines, by
resolution, to make the improvement and to defray the whole or any part of
the cost of the improvement by special assessment.



(1978 Code, § 30-8)



47-9.  PREPARATION AND CONTENTS OF ROLL.



   The Assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment roll,
including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment district
designated by the Council and shall assess to each such lot or parcel of land
such relative portion of the whole sum to be levied against all the lands in
the special assessment district as the benefit to such lot or parcel of land
bears to the total benefits to all lands in such district. There shall also
be entered upon such roll the amount which has been assessed to the city at
large, if any.



(1978 Code, § 30-9)



47-10.  CERTIFICATION OF ROLL AND PRESENTATION OF SAME TO COUNCIL.



   When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll, he or she
shall attach thereto, or endorse thereon, his or her certificate to the
effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to a resolution of
the Council (giving date of adoption of same) and that, in making the
assessments therein, he or she has, as near as may be, according to his or
her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in
such resolution and to the Charter and the provisions of this chapter.
Thereupon he or she shall present the same to the Council.



(1978 Code, § 30-10)



47-11.  HEARING ON AND OBJECTIONS TO ROLL; COUNCIL ACTION ON ROLL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of such special assessment roll, the Council
shall order it filed in the office of the Clerk for public examination and
shall fix the time and place when it will meet and review such roll, which
meeting shall be held not less than ten days after notice thereof has been
sent by the Clerk by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested,
to all property owners in the proposed district as shown by the current
assessment roll of the city. Such notice shall specify the time and place of
such meeting. The Council may, in its discretion, publish notice of the
meeting not less than ten days prior to date of the meeting.



   (B)   Any person deeming himself or herself aggrieved by the special
assessment roll may file his or her objections thereto, in writing, with the
Council prior to the close of the hearing, which written objections shall
specify in what respect he or she deems himself or herself aggrieved.



   (C)   The Council shall meet and review the said special assessment
roll at the time and place appointed, or at an adjourned date therefor, and
shall consider any written objections thereto. The Council may correct said
roll as to any assessment or description of any lot or parcel of land or
other errors appearing therein. Any changes made in such roll shall be noted
in the Council’s minutes. After such hearing and review, the Council may
confirm such special assessment roll, with such corrections as it may have
made, if any, or may refer it back to the assessor for revision or may annul
it and any proceedings in connection therewith. The Council shall endorse the
date of confirmation upon each special assessment roll. The roll shall, upon
confirmation, be final and conclusive.



(1978 Code, § 30-11)



47-12.  ASSESSMENTS AS LIEN; DUE DATE; INSTALLMENT PAYMENT GENERALLY.



   (A)   All special assessments contained in any special assessment
roll, including any part thereof deferred as to payment, shall, from the date
of confirmation of such roll, constitute a lien upon the respective lots or
parcels of land assessed and, until paid, shall be a charge against the
respective owners of the several lots and parcels of land and a debt to the
city from the persons to whom they are assessed. The lien shall be of the
same character and effect as the lien created by the Charter for city taxes
and shall include accrued interest and penalties. No judgment or decree, nor
any act of the Council vacating a special assessment, shall destroy or impair
the lien of the city upon the premises assessed for such amount of the
assessment as may be equitably charged against the same or as, by a regular
mode of proceeding, might be lawfully assessed thereon.



   (B)   All special assessments shall become due upon confirmation of
the special assessment roll or in annual installments not to exceed 30 in
number as the Council may determine at the time of confirmation, and if in
annual installments, the Council shall determine the first installment to be
due on the following July 1 and subsequent installments on July 1 of
succeeding years.



   (C)   Wherever it becomes necessary throughout this section to add
accrued interest to any assessment, the interest shall be computed on the
basis of interest being owed for each month or part thereof with no proration
if the interest owing is paid during a month.



(1978 Code, § 30-12)



Charter reference:



   Authority of Council to provide for installment payment of special
assessments, see § 12.08



47-13.  COLLECTION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The assessment roll shall be transmitted to the Treasurer for
collection immediately after its confirmation. The Treasurer shall give
notice, by one publication in a newspaper, that the special assessment roll
(identifying it) has been filed in his or her office and specifying when and
where payments may be made thereon. He or she shall mail statements of the
several assessments to the respective owners, as indicated by the records of
the Assessor, of the several lots and parcels of land assessed, stating the
amount of the assessment and the manner in which it may be paid; provided,
however, that failure to mail or receive, if mailed, any such statement shall
not invalidate the assessment or entitle the owner to an extension of time
within which to pay the assessment.



   (B)   The Treasurer shall transmit such roll to the Assessor, with
all payments upon assessments noted thereon. The Assessor shall then divide
any remaining balance of each assessment into such number of equal
installments as shall have been fixed by the Council; provided, that if such
division operates to make any installment less than $10, then the Assessor
shall reduce the number of installments so that each installment shall be
above and as near to $10 as possible.



   (C)   The first installment shall be spread upon the next city tax
roll in a column headed "Special Assessments," together with interest upon
all unpaid installments from such date as may be determined by the Council to
July 1 of the year in which such tax roll is made. Thereafter, one
installment shall be spread upon each annual tax roll, together with one
year’s interest upon all unpaid installments; provided, that when any
annual installment shall have been prepaid as hereinafter provided, then
there shall be spread upon the tax roll for such year only the interest upon
all unpaid installments.



   (D)   After each installment has been placed on the tax rolls, the
same shall be collected by the Treasurer with the same rights and remedies
and the same penalties and interest as provided in the chapter for the
collection of taxes and shall be due and payable on the first day of July of
the fiscal year in which levied. All such assessments which are paid on or
before the thirty-first day of July of such year shall be collected by the
Treasurer without the addition of any fee or charge for the collection
thereof. There shall be added to all assessments on such tax roll which
remain unpaid after the said thirty-first day of July a collection fee of
1/2% per month during each and every month or fraction of a month which shall
elapse thereafter before the payment of such assessments is made, until the
last day of February next following the date that such assessments become due
and payable. Upon all city assessments returned to the County Treasurer upon
any delinquent tax roll, a charge of 3½% shall be added and the same shall
be collected by the County Treasurer in like manner as and together with the
taxes, charges and assessments so returned.



(1978 Code, § 30-13)



47-14.  ADVANCE PAYMENT OF INSTALLMENTS.



   Any person desiring to pay any installment in advance shall first
secure the proper statement from the Assessor to permit the Treasurer to
compute the amount to be paid. The Treasurer shall report to the Assessor all
advance payments on installments so that the Assessor shall have such
information before spreading installments on the next city tax roll.



(1978 Code, § 30-14)



47-15.  CERTIFICATION WHEN IMPROVEMENT COMPLETED.



   Upon completion of the improvement and the payment of the cost thereof,
the Engineer shall certify to the Council the total cost of the improvement,
together with the amount of the original roll for the improvement.



(1978 Code, § 30-15)



47-16.  DEFICIENCY ASSESSMENTS.



   Should the assessments in any special assessment roll, including the
amount assessed to the city at large, prove insufficient for any reason to
pay the cost of the improvement for which they were made, then the Council
shall make additional assessments against the city and the several lots and
parcels of land, in the same ratio as the original assessments, to supply the
deficiency, but the total amount assessed against any lot or parcel of land
shall not exceed the value of the benefits received from the improvement.



(1978 Code, § 30-16)



47-17.  REFUND OF EXCESSIVE ASSESSMENTS.



   The excess by which any special assessment proves larger than the
actual cost of the improvement and expenses incidental thereto may be placed
in the General Fund of the city, if such excess is 5% or less of the
assessment, but should the assessment prove larger than necessary by more
than 5%, the entire excess shall be refunded on a pro rata basis to the
owners of the property assessed. The refund shall be made by credit against
future unpaid installments in the inverse order in which they are payable, to
the extent such installments then exist, and the balance of such refund shall
be in cash. No refunds may be made which contravene the provisions of any
outstanding evidence of indebtedness secured in whole or part by such special
assessment.



(1978 Code, § 30-17)



47-18.  REASSESSMENTS IN EVENT OF INVALIDITY.



   Whenever any special assessment shall, in the opinion of the Council,
be invalid by reason of irregularity or informality in the proceedings or if
any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge such assessment to be
illegal, the Council shall, whether the improvement has been made or not, or
whether any part of the assessment has been paid or not, have power to cause
a new assessment to be made for the same purpose for which the former
assessment was made. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the
collection thereof shall be conducted in the same manner as provided for the
original assessment, and whenever the assessment, or any part thereof, levied
upon any premises has been so set aside, if the same has been paid and not
refunded, the payment so made shall be applied upon the reassessment and the
reassessment shall, to that extent, be deemed satisfied.



(1978 Code, § 30-18)



47-19.  RESERVED.



47-20.  SAME-COUNCIL DETERMINATION; ASSESSMENT ROLL GENERALLY.



   (A)   The Council shall, by resolution, after examination of the
report of the Director of Public Services, determine what amount or part of
each such expense shall be charged and the person, if known, against whom and
the premises upon which the same shall be levied as a special assessment. By
such resolution, the Council shall determine the number of installments in
which the assessment may be paid, determine the rate of interest to be
charged on installments, not to exceed 6% per annum, designate the district
or land and premises upon which special assessments shall be levied, direct
the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the
Council’s determination and designate the name by which said assessment
roll shall be known and referred to, and as often as the Council shall deem
it expedient, require notice of all of the several amounts so reported and
determined to be given by the Clerk, either by registered mail sent to the
last known address of the owner as shown on the assessment roll of the city,
or by publication.



   (B)   The Assessor shall thereupon prepare a special assessment
roll, including all lots and parcels of land within the special assessment
district designated by the Council and shall assess to each such lot or
parcel of land such sums as may have been directed by the Council.



   (C)   When the Assessor shall have completed such assessment roll,
he or she shall attach thereto and endorse thereon his or her certificate to
the effect that the roll has been made by him or her pursuant to a resolution
of the Council (giving date of adoption of same) and that, in making the
assessments therein, he or she has, as near as may be, according to his or
her best judgment, conformed in all respects to the directions contained in
such resolution and the Charter and the provisions of this chapter.
Thereupon, he or she shall file the special assessment roll with the Clerk
who shall forthwith give notice as has been required by the Council.



(1978 Code, § 30-20)



47-21.  SAME-NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT AND HEARING THEREON; COUNCIL ACTION ON
ROLL.



   (A)   Upon receipt of a special assessment roll pursuant to §
47-20, the Clerk shall give such notice as has been directed by the Council,
which notice shall state the basis of the assessment, the amount thereof,
describe the property affected thereby and give a reasonable time, which
shall not be less than 30 days, in which a hearing may be had thereon or
payment made.



   (B)   In the event payment is not made within the time specified in
the resolution and notice, the Council shall meet at the time and place
provided and hear any objections to said roll as prepared.



   (C)   The Council may correct the roll as to any assessment or
description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein.
Any changes made in the roll shall be noted in the Council minutes.



   (D)   After the hearing the Council shall confirm such special
assessment roll with such corrections as may have been made and the Clerk
shall endorse the date of confirmation thereon, and upon confirmation such
roll shall be final and conclusive.



(1978 Code, § 30-21)



47-22.  BAR TO SUITS OR PROCEEDINGS TO CONTEST OR ENJOIN COLLECTION OF
ASSESSMENTS.



   Except and unless notice is given to the Council in writing of an
intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment for
the construction of any pavement, sewer or other public improvement, the
construction of any sidewalk or the removal or abatement of any public hazard
or nuisance, within 30 days after the date of the meeting of the Council at
which it is finally determined to proceed with the making of the improvement
in question, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings
are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or
maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such
special assessment; and regardless of whether or not any public improvement
is completed in any special assessment district, no owner of real property
located in such district shall be entitled to commence any suit or action for
the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any such special
assessment after he or she has received the benefits from the substantial
completion of that portion of such public improvement for which he or she is
assessed.



(1978 Code, § 30-22)



47-23.  RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF FUNDS RAISED BY SPECIAL ASSESSMENT.



   Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be
credited to a special assessment fund and shall be used to pay for the costs
of the improvements for which the assessment was levied and of expenses
incidental thereto, to repay any principal or interest on money borrowed
therefor and to refund excessive assessments as herein provided.



(1978 Code, § 30-23)



47-24.  PROCEDURE WHEN PROPERTY OWNER UNABLE TO PAY ASSESSMENT.



   Any person who, in the opinion of the Assessor and upon confirmation by
the City Council, is, by reason of poverty, unable to contribute toward the
cost of the making of a public improvement may execute to the city an
instrument prepared by the City Attorney, creating a lien for the benefit of
the city on all or any part of the real property owned by him or her and
benefitted by any public improvement for the amount of the special assessment
levied for such public improvement, plus interest at 6% per annum. The lien
shall mature and be effective from and after the execution of such instrument
and shall be enforceable by the city only in the event that title to such
property is thereafter transferred in any manner whatsoever. The deed shall
recite that the lien created may be extinguished by the grantor of the deed
by payment of the amount of special assessments covered by such lien at any
time and shall be extinguished by any grantee, heir or devisee of the grantor
within one year after title becomes vested in such grantee, heir or devisee
and that failure to so extinguish the said lien within the said one year
period shall operate to vest title to the real property to which such deed
pertains in the city in fee absolute. This lien shall also be enforceable in
the event that, in the opinion of the Assessor, upon confirmation by the City
Council, such condition of poverty ceases to exist.



(1978 Code, § 30-24)



47-25.  LIABILITY FOR COSTS OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; ENFORCEMENT.



   The owners of all real property, including such as is exempt from
taxation by law, or exempted by the Board of Review, and with or without
valuation placed thereon, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements
benefitting such property, unless exempted from special assessments by law,
the same as other property, as provided herein, and such special assessments
shall be levied, collected and returned, and the premises may be sold or
forfeited in the same manner as for nonpayment of city taxes.



(1978 Code, § 30-25)



47-26.  COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS BY ACTION IN ASSUMPSIT.



   In addition to any other remedies, and without impairing the lien
therefor, any delinquent special assessment, together with interest and
penalties, may be collected in an action in assumpsit in the name of the city
against the person assessed in any court having jurisdiction of the amount.
If, in any such action it shall appear that, by reason of any irregularities
or informalities, the assessment has not been properly made against the
defendant or upon the premises sought to be charged, the court may,
nevertheless, on satisfactory proof that expense has been incurred by the
city, which is a proper charge against the defendant or the premises in
question, render judgment for the amount properly chargeable against such
defendant or upon such premises.



(1978 Code, § 30-26)



47-27.  ASSESSMENTS BY CONTRACT.



   In the event that all persons or property owners to be affected by any
proposed improvement agree that such proposed improvement be made and that a
special assessment be levied in connection therewith, the city may, in lieu
of the foregoing procedure, enter into a written contract with all of the
persons or property owners affected thereby, which contract, when properly
approved and executed, shall operate as a complete special assessment
procedure and the assessment shall be made in accordance with said contract.



(1978 Code, § 30-27)



CHAPTER 48:  STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



48-1.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known as the "City of Sterling Heights Public
Streets and Rights-of-Way Ordinance" and may be cited as such.



(1978 Code, § 31-1; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-2.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this article is to regulate and control the use of
public streets, sidewalks, approaches and rights-of-way and to establish
standards pertaining to the installation of improvements within public
streets and rights-of-way.



(1978 Code, § 31-2; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY. A public or legally established private thoroughfare, other than
a street, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
property and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   APPROACH. A hard-surfaced area connecting a street with an off-street
parking area, truck well, maneuvering lane or driveway as defined herein or
defined in the zoning ordinance.



   CURB. A part of the street usually of the same elevation as the center
of the street which is parallel to the street which separates the portion of
the roadway established for vehicular traffic from the adjacent greenbelt
area designed to keep vehicular traffic from the greenbelt area.



   EASEMENT. A right or privilege over a specific portion of land area
granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular person
or persons for specific uses and purposes and which is designated a public or
private easement depending on the nature of the use.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The entire area owned or dedicated by the city or other
governmental agency or entity for public use as a street, sidewalk, easement,
landscape area or other public place.



   SIDEWALK. A slab of concrete generally parallel with the street and
usually located one foot from the property line in the right-of-way.



   STREET. That portion of a public thoroughfare improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, including curbs on paved roads and
shoulders on unimproved thoroughfares.



(1978 Code, § 31-3; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-4.  GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to construct or lay any pavement for any
public street, sidewalk, alley, approach or to repair the same, to make any
excavation within the right-of-way or to construct any improvement within the
right-of-way without first having secured a permit from the city.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to install or place any vending machine,
express mail machine, private mailbox, pick-up box or railing within the
right-of-way or to erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps, fences,
gates, chains, bars, pipes or other obstructions within the right-of-way.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to install, construct or place any
earthen mound with a grade variance of more than six inches, boulders,
shrubs, mailboxes that do not conform with applicable federal standards,
landscape forms or sculptures exceeding six inches in height within the
right-of-way.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to hang or suspend any object, including
but not limited to signs (except those established and maintained by the
city, county, state or federal governments), festoons, balloons or other
inflatables above the public sidewalk or within any right-of-way area unless
expressly authorized by this article or another applicable ordinance of the
city.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful to remove or alter any pavement, tree,
street identification sign or marker, lawn, fire hydrant or other improvement
placed in the right-of-way by the city without first obtaining a permit from
the city.



   (F)   It shall be unlawful to install any utility poles, towers,
water mains, monitoring wells, sewers, sidewalks, telecommunications,
telegraph, telephone or power lines, pipe lines, wires, cables, conduits or
any like structure within a right-of-way or easement without first securing a
permit from the city.



   (G)   It shall be unlawful to establish any roadside stand within
the right-of-way, nor shall any person sell anything within such right-of-way.



   (H)   The placement of gas, electric, telecommunications, cable
television and other franchised or licensed facilities shall be as determined
and designated by the City Engineer. Utilities constructed of non-metallic
material are required to have a traceable metallic wrap or accompanying wire
for the purpose of tracing and locating with conventional locating equipment.
When placed in the right-of-way, utilities or other franchised facilities
constructed of material susceptible to breakage (i.e., fiber optic, wire,
plastic line) may be encased in a protective shell, as approved by the City
Engineer.



   (I)   Any owners of telecommunication, telegraph, telephone or power
lines, pipe lines, wires, cables, conduit and like structures installed
within a right-of-way must be a member of the Miss Dig System and respond to
and stake or locate underground utilities within the rules and regulations as
prescribed by the Miss Dig System and hold the city harmless for any damage
to pipe lines, wires, cables, conduits and like structures which may be
damaged as a result of the city repairing/maintaining its utility system
located in any right-of-way if due to untimely or incorrect locations being
staked or identified.



(1978 Code, § 31-4; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-A, § 1,
10-1-91; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1, 6-4-96) Penalty, see § 1-9



48-5.  STREET CUTS AND EXCAVATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful to grade,
regrade, reshape, modify or alter the surface grade of any right-of-way
without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.



   (B)   It shall be unlawful to do any grading or other activity
within the right-of-way that creates a nuisance or contributes to the
accumulation of standing water which constitutes a health hazard.



   (C)   It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or opening in or
to tunnel under any right-of-way without first obtaining a permit pursuant to
the provision of this article. The City Manager may, if the public safety
requires, grant immediate permission to a person to make a necessary opening
or excavation within the right-of-way, provided that a permit required by
this article is obtained on the next following business day.



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to install, replace or alter an approach,
sidewalk, culvert, enclose a ditch or make a sewer or water tap without first
securing a permit in accordance with the provisions of this article.



   (E)   It shall be unlawful to construct, alter or cut any opening in
or through any curb in any street or public right-of-way without first
obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions of this article.



   (F)   All openings, excavations or obstructions in a right-of-way
shall be properly barricaded and illuminated with barriers and flashing
beacons as required by the Michigan Manual of Traffic-Control Devices to
prevent injury or damage to persons or vehicles. Flashing beacons shall be
installed at all construction sites to provide adequate notice and warning to
both pedestrians and vehicular traffic.



   (G)   All openings, excavations and tunnels in a right-of-way shall
be properly shored and braced in accordance with all standards promulgated by
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and the Michigan
Occupational Safety and Health Administration (MOSHA) to insure the safety of
all workers and prevent cave-ins and washouts which would likely cause damage
to the surface grade of the street or adjoining portions of the right-of-way.
If it appears that there is a danger to the public safety, the city has the
authority to install any and all barricades, warning signs and other such
devices that it may deem necessary and may charge the permit holder for costs
incurred in protecting the public.



   (H)   The City Manager shall have authority to temporarily close any
portion of the right-of-way when it is deemed an unsafe condition or it is
unsuitable for use. Barriers and signs shall be erected indicating that the
portion of the right-of-way is closed to public travel. It shall be unlawful
to drive or travel over such portion of the right-of-way closed to public
travel, except when such travel is incident to repair, construction or
maintenance work performed therein.



   (I)   It shall be unlawful to interfere with or disturb any
barricade, fencing, signs or lights lawfully placed to protect, mark or
illuminate any obstruction, excavation, repair site or opening in any portion
of the right-of-way.



(1978 Code, § 31-5; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96) Penalty, see § 1-9



48-6.  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to install, construct, repair or
reconstruct any sidewalk within the right-of-way without first having secured
the permission of the city and having secured a permit as required under this
article or any other applicable ordinance.



   (B)   All sidewalks shall conform with the applicable provisions of
Chapter 11, Article X of the City Code, the zoning ordinance (Appendix A to
the City Code), and the subdivision regulations (Appendix B of the City Code).



   (C)   The City Council may order the construction, reconstruction or
repair of sidewalks in any designated area within the city if it is in the
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the city or perform or have
performed on its behalf the construction, reconstruction or repair.



   (D)   The City Council shall determine whether the sidewalks to be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be paid for by invoice to the
abutting property owners or by special assessment to the abutting property
owners.



   (E)   The City Council may, by resolution, require the owners of
lots and premises to construct, reconstruct or repair sidewalks adjacent to
or abutting upon such lots and premises. When any such resolution is adopted,
it shall be the duty of the City Engineer to cause a notice of same to be
sent by first class mail to all owners of lots affected as determined from
the tax rolls of the city to the owner or owners of the lots and premises in
front of or adjacent to which the sidewalk is to be constructed,
reconstructed or repaired requiring such owner or owners to construct,
reconstruct or repair in accordance with city specifications such sidewalk as
is required by such resolution within 30 days of the date of the notice,
unless a different time is specified in the resolution of the City Council. A
notice shall also state that if any owner shall fail to comply with such
order within the specified time, then the city shall construct, reconstruct
or repair such sidewalk and charge the expense thereof to the premises and
the owner thereof, together with an administrative charge  established by
the annual appropriations ordinance to cover administrative, bidding,
engineering and collection expenses.



   (F)   The owner of the property abutting the sidewalk to be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall have 15 days from the date of
the notice to appeal the determination that the sidewalk should be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired. If the Ordinance Board of Appeals,
upon appeal, determines that the construction, reconstruction or repair is
unnecessary or not within the interest of public safety of the city, the
sidewalk need not be constructed, reconstructed or repaired at that time.



   (G)   If the owner of any property fails to construct, reconstruct
or repair in accordance with the city specifications any particular sidewalk
described in the notice and within the time period and in the manner required
thereby, the City Engineer is authorized and required, immediately after the
expiration of the time period provided for the construction, reconstruction
or repair by the owner, to cause such sidewalk to be constructed,
reconstructed or repaired with the expense thereof to be charged to such
property and the owner thereof, together with the administrative charge
hereinbefore provided. The charge shall constitute a lien against the
property abutting the sidewalk and shall be collected as a special assessment.



   (H)   The City Council may provide that the payment for the
sidewalks to be constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be by special
assessment. If the City Council decides to pay for such sidewalk by special
assessments, the procedures set forth in Chapter 47 of this Code shall be
followed.



   (I)   All sidewalks within the city shall be kept and maintained in
good repair by the owner of the property adjacent to and abutting upon the
same. Whenever the City Engineer determines that a sidewalk is unsafe, he or
she shall cause written notice thereof to be given by first class mail to the
owner of abutting property as determined from the tax rolls. If any owner
shall neglect to keep and maintain in good repair the sidewalk adjacent and
abutting upon his or her property, then the owner shall be liable to the city
for any damages recovered against the city sustained by any person by reason
of the sidewalk being unsafe and in a state of disrepair.



(1978 Code, § 31-6; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96; Ord. No. 388, § 21, 1-3-07)



48-7.  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Application for a permit under the terms and conditions of
this article and any other applicable provision of the City Code shall be
made on forms provided by the city and shall be accompanied by plans and
specifications showing the proposed work to be performed within the
right-of-way.



   (B)   Application for a permit shall not be accepted unless it
contains all of the required information, is accompanied by required plans
which conform to the applicable provisions of the City Code, ordinances and
regulations and is accompanied by the payment of the permit fee as
established by  the annual appropriations ordinance. The proposed plans and
specifications shall be reviewed by appropriate city departments depending on
the nature of the work to be performed.



   (C)   Where liability insurance policies are required to be filed in
making application for a permit, they shall be for the amounts established by
the City Manager or his or her designate. A properly executed certificate of
insurance containing evidence that the pertinent policy of insurance or
endorsement applies to the provisions under which the permit is issued, and
approved as to form by the City Attorney, shall be filed with the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 31-7; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96; Ord. No. 388, § 22, 1-3-07)



48-8.  BOND AND HOLD HARMLESS REQUIREMENT.



   As a condition of obtaining a permit, the applicant shall be required
to file with the city a bond in an amount established by the City Engineer
which shall be utilized to pay all valid claims for damages resulting from
activity within the right-of-way. Moreover, the applicant shall execute an
agreement to defend and indemnify the city and to hold the city harmless in
the event a claim arises out of an activity conducted by the applicant within
the right-of-way.



(1978 Code, § 31-8; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-9.  INSPECTION OF WORK; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.



   All work done pursuant to any permit issued pursuant to this article
shall be inspected by the city under the direction of the City Manager to
determine that the work conforms with the applicable City Code provisions.
The City Manager may suspend or revoke any permit where the workmanship or
materials used do not conform to the approved plans and specifications and
the applicable provisions of this Code or other applicable ordinances.
Violation of the terms and conditions contained in this article or any other
applicable ordinance or Code provision may result in the permit being
revoked. It shall be unlawful to perform any work authorized by any permit or
cause any work to be performed after permit has been suspended or revoked.



(1978 Code, § 31-9; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96) Penalty, see § 1-9



48-10.  REVIEW PROCEDURE.



   (A)   If a permit is refused, suspended or revoked, the applicant
may, within ten days of the denial, suspension or revocation, appeal that
determination to the City Council. The City Council shall, after proper
notice to all interested parties, conduct a hearing concerning the refusal,
suspension or revocation. After conducting the public hearing, the City
Council shall either affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the City
Manager. The decision of the City Council shall be final.



   (B)   All operations for which a permit is granted pursuant to the
terms of this article shall be under the direction and supervision of the
City Manager. The City Manager or his or her designate shall have the
authority to promulgate rules and regulations in order to implement the terms
and provisions of this article.



(1978 Code, § 31-10; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-11.  VARIANCES.



   The Board of Code Appeals may grant a variance from the provisions of
this article upon finding that undue hardship or practical difficulty may
result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements.



(1978 Code, § 31-11; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-12.  CONFLICT BETWEEN LAWS.



   In the event that part of this article shall conflict with any other
applicable Code provision or ordinance of the city, the more restrictive Code
provision or ordinance shall apply.



(1978 Code, § 31-12; Ord. No. 286, § 1, 8-21-90; Ord. No. 286-C, § 1,
6-4-96)



48-13-48-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  PRIVATE STREETS AND STORM SEWERS



48-16.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and cited as the "Private Street Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 31-16; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-17. DEFINITION OF PRIVATE STREET.



   A private street is a privately owned and maintained hard surfaced
street located within a cluster housing, residential condominium, site
condominium or multiple family development which is accessible to the public,
including public and private emergency vehicles. Where a private street is
served by a private storm sewer, the term shall include the private storm
sewer.



(1978 Code, § 31-17; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-18.  AVAILABILITY OF PRIVATE STREETS.



   A private street or private storm sewer may be installed in a cluster
housing, residential condominium, site condominium or multiple family
development if authorized by the city. In no instance shall a private street
be permitted if it is a continuation of a public street or is located so that
it may later become a continuation of a public street. In no instance shall a
private storm sewer be permitted if it is a continuation of a public storm
sewer or is so located that it may later become a continuation of a public
storm sewer.



(1978 Code, § 31-18; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-19.  CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE STREET OR PRIVATE STORM SEWER.



   A private street or private storm sewer shall be constructed in
accordance with the written standards established by the City Manager and
filed with the City Clerk’s office which are in effect at the time of
construction.



(1978 Code, § 31-19; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-20.  PLANS.



   A private street or private storm sewer shall be constructed according
to plans approved by the City Engineer. The plan may be a part of the site
plan but shall include information required by the City Engineer to determine
that the private street or storm sewer construction standards and other
applicable requirements of the city have been met.



(1978 Code, § 31-20; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-21.  REVIEW AND INSPECTION APPROVALS.



   Each private street or private storm sewer may be inspected by the city
during the course of construction and upon completion to determine that it
has been constructed in compliance with the terms of this article and any
applicable regulations or standards. No zoning compliance permit for a use or
development nor any building permit for any building to be constructed shall
be issued unless all private streets and private storm sewers included with
the development have been constructed, inspected and approved by the city;
provided, however, the city may, in its discretion, allow a building permit
to be issued prior to final approval of the private street or private storm
sewer if suitable temporary access is provided and a cash deposit or
irrevocable bank letter of credit is filed to ensure completion of the
improvements in accordance with this article. Review and inspection fees
shall be paid prior to construction in accordance with a fee schedule
established by the  annual appropriations ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 31-21; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91; Ord. No. 388, § 23,
1-3-07)



48-22.  MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE STREETS; PROMULGATION OF ENGINEERING
STANDARDS.



   All private streets and private storm sewers shall be maintained,
repaired and replaced in accordance with the applicable city codes,
ordinances, regulations and standards of the city and the maintenance
agreement between the city and the developer, owner or association.



(1978 Code, § 31-22; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-23.  MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS.



   (A)   The owner of any development containing a private street which
is constructed after the effective date of this article (November 20,1991)
shall execute a maintenance agreement in form and substance satisfactory to
the city. The agreement shall obligate the owner (or property owners if the
development has multiple owners) of the development to maintain, repair and
replace any private street or private storm sewer determined by the city to
constitute a public hazard or public nuisance to the city or its residents
and shall provide a means of paying for the cost of such maintenance, repair
or replacement of the private streets and private storm sewers.



   (B)   The agreement shall further provide that if any units within
the development are conveyed to individual owners, an association comprised
of all owners of units within the development must be established prior to
such conveyance. The maintenance agreement (excluding the approved site plan
exhibit) shall be executed by the developer and delivered to the city prior
to the city issuing final site plan approval for the development containing
private streets. Prior to approval and execution of the agreement by the
city, the city shall attach the final approved site plan accurately depicting
the location of the private streets or private storm sewers. At the option of
the city, approved legal descriptions of the private streets or private storm
sewers may be attached in place of the approved site plan. The maintenance
agreement requiring the owner or owners to pay the expenses of the required
maintenance, repair and replacement shall be recorded against all of the
property within the development after site plan approval and prior to the
conveyance of any units to individual owners. The maintenance agreement shall
be referenced in the master deed for any condominium development.



   (C)   The agreement shall authorize the installation, repair,
maintenance or reconstruction of electrical, telephone, cable or other
utility lines within the easement of the private street if a public easement
for such purpose has not been granted by the owner. The owner shall be
responsible for payment of any administrative and legal fees incurred by the
city in connection with preparation or review of such agreement.



(1978 Code, § 31-23; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-24.  NAMING AND SIGNAGE OF PRIVATE STREETS.



   All private streets shall be named and identified with street signs in
accordance with the applicable city codes, ordinances, regulations and
standards.



(1978 Code, § 31-24; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-25.  VARIANCES.



   Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this article would involve practical difficulties or cause
unnecessary hardships, the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the power,
upon appeal, in specific cases, to modify the provisions of the article with
such conditions and safeguards as it may reasonably determine as may be in
harmony with the spirit of this article and so that public safety and welfare
be secured and substantial justice done. No variance of the provisions of
this article shall be granted unless it appears to the Board of Ordinance
Appeals by a preponderance of the evidence that all of the following facts
and conditions exist:



      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to
other properties in the city;



      (2)   The granting of such variance or modification will not
be materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to
the property or improvements in the vicinity of the property;



      (3)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect
the purposes of objectives of any master plan of the city.



   The Board of Ordinance Appeals may impose reasonable conditions upon
any approval to insure that the spirit and intent of this article is upheld.
If a variance is approved, the property owner shall file a notice of variance
with the County Register of Deeds relating to the property.



(1978 Code, § 31-25; Ord. No. 301, § 1, 11-6-91)



48-26-48-31.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE FROM SIDEWALKS



48-32.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Snow Removal
Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 31-32; Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-33.  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.



   It shall be the duty of the code enforcement official and the Police
Department of the city to enforce the provisions of this article.



(1978 Code, § 31-33; Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-34.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL .  The City Manager's designee responsible
for oversight of the enforcement of property maintenance and other codes
throughout the city.



   SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT .  Any motor-driven vehicle with a gross weight
of 2,000 pounds or more.



(1978 Code, § 31-34; Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-35.  DUTY OF PROPERTY OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.



   No person shall permit any snow or ice to remain on the public
sidewalks in the front, rear or sides of any house, premises, building, lot
or parcel of land owned, occupied or controlled by him or her longer than 24
hours after the same has fallen or formed.  Whenever any snow or ice has
fallen or formed on any such sidewalk, the person shall, within 24 hours
after the same has fallen or formed, remove all snow or ice so far as is
practicable and reasonable to allow the pedestrian use of such sidewalk. 
The City Manager may establish regulations for exempting public sidewalks in
the rear of a house, premises, building, lot or parcel of land from the
requirements of this section.



(1978 Code, § 31-35; Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-36.  ABATEMENT OF SNOW OR ICE OBSTRUCTIONS.



   (A)   When an owner or occupant fails to comply with the
requirements of this section, and the public sidewalk(s) in the front, rear,
or sides of the owner's or occupant's house, premises, building, lot, or
parcel of land remain obstructed with snow and/or ice, a city employee
authorized by the code enforcement official or Police Chief may affix a tag
upon a conspicuous location on the property.  The tag shall advise the owner
or occupant of the property that the accumulation of snow and/or ice upon the
adjoining sidewalks constitutes a violation of this article, and must be
abated within 24 hours.  The tag shall also state that if the owner or
occupant shall fail to comply with such order within the specified time, then
the city shall abate the accumulation of snow and/or ice and assess the
expense thereof to the premises and the owner thereof, together with a charge
to cover administrative expenses.  Upon expiration of the 24-hour period, if
the accumulation of snow and/or ice has not been abated, and the code
enforcement official or Police Chief determines that the accumulation of snow
and/or ice constitutes an obstruction of such sidewalk(s), the code
enforcement official may proceed to abate such obstruction.



   (B)   The code enforcement official shall take all steps necessary
to carry out the abatement of an accumulation of snow and/or ice upon a
sidewalk, shall keep an accurate record of all expenses in connection
therewith, and upon completion of the work to be performed shall submit a
report of the work done and all expenses in connection therewith to the City
Treasurer, who shall charge such expenses to the property and the owner
thereof.  Such expenses shall be paid to the city within 30 days, and shall
include, but not be limited to, the actual expenditure of funds to abate the
obstruction, the actual cost to the city for the time spent by city
employees, officers, or agents to abate, or work toward abatement of, the
obstruction (including actual salary, fringe benefits, equipment usage, and
other taxpayer-funded expenditures), attorney fees, consulting fees, any
court costs incurred for enforcement, and/or similar costs and expenses. 
The city's administrative expenses may be set by the city's annual
appropriations ordinance.  The unpaid expenses shall constitute a lien
against the property abutting the sidewalk .



(Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 396 § 9, 5-6-08)



Charter reference:



   Authority to require abutting property owners to remove snow and ice
from sidewalks, see § 16.07



48-37.  NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT; COUNCIL DETERMINATION.



   (A)   In the event that payment of the Treasurer's invoice is not
paid within 30 days, the code enforcement official shall notify the property
owner or occupant that the unpaid expenses shall be submitted to the City
Council for assessment against the property as provided in this section. 
Such notice shall be sent either by registered or certified mail sent to the
property owner's or occupant's last known address as shown on the assessment
roll of the city, or by publication.  Such notice shall state the basis of
the assessment and the cost thereof, and shall give a reasonable time, which
shall not be less than 30 days, in which payment shall be made.  In all
cases where payment is not made within the time limit, the same shall be
reported by the code enforcement official to the City Manager for submission
to the City Council.



   (B)   The City Council shall determine, by resolution, what amount
or part of the assessment shall be charged and the premises upon which the
same shall be levied as a special assessment or the person against whom the
assessment shall be charged.  After such determination, the assessor shall
spread such amounts, plus administrative and legal costs, against the
person(s) or description(s) of real property chargeable therewith on the next
roll for the collection of city taxes.



(Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-38.  DELINQUENT ASSESSMENTS.



   In addition to the remedies provided in this article, delinquent
assessments may also be collected by civil action as provided in Chapter 47.



(Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-39.  ASSESSMENTS BY CONTRACT.



   Property owners who are or plan to be absent from the city for an
extended period of time during the winter season may utilize the assessment
by contract provisions of Chapter 47.  So long as the property owner fully
complies with the contract, the assessments permitted by this article shall
not be added to the tax roll for the owner's property.



(Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-40.  PENALTY.



   The assessments provided for in this section are in addition to, not a
replacement of, the general penalties provided for in Chapter 1 of this code.



(Ord. No. 378, § 4, 5-3-05)



48-41.  EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall operate upon the sidewalks of the city any
snow removal equipment, unless the snow removal equipment is equipped with
pneumatic tires and a revolving type brush.  No person shall operate any
snow removal equipment which has an overall width greater than the width of
the public sidewalk and such equipment shall not in any case be wider than
six feet.  No person shall operate a scraper or plow-type snow removal
equipment upon the sidewalks of the city.



   (B)   This section shall be inapplicable to the owner or occupant
while removing snow or ice from the public sidewalks contiguous to his or her
premises.



(1978 Code, § 31-36)



48-42.  COMMERCIAL REMOVER'S PERMIT-REQUIRED.



   No person shall, for hire, gain or reward, operate any snow removal
equipment, as defined in this article, upon the sidewalks of the city,
without first obtaining an annual permit from the office of the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 31-37)



Cross reference:



   Permits generally, see Ch. 29



48-43.  SAME-ISSUANCE; FEE; PERMITTEE'S BOND AND INSURANCE.



   (A)   The City Clerk is authorized to grant a permit to any person
of good moral character to engage in the business of snow removal by the
operation of snow removal equipment upon the payment of a permit fee
established by the annual appropriations ordinance, together with the
execution of a surety bond to the city in the penal sum of $5,000, approved
by the City Attorney and  conditioned upon the following: that the permittee
will reimburse the city for any and all damage done to the sidewalks, trees
or any other public property by the permittee and a policy of insurance,
approved by the City Attorney, naming the city as an additional insured in
the amount of $10,000 property damage, $100,000 for injury to or death of one
person and $300,000 for injuries to or death of more than one person arising
out of the operation of such snow removal equipment.  Said bond and policies
shall be filed with the office of the City Clerk.



   (B)   Any permit issued shall be immediately revocable, without
further reason, if the insurance has been revoked or canceled.



   (C)   No permit shall be issued by the office of the City Clerk
until the approved bond and insurance policies have been filed in the office
of the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 31-38) (Ord. No. 388, § 24, 1-3-07)



48-44.  SAME-EXPIRATION; NOT TRANSFERABLE.



   All permits granted under the provisions of this article shall expire
on June 13 of each year and shall not be transferable.



(1978 Code, § 31-39)



48-45-48-49.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS AND FRANCHISES



48-50.  FRANCHISE REQUIREMENT.



   No person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private,
operating a public utility may transact local business in the city without
first obtaining a franchise from the city.  Competitive suppliers of natural
gas or electricity with customers in the city shall obtain a franchise from
the city.  A public utility providing transmission or distribution services
to any person, partnership, association or corporation, public or private,
offering any public utility, telecommunications, natural gas or electric
service to customers in the city shall promptly notify the City Clerk in
writing of the name and address of such person, partnership, association or
corporation.



(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 6-19-01)



48-51.  APPLICATIONS FOR FRANCHISES.



   (A)   Applications for franchises under this article will be made to
the City Clerk on a form prepared by the Clerk.  Applications for a
franchise require the payment of a non-refundable application fee of $5,000.



   (B)   Upon receiving a completed application, the Clerk will advise
the City Attorney who will negotiate and draft the appropriate franchise.



(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 6-19-01)



48-52.  FRANCHISES, GENERALLY.



   (A)   A franchise will contain such terms and conditions as deemed
appropriate by the City Council.  The City Council may require payment of a
franchise fee.  Unless submitted to the voters and approved by a
three-fifths majority, franchises are revocable at will by the city. 
Franchises may be issued for a term not exceeding 30 years.



   (B)   In the event that a holder of a franchise (or any subsidiary,
affiliate or other related company) pays a fee, charge, or other payment of
any kind on a periodic basis (i.e., monthly, quarterly, annually) to any
municipality in the State of Michigan which is higher or in addition to any
fees or charges set forth in a franchise with the city, the holder of a
franchise shall notify the city in writing of the details of such other
arrangement within 60 days of its effective date.  Upon receipt by the city
of such notice, a revocable franchise may be revoked upon notice from the
city.  As a condition for a new franchise, the city may require payment of a
similar fee or charge as provided to the third party.



   (C)   A person, partnership, association or corporation granted a
franchise under this article shall obtain all other necessary permits or
approvals for construction, maintenance and operation in the city.



(Ord. No. 355, § 1, 6-19-01)



48-53-48-59.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  CONCRETE WORK



48-60.  TITLE.



   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Sterling
Heights Concrete Ordinance."



(1978 Code, § 8-242; Ord. No. 396 § 8, 5-6-08)



48-61.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASEMENT FLOOR. A slab of concrete poured at the foundation line or
below the living quarters of any residential structure.



   BRICK PAVERS. Brick materials specifically designed and manufactured
for use on driveways, sidewalks and similar areas where there is likely to be
heavy pedestrian or vehicular use.



   DRIVEWAY. A slab of concrete from the sidewalk or property line to a
garage or to the building line setback.



   GARAGE FLOOR. A slab of concrete poured inside a garage.



   PORCH SLAB. A slab of concrete with or without a roof over front, back
or grade door.



   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. A slab of concrete parallel with a street and located
one foot from the property line in the public right-of-way.



   SERVICE WALK. A slab of concrete from a sidewalk or driveway to a
front, grade or service door, back or side porch slab.



   WOODEN. Wood products that have been pressure treated to a minimum of
.40 retention value.



(1978 Code, § 8-243; Ord. No. 177-D, § 1; 5-19-92; Ord. No. 396 § 8,
5-6-08)



48-62.  ADMINISTRATIVE MODIFICATION OF AND APPEALS FROM ORDERS, DECISIONS
AND THE LIKE MADE UNDER ARTICLE; VARIANCES.



   (A)   Administrative modification of sidewalk requirements.  The
City Manager, or his or her designate, may administratively modify the
requirement that sidewalks be installed in an existing developed one family
residential area if all of the following conditions have been met:



      (1)   An application signed by the property owner specifying
the particular requirement that is requested to be modified is filed and
accompanied by the appropriate filing fee as established by the City Council
in the annual appropriations ordinance;



      (2)   Documentation is presented establishing that the street
abutting the property is not paved in accordance with current city standards;



      (3)   The property owner shall execute and file with the
county register of deeds an agreement and notice of modification indicating
that a sidewalk modification has been granted and that the property owner and
successors in title and interest in the property shall be responsible for
installation of the sidewalk at their own expense or be subject to a special
assessment district if the City Council deems the installation of the
sidewalk to be necessary upon such street.



   (B)   Appeals and variance to requirements of concrete code chapter.
The Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide
appeals from and review any order, requirement, decision or determination
made by any administrative official charged with enforcing or administering
the terms of this article or any other ordinance applicable to sidewalks.
Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter would involve practical difficulties or cause unnecessary
hardships or would deny the property owner a substantial property right
enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity, the Board of Ordinance
Appeals shall have power upon appeal in specific cases to modify the
provisions of the article with such conditions and safeguards as it may
reasonably determine, as may be in harmony with the spirit of this article
and so that public safety and welfare be secured and substantial justice
done. No variance of the provisions of this article shall be granted unless
it appears to the Board of Ordinance Appeals by a preponderance of the
evidence that all of the following facts and conditions exist:



      (1)   There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or
conditions applicable to the property involved that do not apply generally to
other properties in the city;



      (2)   The variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in
the vicinity;



      (3)   The granting of the variance or modification will not be
materially detrimental to the public welfare or materially injurious to the
property or improvements in the vicinity of the property;



      (4)   The granting of the variance will not adversely affect
the purposes or objectives of any master plan of the city.



   Notice of the meeting at which the request for variance shall be
considered shall be given to all property owners whose property abuts the
property for which the variance is sought at least five days prior to the
date of the meeting at which the request is to be considered. If the variance
is approved, the property owner shall file a notice of variance with the
County Register of Deeds relating to the property.



   (C)   Appearance fee. The City Council may set a fee, in the annual
appropriations ordinance, for applicants to appear before the Board of
Ordinance Appeals requesting an administrative modification or a variance to
the requirements of the article.



   (D)   Modification of sidewalk requirements. If the City Council
modifies the sidewalk requirements in a platted residential subdivision
pursuant to the subdivision regulations, no variance to the requirements of
this article shall be required.



(1978 Code, § 8-244; Ord. No. 177-B, § 1, 9-19-78; Ord. No. 177-C, § 1,
8-18-87; Ord. No. 279, § 2, 10-3-89; Ord. No. 388, § 4, 1-3-07; Ord. No.
396 § 8, 5-6-08)



48-63.  PERMIT TO INSTALL, CONSTRUCT OR IMPROVE CURBS, APPROACHES, SIDEWALKS
OR DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to install, construct or
improve any curb, approach, public sidewalk or driveway within the city
without first having obtained a permit, except contractors working under the
terms of a contract with the city.



   (B)   Application for a permit shall be made on forms provided
therefor by the Building Official of the city and shall be accompanied by a
plan showing location and specifications for the proposed installation,
construction or improvement.



   (C)   A permit shall be granted by the Building Official only when
the application and plans conform to this article and any other ordinance
which may affect the application and the minimum standards and specifications
which have been or may be established therefor by resolution of the Council.



   (D)   At the time the permit is granted, the applicant shall pay a
fee in an amount established by the annual appropriations ordinance. The
permit fee shall be waived for a homeowner requesting a permit to replace a
section(s) of damaged or defective public sidewalk abutting his or her
property. The homeowner shall be required to obtain all necessary permits and
inspections required by ordinance.



(1978 Code,  § 8-245; Ord. No. 177-E, § 1, 5-16-95; Ord. No. 388, § 5,
1-3-07; Ord. No. 396 § 8, 5-6-08)  Penalty, see § 1-9



Cross reference:



   Permits generally, see Ch. 29; Streets and sidewalks, this chapter



48-64.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Any concrete poured in the city shall not be less than a six
bag mix, have a moisture content of not more than seven and one-half gallons
of water per sack of cement and not more than six parts of aggregate for each
one part of cement, by separate, dry volumetric measuring.



   (B)   No concrete shall be poured in freezing temperatures or when a
freezing temperature is predicted without the use of antifreezing chemicals
or protection from freezing by other approved methods.  No concrete shall be
poured upon frozen subgrade.



   (C)   All concrete poured for approaches, sidewalks, driveways,
service walks and slabs at grade doors shall have a broom finish.  Broom
finish marks shall not be more than one-sixteenth of an inch in depth. 



   (D)   Open rail inspection is required.  Final inspection of
concrete shall be made at the time of final building and/or site inspection.



   (E)   In the event of a conflict between a requirement of this
article and the requirements set forth in the Michigan Building Code, the
latter shall control if the provisions cannot be meaningfully reconciled.



(1978 Code, § 8-246; Ord. No. 177D, § 3, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 396 § 8, 5-6-08)



48-65.  CURBS AND APPROACHES.



   (A)   Any curb that is damaged will be restored to the original
condition, underpinning the street no less than eight inches deep and 12
inches under the street.  However, where a curb is cut for the purpose of
constructing an approach or a driveway, the curb cut shall be left reasonably
smooth.



   (B)   All approaches shall be poured no less than the full width of
the driveway and shall flare out 18 inches on each side at the curb or street
line and be no less than six inches thick and no less than four inches thick
at the sidewalk or lot line and have a nonextruding bituminous expansion at
the street or sidewalk.



   (C)   Concrete driveways and drive approaches may be repaired by the
use of asphalt resurfacing, provided the concrete driveway or approach meets
the minimum construction standards of subsection (B) of this section.



(1978 Code, § 8-247; Ord. No. 177-D, § 4, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 396 § 8,
5-6-08)



48-66.  SIDEWALKS.



   (A)   Public sidewalks shall be required when building residential
structures unless the City Council has modified the requirement for a
subdivision pursuant to the subdivision regulations of the city or a variance
to the sidewalk requirements for an individual residential lot or unplatted
residential parcel has been granted by the Board of Ordinance Appeals
pursuant to § 48-62 of this chapter.  Public sidewalks shall be provided in
connection with the development of commercial and industrial uses when the
Planning Department determines that there is a need for pedestrian
circulation on or between commercial or industrial sites.  In such cases,
the locations of sidewalks shall be indicated on and be installed in
accordance with the approved site plan.



   (B)   All public sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete poured
from lot line to lot line. However, on a corner lot or parcel, the sidewalk
shall be poured from curb or street line to the side and rear lot line, no
less than five feet wide and four inches thick, to within 18 inches of the
curb, and at this point, the sidewalk shall slope to eight inches thick
abutting up to the curb with a three-quarter inch by eight inch by five foot
nonextruding bituminous expansion joint.  (See following drawing.) 
Sidewalks shall be reinforced over water and sewer excavations and have a
nonextruding bituminous expansion strip, where passing a driveway or an
approach or abutting up to an existing sidewalk, at intervals of not less
than 50 feet and shall have control joints every five feet.



(1978 Code, § 8-248; Ord. No. 177-D, § 5, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 396 § 8,
5-6-08)



Cross references:



   Construction of sidewalks generally, see §§ 48-1 et seq.;



   Requirements of subdivision regulations relative to sidewalks, see App.
B, § 5.03(A)



48-67.  DRIVEWAYS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, driveways shall
be constructed of poured concrete extending to all garages.  Where no garage
exists, the concrete driveway shall be poured to the front or side building
line setback and shall be no less than ten feet wide and no less than four
inches thick.  It shall be reinforced over all excavated areas and shall
have a nonextruding bituminous expansion at the sidewalk and the garage
floor.  If a concrete driveway is parallel with and abutting a building, an
expansion joint shall be required to separate the driveway from the building
or foundation.  A control joint shall be installed for every ten feet by ten
feet square. If a driveway is widened, the approach must also be widened to
the same width with 18 inch flares at the street.



   (B)   Access from a second garage to a public or private street will
not be permitted from an unpaved surface but shall be from the paved driveway
required for the first garage or from a separate driveway meeting the
requirements of subsection (A) of this section.



   (C)   Where paving is proposed in the side yard to less than 18
inches from the property line, run off shall be contained within the property
by reverse pitch of one and one-half inches curb to prevent water, road salts
or other substances from entering onto the adjoining property.



(1978 Code, § 8-249; Ord. No. 177-D, § 6, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 177-F, § 1,
1-21-97; Ord. No. 396 § 8, 5-6-08)



48-68.  SERVICE WALKS.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, front service walks shall
be constructed of poured concrete in accordance with approved plans and the
provisions of this article.  Front service walks shall be no less than three
feet wide and four inches thick and shall be reinforced over all excavated
areas.



(1978 Code, § 8-250; Ord. No. 177-D, § 7, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 396 § 8,
5-6-08)



48-69.  USE OF BRICK PAVERS.



   (A)   Brick pavers or decorative stamped concrete may be used in
place of concrete driveways, approaches and service walks if installed in
accordance with the provisions of this section and the brick or other
manufacturer's recommended installation standards.



   Prior to the issuance of a permit for the installation of brick pavers
or decorative stamped concrete in an approach, the owner(s) of the property
shall execute an agreement in a form satisfactory to the city holding the
city harmless for any liability to repair or replace the approach with any
material other than concrete.



   (B)   At a minimum, the subbase must total at least eight inches
comprised of a base course of not less than four inches of compacted, crushed
rock or natural gravel approved for use with adequate drainage and an upper
layer of subbase of not less than four inches of materials approved by the
Building Department compacted to 95% compaction.  The base course shall be
inspected and approved prior to installation of the brick pavers.



(1978 Code, § 8-252; Ord. No. 177-D, § 9, 5-19-92; Ord. No. 177-G, § 1;
Ord. No. 396 § 8, 5-6-08)



CHAPTER 48A:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS



ARTICLE I.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



48A-1.  LEGISLATIVE INTENT.



   (A)   The rapid development and convergence of public and private
voice, two-way interactive communication and data services on twisted copper
pair wire, coaxial cable, fiber optic cable or wireless systems using the
public right-of-way carries the promise of economic growth, new investment by
the private sector and the ready availability of telecommunication tools for
streamlining and improving the delivery of products and services to residents
and businesses in the city.



   (B)   This chapter is intended to implement local, state and federal
policies that will accelerate the development of new and advanced
communication and information technologies and services to residents and
businesses in the city by opening telecommunication markets to competition.



   (C)   This chapter is also intended to protect the city’s
infrastructure, ensure open and equal access to telephone and advanced
telecommunication and information technologies and support an open and
competitive marketplace and level playing field in the use of the
right-of-way by companies offering public and private voice, two way
interactive communication or data services.



   (D)   This chapter is intended to minimize the disruption to the
right-of-way caused by the installation of overhead and underground lines and
facilities and to require those who use them to operate a telecommunication
system to cooperate with the city in the construction, maintenance and
restoration of the right-of-way.



   (E)   This chapter is intended to protect the public health, safety
and welfare by requiring that new lines, wires and cables be installed in
underground conduit wherever practical because there are too many unsightly
overhead lines, wires and cables and utility poles. They are proliferating,
adversely affecting public safety, detracting from property values and are
reaching the maximum safe capacity of poles and underground spaces.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



48A-2.  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate persons providing
telecommunication service using the public right-of-way in the city.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



48A-3.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   (A)   CITY. The City of Sterling Heights, Michigan.



   (B)   FACILITIES. Any plant, works, systems, improvements and
equipment owned, leased or used by a grantee, including poles, wires,
fixtures, underground circuits, conduits and other property used or installed
in the public right-of-way which is necessary or convenient for the
transmission and distribution of telecommunication service.



   (C)   GRANTEE. Any holder of a permit.



   (D)   PERMIT.



      (1)   The permit which a provider of telecommunication service
using the highways, streets, alleys or other public places must obtain from
the city under Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002, ("Act 48"); and



      (2)   The consent which a telegraph, telephone or other public
utility company using any right-of-way must obtain from the city under Public
Act 368 of 1925, § 13, as amended, ("Act 368") or both.



   (E)   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company or organization, including educational institutions
defined by Public Act 179 of 1991, § 102(F).



   (F)   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY . The entire area on, below, or above a
public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement, or waterway.  PUBLIC
RIGHT-OF-WAY does not include a federal, state or private right-of-way.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 10-15-02)



ARTICLE III.  PERMIT



48A-4.  CITY APPROVAL REQUIRED.



   (A)   No person shall install, construct, maintain or operate a
telecommunication system using the public right-of-way without a permit,
except as otherwise allowed by law.



   (B)   This chapter applies to any existing cable television system
which is used to provide any telecommunication service subject to Act 48.



   (C)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any
codes, ordinances or regulations of the city or the city's right to require a
grantee or other person utilizing a telecommunication service to secure
appropriate construction permits, plan reviews, inspections or authorizations
for such uses subject to the limitation on fees imposed by Act 48.



   (D)   The city may grant one or more permits for a telecommunication
system in the city subject to this chapter.



   (E)   The city specifically reserves the right to grant, at any
time, additional permits for telecommunication companies as it deems
appropriate. Additional permits shall not be deemed to modify, revoke,
terminate or damage any rights previously granted to any other grantee.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



48A-5.  APPLICATION PROCEDURES.



   (A)   The application for a new, renewed or amended permit to
install, construct or maintain a telecommunications system in the city shall
be made in writing in such form as may be prescribed by the Michigan Public
Service Commission.



   (B)   An application for a permit shall be accompanied by  an
application fee  set by the annual appropriations ordinance which may be
used to cover expenses, direct or indirect, incurred by the city in the
preparation of this chapter, amendments to this chapter, development of
requests for proposals, drafting of a permit and any amendments to them and
reviewing, investigating and evaluating applications .



   (C)   Upon the filing of an application for a bilateral permit as
promulgated by the Michigan  Public Service Commission and payment of the
application fee, the Telecommunication Commission shall consider the
application, may request information required by the application form as it
may reasonably deem necessary to establish the legal, financial, technical
and other qualifications of the applicant to provide telecommunication
service and make a written recommendation to the Council to approve or deny
the application.



   (D)   Upon the filing of an application for a unilateral permit as
promulgated by the Michigan Public Service Commission and payment of the
application fee, the City Manager or his designees shall consider the
application, may request additional information required by the application
form as they may reasonably deem necessary to establish the legal, financial,
technical and others qualifications of the applicant to provide
telecommunication service and approve or deny the application.



   (E)   The 45 day deadline for the city to approve or deny access to
a provider of telecommunications services under Act 48 shall be tolled until
all information required by the application is submitted.  The city shall
act reasonably and promptly on all applications filed for a permit involving
an easement or public place.  The Clerk shall report to the Michigan Public
Service Commission the date an application was received and the date the city
approved or denied access.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02; Ord. No. 388, §
25, 1-3-07



48A-6.  SERVICE AREA.



   A permit shall specifically describe the area of the city in which the
grantee may install any wires, cables, poles, conduits, fixtures and like
structures. The City Manager may consent to the laying and maintaining of
additional wires, cables, conduits, fixtures and like structures extending no
further than 500 feet from the right-of-way described in the permit.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97)



48A-7.  TERM.



   The term of the unilateral permit is three years.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, 1, 10-15-02)



48A-8.  POLICE POWER AND REGULATORY AUTHORITY RESERVED.



   (A)   Any right granted to any person under this chapter to use or
occupy any right-of-way shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the city in
the lawful exercise of the police power.



   (B)   Any right granted to any person under this chapter to use or
occupy any right-of-way shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting in any way the city in
the lawful exercise of the police power. The grant of a permit to any person
shall confer no right not specifically set forth in this chapter.



   (C)   A grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city
for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of the failure of the city
to have the authority to grant all or any part of a permit.



   (D)   The grantee expressly acknowledges by acceptance of a permit:



      (1)   It did so relying on its own investigation and
understanding of the power and authority of the city;



      (2)   It was not induced to accept the permit by any
understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or
on behalf of city or by any other third person concerning any term or
condition of a permit not expressed in this chapter;



      (3)   It has carefully read the terms and conditions of the
permit and it does accept all of the risks of the meaning of such terms and
conditions.



   (E)   If any state or federal law or regulation shall require a
grantee to perform any service, shall allow a grantee to perform any service
or shall prohibit a grantee from performing any service in conflict with the
terms this chapter, laws or regulation of the city or the permit, then as
soon as possible a grantee shall notify the city of the point of conflict
believed to exist before acting upon the state or federal law.



   (F)   If the city determines that a provision of this chapter is
affected by action of a court or of the state or federal government, the city
may modify any of the provisions to such reasonable extent as may be
necessary to carry out the full intent and purpose of this chapter.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, 1, 10-15-02)



48A-9.  SALE, ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A PERMIT.



   (A)   A permit may not be sold, transferred or assigned.



   (B)   Prior approval of the Council also shall be required where
ownership or control of more than 25% of the right of control of a grantee is
acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom
already owns or controls 25% or more or the right of control, singularly or
collectively ("change of control").



   (C)   The Council shall have 120 days from receipt of the written
application to act upon a request for approval. If the Council fails to
render a final decision on the request within that time, the request shall be
deemed granted unless the grantee and the Council agree to an extension of
the time.



   (D)   During the review period, the city may advise the grantee that
a public hearing before the Council is deemed necessary to evaluate any
potential adverse effect of the sale, transfer, assignment or change of
control. The grantee shall be given 14 day written notice and an opportunity
to participate in the hearing.



   (E)   The decision of the Council shall be in writing and subject to
review and appeal as provided by law.



   (F)   In reviewing a request for a sale, transfer, assignment or
change of control, the city may inquire into the technical, legal and
financial qualifications of the buyer, transferee or assignee, and the
grantee shall assist the city in so inquiring.



   (G)   No approval by the Council shall be required for a sale,
transfer, assignment or change of control to any person or entity
controlling, controlled by or under the same common control as the grantee.



   (H)   Any attempted sale, transfer or assignment of a permit,
facilities, control or similar action by the grantee in violation of this
section shall be null and void and shall constitute a material default by the
grantee.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97)



48A-10.  PERMIT AND OTHER PAYMENTS BY GRANTEE.



   (A)   For the reason that the right-of-way in the city used in the
operation of a telecommunication system are valuable public property, which
are acquired and are maintained by the city at great taxpayer expense and
that the use of the right-of-way is a valuable privilege without which a
person using them would be required to make a substantial capital investment
in right-of-way costs and acquisitions, a person shall pay:



      (1)   $1,000 per mile with a $5,000 minimum for a permit under
Public Act 368; or



      (2)   The statutory annual right-of-way maintenance fee for a
permit under Act 48.



   (B)   Miscellaneous fee considerations.



      (1)   A grantee shall not permit any other provider of
telecommunication service or cable service to attach to the grantee’s
poles, wire, cable, conduits or other facilities unless the other provider of
telecommunication service has obtained a permit from the city or the provider
of cable service has obtained a franchise from the city.



      (2)   The grantees sharing the same facilities shall each pay
a fee.



      (3)   A grantee originating signals over another
telecommunication system for which subscribers are billed is subject to the
fees described in this section.



      (4)   A grantee using the same telecommunication system to
provide cable service and any other telecommunication service is subject to
all fees set forth by its permit, franchise and this chapter, except it shall
receive a credit against fees due under its permit or this chapter for
amounts paid under its franchise.



      (5)   In the event a grantee enters into an agreement with a
public entity in Wayne, Oakland or Macomb County, Michigan and agrees to a
formula or method for determining minimum fees, which when applied in the
other public entity yields a larger amount than if the formula or method set
forth in subsection (B) were applied in the other public entity, then the
grantee shall pay fees to the city based on the formula or method yielding
the larger amount.



      (6)   Educational institutions, public libraries and nonprofit
associations or consortiums whose primary purpose is education, as defined by
Public Act 179, § 102(F) will pay to the city a one-time educational
telecommunication permit fee of $3,000, plus any administrative costs
incurred by the city in processing the permit application not to exceed
$2,000 in lieu of the fee required by subsection (A)(1) and (2).



   (C)   Permit fees under this chapter shall be in addition to any
other tax, charge, fee or payment due the city by a grantee.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 324-A, § 1, 11-3-99; Ord. No. 365, §
1, 10-15-02)



48A-11.  CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a grantee or any other person to open
or otherwise disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway, public
way or other public place for any purpose whatsoever, except emergency
repairs, without obtaining approval to do so from the City Engineer. A
violation of this subsection shall be cause to terminate the permit may be
deemed a material breach of the permit and shall subject the grantee to all
penalties and remedies prescribed by the City Code and to all other remedies,
legal or equitable, which are available to the city. A grantee shall promptly
notify the City Engineer upon making any emergency repairs and seek approval
as otherwise specifically provided by this Article and the City Code,
accepting all risks involved.



      (1)   A grantee shall submit to the City Engineer for review
and approval a concise description of the facilities proposed to be erected
or installed, including engineering drawings, if requested or required,
together with a, map indicating the proposed location of such facilities and
a general construction schedule.



      (2)   If a grantee fails to commence, pursue or complete any
repair or maintenance work required by law or by the provisions of this
chapter to be done in any right-of-way as designated by the City Engineer,
the City Engineer may cause the work to be done and the grantee shall pay to
the city's expenses within 30 days of the receipt of an itemized statement.



      (3)   The City Engineer shall give a grantee reasonable notice
of improvements where paving, re-grading or resurfacing of a permanent nature
is involved. The notice shall describe the nature and character of said
improvements, the schedule upon which they shall be made, the extent of the
improvements and the work schedule for the project.



      (4)   The city shall allow the grantee a reasonable time to
make such additions, alterations or repairs to its facilities as the grantee
deems necessary in advance of the city's commencement of said improvements so
as to permit the grantee to maintain continuity of service.



      (5)   A grantee shall coordinate its construction program and
all other work in the right-of-way with the city's construction, rebuilding,
resurfacing and repair. A grantee shall conduct all work, except emergency
repairs, in conjunction with or immediately prior to any construction,
rebuilding, resurfacing or repair planned by city and to prevent a street
from being disturbed by the grantee for a period of two years after it has
been constructed, rebuilt, resurfaced or repaired.



      (6)   Any opening or obstruction in, disturbance of or damage
to the right-of-way shall be properly guarded by adequate barriers, lights,
signals and warnings as to prevent danger to any person or vehicle using such
right-of-way and shall be properly and promptly repaired, all in a manner
specified and approved by the City Engineer, at the grantee's expense.



      (7)   Mini-hubs, switches, nodes and other equipment shall be
installed in underground enclosures whenever possible. The City Engineer's
approval shall be required for any buildings, mini-hubs, switches, nodes and
other equipment installed above ground in a right-of-way. The grantees shall
cooperate with private property owners in placing and screening structures
located above ground.



      (8)   No poles may be installed by a grantee without approval
by the City Engineer.



      (9)   The City Engineer may require a grantee to make use of
existing poles and conduit if fair and reasonable terms of use are available
to the grantee.



      (10)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as
authorizing the grantee to erect and maintain new poles in areas serviced by
existing poles. A grantee shall obtain written approval from the City
Engineer before erecting any new poles or installing underground conduits
where none exist at the time that the grantee seeks to install its
telecommunication system.



   (B)   The grantee shall maintain all wires, conduits, cables and
other real and personal property and facilities in good condition, order and
repair.



   (C)   A grantee shall construct and maintain its telecommunication
system in a manner consistent and in compliance with all applicable laws,
ordinances, construction standards, governmental requirements and technical
standards established by the Federal Communications Commission or state
agency.



   (D)   A grantee shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of
persons or property within the city or other areas where the grantee may have
equipment located. A grantee shall replace and restore all paving, sidewalk,
driveway, landscaping or surface of any property disturbed by construction or
maintenance of its telecommunication system in a good and workmanlike manner
within 24 hours after any damage is incurred.



   (E)   All working facilities, conditions and procedures used or
occurring during construction and operation of a telecommunication system
shall comply with the standards of the Occupational Safety and Health
Administration.



   (F)   Construction and maintenance of a telecommunication system
shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner and in close
coordination with public and private utilities serving the city following
accepted industry construction procedures and practices and working through
existing committees and organizations. A grantee shall join the Miss Dig
Program.



   (G)   All cable and wires shall be installed, where possible,
parallel with electric and telephone lines, and multiple cable configurations
shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering
consideration.



   (H)   House drops shall be grounded and installed in a neat and
workmanlike manner.  Buried drops shall be at least three inches deep. 
Underground installations made in the winter months shall be completely
buried by May 31 of each year.



   (I)   A grantee shall identify its telecommunication system and
subscriber drops by color code, stamping, engraving, tags, stickers or other
appropriate method selected by the grantee to distinguish among
telecommunication systems, utilities and other services.



   (J)   No erection or installation of any tower, pole, guy, anchor,
underground conduit, manhole or fixture for use in a telecommunication system
shall be commenced by any person until approval has been received from the
City Engineer.



   (K)   A grantee shall, at its own expense and without reimbursement
from the city, upon request, protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
relocate or remove from the right-of-way any property within 45 days of such
person when required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
vacation, freeway or street construction, sidewalks change or establishment
of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines,
signal lines, tracks, the construction or change of the transmission or
distribution facilities of any telephone or electric public utility or other
public improvements.



   (L)   The grantee shall, at the request of any person holding a
permit to move a building, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the
moving of said building.



      (1)   Such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires
shall be at the sole cost and expense of the person requesting the same, and
the grantee shall have the authority to request payment for the same in
advance before complying with such request.



      (2)   Any person making such a request from the grantee shall
give not less than seven business days notice of the contemplated move.



   (M)   The grantee may trim trees or other vegetation to prevent
their branches or leaves from touching or otherwise interfering with its
wires, cables or other structures in accordance with Chapter 51 of this Code.



      (1)   All trimming or pruning shall be at the sole cost of the
grantee.



      (2)   The grantee may contract for said trimming or pruning
services with any person approved by the city prior to the rendering of said
services. Any person engaged by the grantee to provide tree trimming or
pruning services shall be deemed an employee of the grantee when engaged in
said activity.



      (3)   The grantee shall obtain the written permission of the
owner of any privately owned tree or other negotiation before it trims or
prunes the same, unless otherwise provided by the permit.



      (4)   The grantee shall comply with all ordinances and
resolutions concerning city property.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, 1, 10-15-02)



48A-12.  OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION.



   All new construction shall be underground unless waived by the
Council.  When either the telephone or electrical service wires are placed
underground in an area, the grantee shall place its telecommunication system
underground in the same area.  Wire or cable passing under a street or
highway shall be installed in conduit.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



48A-13.  CONSTRUCTION AND PERFORMANCE BONDS.



   A grantee may not provide cable service without obtaining a franchise
to provide cable service.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



48A-14.  INDEMNIFICATION.



   Subject to Act 48, violation of any of the terms of this chapter shall
be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500 or 90 days in jail or
both.  Each day shall constitute a new violation.



(Ord. No. 324, § 1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 365, § 1, 10-15-02)



CHAPTER 49:  TRAFFIC AND VEHICLE CODE



ARTICLE I.  MICHIGAN VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED



49-1.  CODE ADOPTED.



   The Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of 1949, being M.C.L.A. §§
257.1 through 257.923, as amended and as it may be amended from time to time
and including all amendments through the effective date of this section, also
known as M.C.L. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, and the Uniform Traffic Code, as
amended and as it may be amended from time to time, including all amendments
through the effective date of this section, promulgated by the Department of
State Police pursuant to Public Act 62 of 1956, also known as M.C.L. §§
257.951 et seq., are adopted and incorporated by reference into the
ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights and shall be known as the Traffic
and Vehicle Code of the City of Sterling Heights. In case of conflict between
the provisions of the codes which cannot be resolved by construing them as
complementary or supplementary to each other, then the provision of the
Michigan Vehicle Code shall supersede and control.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Authority, see M.C.L. § 117.3(k)



49-2.  REFERENCES IN CODE.



   References in the Michigan Vehicle Code and Uniform Traffic Code to
"local authorities" shall mean the City of Sterling Heights. For purposes of
citing to this chapter, the section number of the respective code should be
inserted as demonstrated in the following example:



 

M.C.L. 257.626b
 
Careless Driving
 
City of Sterling Heights Cite:
 
49-1:626b


U.T.C. Sec. 5.98
 
Impeding Traffic
 
City of Sterling Heights Cite:
 
49-1:5.98



 



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-3.  NOTICE TO BE PUBLISHED.



   The City Clerk shall publish this chapter in the manner required by law
and shall publish, at the same time, a notice stating the purpose of the
Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform Traffic Code and the fact that a
complete copy of each code is available to the public at the office of the
Clerk for inspection.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-4.  PENALTIES.



   The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code and the Uniform
Traffic Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city will
not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code for which the maximum
period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days unless such enforcement is
otherwise permitted by law.  No term of imprisonment shall exceed 93 days,
and no fine shall exceed $500 for a violation of this chapter, unless a
higher term of imprisonment or a higher fine is otherwise permitted by law.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00; Ord. No. 422, § 2, 12-4-12)



49-5.  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   The definitions of words or phrases in the Michigan Vehicle
Code and Uniform Traffic Code shall apply throughout this chapter unless
otherwise modified in this section. Conflict between definitions in the
respective codes shall be resolved as explained in § 49-1.



   (B)   For purposes of impounding or removing vehicles pursuant to
the Michigan Vehicle Code’s provisions for abandoned vehicles, impoundment
of vehicles and removal of vehicles from public or private property, VEHICLE
means every vehicle that is self-propelled, including but not limited to
industrial equipment, such as a forklift, a front-end loader or other
construction equipment, as well as watercraft, snowmobiles, off-road vehicles
and trailers, whether or not registration is required under the Michigan
Vehicle Code.



   (C)   VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION NUMBER means a numeric or alphanumeric
symbol assigned or affixed to a vehicle for purposes of registration and/or
identification. For vehicles that do not bear vehicle identification numbers,
any registration number, identification mark or other information which
serves to identify or track a particular vehicle shall suffice when a vehicle
identification number is required pursuant to the sections of the Michigan
Vehicle Code which address abandoned vehicles, impoundment of vehicles and
removal of vehicles from public or private property, when such sections are
relied upon by the Police Department for removal or impoundment of vehicles
not subject to registration requirements.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-6.  OPERATING WHILE INTOXICATED - ALCOHOL CONTENT OF .17 OR MORE.



   As permitted by and in accordance with the Home Rule City Act, Section
625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code, codified as MCL 257.625(1)(c), as
amended and as it may be amended from time to time, is adopted by
reference.  Violation of this section is punishable by 1 or more of the
following:



   (A)   Community service for not more than 360 hours.



   (B)   Imprisonment for not more than 180 days.



   (C)   A fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00.



(Ord. No. 422, § 1,12-4-12)



Statutory reference:



    Authority, see M.C.L. § 117.3(k)



49-7-49-10.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS



49-11.  APPLICATION TO SCHOOL PROPERTY.



   All provisions of this Code relative to the operation, parking without
fees and the speed of motor vehicles shall include and shall be applicable
and enforceable upon the property in the city of any board of education or
school district.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-12-49-20.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  SNOWMOBILES



49-21.  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions set forth in the Uniform Traffic Code and the Natural
Resources and Environmental Protection Act (referred to hereinafter as the
"Act"), as amended and as it may be amended from time to time, including all
amendments through the effective date of this section, shall apply for
purposes of this article. Any conflict between definitions shall be resolved
as explained in § 49-1.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 324.82101; U.T.C. §§ 10.1 et seq.



49-22.  APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of the Uniform Traffic Code shall only apply to the
extent that they do not conflict with this article.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-23.  CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; REGISTRATION DECAL; NECESSITY;
EXCEPTIONS; VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, a snowmobile shall not be
operated unless the owner first obtains a certificate of registration and a
registration decal. The certificate of registration shall be secured at the
time of purchase or transfer of ownership. A certificate of registration or a
registration decal is not required for a snowmobile operated exclusively on
lands owned or under the control of the snowmobile owner or for a snowmobile
used entirely in a safety education and training program conducted by a
certified snowmobile safety instructor and authorized pursuant to § 82108 of
the Act.



   (B)   A person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall
be fined not more than $50.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82103



49-24.  SPECIAL EVENTS.



   A certificate of registration or a registration decal is not required
for a snowmobile that is exclusively operated in a special event of limited
duration conducted according to a prearranged schedule under a permit from
the governmental unit having jurisdiction.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82104



49-25.  POSSESSION AND DISPLAY OF CERTIFICATE AND DECAL.



   The certificate of registration issued pursuant to § 82105 of the Act
shall accompany the vehicle, shall be legible and shall be made available for
inspection upon demand by a police officer.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82105



49-26.  SAFETY CERTIFICATES.



   A person less than 17 years of age who successfully completes the
training program set forth in § 82108 of the Act shall carry the safety
certificate on his or her person whenever operating a snowmobile in this
city. Failure to comply with this section shall result in a fine of not more
than $25.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82108



49-27.  REGISTRATION NUMBER; DISPLAY; EXPIRATION OF CERTIFICATES OF
REGISTRATION.



   The owner of a snowmobile having been issued a certificate of
registration for the snowmobile shall affix to each side of the forward half
of the cowl above the footwell of the snowmobile the registration decal
assigned to that snowmobile. The registration decal shall be as prescribed by
the Department.



   Beginning July 1, 1999, the registration decal shall include the
registration expiration date and the registration number and shall contain
two letters and four numbers. The numbers shall contrast so as to be
distinctly visible and legible. A number other than the number awarded to the
snowmobile on the registration certificate or granted reciprocity under this
part shall not be attached or otherwise displayed on the snowmobile.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82113



49-28.  NOTICE OF DESTRUCTION, ABANDONMENT, SALE OR CHANGE OF ADDRESS; LOST,
MUTILATED OR ILLEGIBLE CERTIFICATES.



   (A)   The owner of a snowmobile shall notify the Department of State
within 15 days if the snowmobile is destroyed or abandoned, is sold or an
interest in the snowmobile is transferred either wholly or in part to another
person or if the owner’s address no longer conforms to the address
appearing on the certificate of registration.



   (B)   If a certificate of registration is lost, mutilated or
illegible, the owner of the snowmobile shall obtain a duplicate of the
certificate of registration.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1,10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82114



49-29.  SNOWMOBILE TRAIL PERMIT STICKERS.



   (A)   In addition to registration of a snowmobile as provided in the
Act, except as otherwise provided, a person who desires to operate a
snowmobile in this city shall purchase a Michigan snowmobile trail permit
sticker.



   (B)   The trail permit sticker shall be permanently affixed to the
forward half of the snowmobile directly above or below the headlight of the
snowmobile.



   (C)   A snowmobile used solely for transportation on the frozen
surface of public waters for the purpose of ice fishing is exempt from the
requirement of purchasing and displaying a snowmobile trail permit sticker
under this section.



   (D)   A person who fails to secure a permit under this section or
who violates subsection (B) of this section is responsible for a civil
infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $50.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82118



49-30.  REGULATION OF SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS.



   A person shall not operate a snowmobile upon a public highway, land
used as an airport or street or on a public or private parking lot not
specifically designated for the use of snowmobiles, except under the
following conditions and circumstances.



   (A)   A snowmobile may be operated on the right-of-way of a public
highway, except a limited access highway, if it is operated at the extreme
right of the open portion of the right-of-way and with the flow of traffic on
the highway. However, a snowmobile may be operated on the right-of-way of a
public highway against the flow of traffic if the right-of-way is a
snowmobile trail designated by the Department. Snowmobiles operated on the
right-of-way of a public highway shall travel single file and shall not be
operated abreast, except when overtaking and passing another snowmobile. In
the absence of a posted snowmobile speed limit, a snowmobile operated on the
right-of-way of a public highway shall be limited to the speed limit posted
on the public highway.



   (B)   A snowmobile may be operated on the roadway or shoulder when
necessary to cross a bridge or culvert if the snowmobile is brought to a
complete stop before entering onto the roadway or shoulder and the driver
yields the right-of-way to an approaching vehicle on the highway.



   (C)   In a court action in this state where competent evidence
demonstrates that a vehicle that is permitted to be operated on a highway
pursuant to the Michigan Vehicle Code is in a collision with a snowmobile on
a roadway, the driver of the snowmobile involved in the collision shall be
considered prima facie negligent.



   (D)   A snowmobile may be operated across a public highway other
than a limited access highway, at right angles to the highway, for the
purpose of getting from one area to another when the operation can be done in
safety and another vehicle is not crossing the highway at the same time in
the same general area. An operator shall bring his or her snowmobile to a
complete stop before proceeding across the public highway and shall yield the
right-of-way to all oncoming traffic.



   (E)   A duly constituted police officer may authorize use of a
snowmobile on a public highway or street within the city when an emergency
occurs and conventional motor vehicles cannot be used for transportation due
to snow or other extreme highway conditions.



   (F)   A snowmobile may be operated on a highway or street for a
special event of limited duration conducted according to a prearranged
schedule only under permit from the governmental unit having jurisdiction.
The event may be conducted on the frozen surface of public waters only under
permit from the Department.



   (G)   The city may by ordinance designate one or more specific
public highways or streets as egress and ingress routes for the use of
snowmobiles.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82119



49-31.  AGE RESTRICTIONS, OPERATORS, VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   A parent or legal guardian shall not permit his or her child
who is less than 12 years of age to operate a snowmobile without the direct
supervision of an adult except on land owned or under the control of the
parent or legal guardian.



   (B)   A person who is at least 12 but less than 17 years of age may
operate a snowmobile if one of the following conditions exist:



      (1)   The person is under the direct supervision of a person
who is 21 years of age or older;



      (2)   The person has in his or her immediate possession a
snowmobile safety certificate issued pursuant to a program conducted under §
82107 of the Act;



      (3)   The person is on land owned or under the control of his
or her parent or legal guardian;



      (4)   The person possesses a snowmobile safety certificate
issued to the person under the authority of a law of another state or
province of Canada.



   (C)   A person who is operating a snowmobile pursuant to subsection
(B)(2) shall present the snowmobile safety certificate to any police officer
upon demand.



   (D)   Notwithstanding § 49-30, an operator who is less than 12
years of age shall not cross a highway or street. An operator who is at least
12 years of age but less than 17 years of age may cross a highway or street
only if he or she has a valid snowmobile safety certificate in his or her
immediate possession.



   (E)   The owner of a snowmobile shall not permit the snowmobile to
be operated contrary to this section.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82120



49-32.  HUNTING OR PURSUING BIRDS OR ANIMALS, PROHIBITION.



   A snowmobile shall not be used to hunt, pursue, worry or kill a wild
bird or animal.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82121



49-33.  LIGHTS AND BRAKES.



   A snowmobile shall not be operated unless it has at least one
headlight, one taillight and adequate brakes capable, while the snowmobile
travels on packed snow and carries an operator who weighs 175 pounds or more
of stopping the snowmobile in not more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour or of locking the snowmobile’s traction belt or
belts.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82122



49-34.  HELMETS.



   A person operating or riding on a snowmobile shall wear a crash helmet
on his or her head. Crash helmets shall be approved by the United States
Department of Transportation. This section does not apply to a person riding
on or operating a snowmobile on his or her own private property.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82123



49-35.  PROHIBITED SNOWMOBILE OPERATIONS AND ACTIONS.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile under any of the
following circumstances:



      (1)   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper
having due regard for conditions then existing;



      (2)   In a forest nursery, planting area or public lands
posted or reasonably identifiable as an area of forest reproduction when
growing stock may be damaged or posted or reasonably identifiable as a
natural dedicated area that is in Zone 2 or Zone 3 as defined by the Act;



      (3)   On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet
of a person, including a skater, not in or upon a snowmobile or within 100
feet of a fishing shanty or shelter except at the minimum speed required to
maintain forward movement of the snowmobile or on an area which has been
cleared of snow for skating purposes unless the area is necessary for access
to the public water;



      (4)   Without a muffler in good working order and in constant
operation from which noise emission at 50 feet at right angles from the
vehicle path under full throttle does not exceed 86 DBA, decibels on the "a"
scale on a sound meter having characteristics defined by American Standards
Association S1, 4-1966 "general purpose sound meter." This subdivision does
not apply to a snowmobile that is being used in an organized race on a course
which is used solely for racing;



      (5)   Within 100 feet of dwelling between 12:00 midnight and
6:00 a.m. at a speed greater than the minimum required to maintain forward
movement of the snowmobile;



      (6)   In an area on which public hunting is permitted during
the regular November firearm deer season from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and
from 2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency, for law enforcement
purposes, to go to and from a permanent residence or a hunting camp otherwise
inaccessible by a conventional wheeled vehicle or for the conduct of
necessary work functions involving land and timber survey, communication and
transmission line patrol and timber harvest operations or on the person’s
own property or property under the person’s control or as an invited guest;



      (7)   While transporting on the snowmobile a bow, unless
unstrung or encased, or a firearm, unless unloaded in both barrel and
magazine and securely encased;



      (8)   On or across a cemetery or burial ground;



      (9)   Within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area, except
when traveling on a country road right-of-way pursuant to the Act or a
snowmobile trail that is designated and funded by the Department. A
snowmobile may enter such an area for the purpose of servicing the area or
for medical emergencies;



      (10)   On a railroad or railroad right-of-way. This
prohibition shall not apply to railroad personnel, public utility personnel,
law enforcement personnel while in the performance of their duties and
persons using a snowmobile trail located on or along a railroad right-of-way
or an at-grade snowmobile trail crossing of a railroad right-of-way which has
been expressly approved in writing by the owner of the right-of-way and each
railroad company using the tracks and which meets the conditions imposed in
subsections (2) and (3) of § 82126 of the Act. A snowmobile trail or an
at-grade snowmobile trail shall not be constructed on a right-of-way
designated by the federal government as a high-speed rail corridor.



   (B)   A person shall not alter, deface, damage or remove a
snowmobile trail sign or control device.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82126



49-36.  CARELESS OR NEGLIGENT OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile upon a highway, public
trail, frozen surface of a public lake, stream, river, pond or another public
place, including but not limited to an area designated for the parking of
snowmobiles or other motor vehicles, in a careless or negligent manner likely
to endanger any person or property.



   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is
responsible for a civil infraction.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82126a



49-37.  OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES IN WILLFUL OR WANTON DISREGARD FOR SAFETY
OF PERSONS OR PROPERTY.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile upon a highway, public
trail, frozen surface of a public lake, stream, river, pond or another public
place, including but not limited to an area designated for the parking of
snowmobiles or other motor vehicles, in willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property.



   (B)   A person who violates subsection (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $250.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82126b



49-38. OPERATION OF A SNOWMOBILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR
OR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.



   (A)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile in this city if either
of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or a controlled substance or both;



      (2)   The person has a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or
more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67
milliliters of urine.



   (B)   The owner of a snowmobile or a person in charge or in control
of a snowmobile shall not authorize or knowingly permit the snowmobile to be
driven or operated by a person who is under the influence of intoxicating
liquor or a controlled substance, or both, or who has a blood alcohol content
of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath
or per 67 milliliters of urine.



   (C)   A person shall not operate a snowmobile when, due to the
consumption of an intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or both, the
person’s ability to operate the snowmobile is visibly impaired. If a person
is charged with violating subsection (A) of this section, a finding of guilty
under this subsection may be rendered.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82127



49-39.  CONVICTIONS AND PENALTIES.



   (A)   This section becomes effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   If a person is convicted of violating § 49-38(A), the
following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be
punished by one or more of the following:



         a.   Community service for not more than 45 days;



         b.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days;



         c.   A fine of not less than $100 or more than $500.



   (C)   A person sentenced to perform service to the community under
this section shall not receive compensation and shall reimburse the city for
the cost of supervision incurred by the city as a result of the person’s
activities in that service if ordered by the court.



   (D)   In addition to the sanctions prescribed under subsection (B)
of this section, the court may order the person to pay the costs of the
prosecution. The court shall also impose sanctions under § 49-50.



   (E)   A person who is convicted of violating § 49-38(B) is guilty
of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a
fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both.



   (F)   If a person is convicted of violating § 49-38(C), the
following apply:



      (1)   The person is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by one
or more of the following:



         a.   Community service for not more than 45 days;



         b.   Imprisonment for not more than 93 days;



         c.   A fine of not more than $300.



      (2)   In addition to the sanctions prescribed in subsection
(1), the court may order the person to pay the costs of the prosecution. The
court shall also impose sanctions under § 49-50.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provision, see M.C.L. § 324.82128; M.C.L. § 324.82129



49-40.  ACCIDENTS, NOTIFICATION OF AUTHORITIES.



   The operator of a snowmobile involved in an accident resulting in
injuries to or the death of any person or property damage in an estimated
amount of $100 or more shall immediately by the quickest means of
communication notify the Police Department.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82132



49-41.  VIOLATIONS OF ARTICLE; MISDEMEANOR.



   Except as otherwise provided in this article, a person who violates
this article is guilty of a misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82133



49-42.  VIOLATIONS; APPEARANCE TICKETS, ISSUANCE; OWNER AS OPERATOR, PRIMA
FACIE EVIDENCE.



   (A)   A police officer may issue appearance tickets for violations
of this article pursuant to M.C.L. §§ 764.9a through 764.9e.



   (B)   In a proceeding for a violation of this article involving
prohibited operation or conduct, the registration number displayed on a
snowmobile constitutes prima facie evidence that the owner of the snowmobile
was the person operating the snowmobile at the time of the offense.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82134



49-43.  FAILURE TO STOP SNOWMOBILE UPON SIGNAL BY OFFICER, OFFENSE.



   An operator of a snowmobile who is given by hand, voice, emergency
light or siren a visual or audible signal by a police officer acting in the
lawful performance of his or her duty, directing the operator to bring his or
her snowmobile to a stop and who willfully fails to obey the direction by
increasing his or her speed or extinguishing his or her lights or who
otherwise attempts to flee or elude the officer is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The officer giving the signal shall be in uniform. A vehicle or snowmobile
which is used by an officer at night for purposes of enforcing this article
shall be identified as an official law enforcement vehicle or snowmobile.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82135



49-44.  ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT; PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS.



   (A)   A police officer, without a warrant, may arrest a person if
the officer has reasonable cause to believe that the person was, at the time
of an accident, the operator of a snowmobile involved in the accident in this
city while in violation of § 49-38(A) and (C).



   (B)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a
person was operating a snowmobile and that, by the consumption of
intoxicating liquor, the person may have affected his or her ability to
operate a snowmobile may require the person to submit to a preliminary
chemical breath analysis. The following apply with respect to a preliminary
chemical breath analysis:



      (1)   A police officer may arrest a person based in whole or
in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis;



      (2)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis
are admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in § 49-51
or in an administrative hearing solely to assist the court or hearing officer
in determining a challenge to the validity of an arrest. This subdivision
does not limit the introduction of other competent evidence offered to
establish the validity of an arrest;



      (3)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath
analysis remains subject to the requirements of §§ 49-51 to 49-53 and §
82146 of the Act for the purposes of chemical tests described in those
sections;



      (4)   A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis upon a lawful request by a police officer is guilty of a
misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82136.



49-45.  CHEMICAL TEST AND ANALYSIS OF BLOOD, URINE OR BREATH.



   (A)   The following apply with respect to a chemical test and
analysis of a person’s blood, urine or breath other than a preliminary
chemical breath analysis:



      (1)   The amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance, or both, in an operator’s blood at the time alleged as shown by
chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine or breath is admissible into
evidence in any civil or criminal proceeding;



      (2)   A person arrested for a crime described in § 49-51(A)
shall be advised of all of the following:



         a.   That if the person takes a chemical test of his or
her blood, urine or breath administered at the request of a police officer,
the person has the right to demand that someone of the person’s own
choosing administer one of the chemical tests; that the results of the test
are admissible in a judicial proceeding as provided under this part and shall
be considered with other competent evidence in determining the innocence or
guilt of the defendant; and that the person is responsible for obtaining a
chemical analysis of a test sample obtained pursuant to the person’s own
request;



         b.   That if the person refuses the request of a police
officer to take a test described in subparagraph a, the test shall not be
given without a court order, but the police officer may seek to obtain such a
court order;



         c.   That the person’s refusal of the request of a
police officer to take a test described in subparagraph a will result in
issuance of an order that the person not operate a snowmobile.



   (B)   A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a licensed
nurse or medical technician under the direction of a licensed physician,
qualified to withdraw blood and acting in a medical environment may withdraw
blood at the request of a police officer for the purpose of determining the
amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance, or both, in a
person’s blood, as provided in this subsection. A qualified person who
withdraws or analyzes blood, or assists in the withdrawal or analysis, in
accordance with this part is not liable for a crime or civil damages
predicated on the act of withdrawing or analyzing blood and related
procedures unless the withdrawal or analysis is performed in a negligent
manner.



   (C)   A rule relating to a chemical test for alcohol or a controlled
substance promulgated under the Michigan Vehicle Code, Public Act 300 of
1949, being M.C.L. §§ 257.1 through 257.923, applies to a chemical test
administered under this article.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82137



49-46.  ADMINISTRATION OF CHEMICAL TEST, ANALYSIS OF SAMPLE.



   (A)   A chemical test described in § 49-45 shall be administered at
the request of a police officer having reasonable grounds to believe the
person has committed a crime described in § 49-51(A). A person who takes a
chemical test administered at the request of a police officer, as provided in
§ 49-45, shall be given a reasonable opportunity to have someone of the
person's own choosing administer one of the chemical tests described in §
49-45 within a reasonable time after the person’s detention, and the
results of the test are admissible and shall be considered with other
competent evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant. If
the person charged is administered a chemical test by someone of the
person’s own choosing, the person charged is responsible for obtaining a
chemical analysis of the test sample.



   (B)   If, after an accident, the operator of a snowmobile involved
in an accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the
operator’s blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of medical
treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample are admissible
in any civil or criminal proceeding to show the amount of alcohol or presence
of a controlled substance, or both, in the person’s blood at the time
alleged, regardless of whether the person had been offered or had refused a
chemical test. The medical facility or person performing the chemical
analysis shall disclose the results of the analysis to a prosecuting attorney
who requests the results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in
this subsection. A medical facility or person disclosing information in
compliance with this subsection is not civilly or criminally liable for
making the disclosure.



   (C)   If, after an accident, the operator of a snowmobile involved
in an accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent’s blood shall be
withdrawn in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the purpose of
determining the amount of alcohol or the presence of a controlled substance,
or both, in the decedent’s blood. The medical examiner shall give the
results of the chemical analysis of the sample to the Police Department, and
the Police Department shall forward the results to the Department of State
Police.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82138



49-47.  ADMISSIBILITY OF OTHER COMPETENT EVIDENCE; CHEMICAL TESTS;
DISCLOSURE OF RESULTS; WRITTEN REQUESTS,TIME LIMITATIONS, FAILURE TO COMPLY
WITH REQUEST AS BAR TO ADMISSIBILITY.



   (A)   The provisions of §§ 49-45 and 49-46 relating to chemical
testing do not limit the introduction of any other competent evidence bearing
upon the question of whether a person was impaired by, or under the influence
of, intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, or both, or whether the
person had a blood alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters
of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine.



   (B)   If a chemical test described in §§ 49-45 and 49-46 is
administered, the results of the test shall be made available to the person
charged or the person’s attorney upon written request to the prosecution,
with a copy of the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall
furnish the results at least two days before the day of the trial. The
results of the test shall be offered as evidence by the prosecution in that
trial. Failure to fully comply with the request bars the admission of the
results into evidence by the prosecution.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82139



49-48.  CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF BLOOD, URINE OR BREATH; PRESUMPTIONS.



   (A)   Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of §
49-38(A)(2), the amount of alcohol in the driver’s blood at the time
alleged as shown by chemical analysis of the person’s blood, urine or
breath gives rise to the following presumptions:



      (1)   If at the time the defendant had a blood alcohol content
of 0.07 grams or less per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath
or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant’s
ability to operate a snowmobile was not impaired due to the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and that the defendant was not under the influence of
intoxicating liquor;



      (2)   If at the time the defendant had a blood alcohol content
of more than 0.07 grams but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of
blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be
presumed that the defendant’s ability to operate a snowmobile was impaired
within the provisions of § 49-38(C) due to the consumption of intoxicating
liquor;



      (3)   If at the time the defendant had a blood alcohol content
of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath
or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the defendant was
under the influence of intoxicating liquor.



   (B)   A person’s refusal to submit to a chemical test as provided
in §§ 49-45 and 49-46 is admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime
described in § 49-51 only for the purpose of showing that a test was offered
to the defendant, but not as evidence in determining innocence or guilt of
the defendant. The jury shall be instructed accordingly.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82140



49-49.  PLEAS OF GUILTY OR NOLO CONTENDERE; MAXIMUM IMPRISONMENT OR  FINES;
SENTENCING; SCREENING AND ASSESSMENT.



   (A)   This section becomes effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   Before accepting a plea of guilty or nolo contendere under §
49-38, the court shall advise the accused of the maximum possible term of
imprisonment and the maximum possible fine that may be imposed for the
violation.



   (C)   Before imposing sentence, other than court-ordered operating
sanctions, for a violation of § 49-38(A) or(C), the court shall order the
person to undergo screening and assessment by a person or agency designated
by the office of substance abuse services to determine whether the person is
likely to benefit from rehabilitative services, including alcohol or drug
education or treatment programs. As part of the sentence, the court may order
the person to participate in and successfully complete one or more
appropriate rehabilitative programs. The person shall pay for the costs of
the screening, assessment and rehabilitative services.



   (D)   Each Municipal Judge and each Clerk of a Court of Record shall
keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged with a
violation of § 49-38(A) or(C). The Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court of
Record shall prepare and immediately forward to the Secretary of State an
abstract of the Court of Record for each case charging a violation of §
49-38(A) or(C).



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82141



49-50.  ACCEPTANCE OF GUILTY OR NOLO CONTENDERE PLEAS, GUILTY VERDICTS.



   (A)   Immediately upon acceptance by the court of a plea of guilty
or nolo contendere or upon entry of a verdict of guilty for a violation of §
49-38(A) or (C), whether or not the person is eligible to be sentenced as a
multiple offender, the court shall consider all prior convictions established
under § 82130 of the Act, except those convictions that, upon motion by the
defendant, are determined by the court to be constitutionally invalid and
shall impose the following sanctions:



      (1)   For a conviction under § 49-38(A):



         a.   If the court finds that the person has no prior
convictions within seven years for a violation of § 82127(1), (3), (4) or
(5) of the Act, former § 15a(1), (3), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of 1968,
or former § 15a or another snowmobile substance abuse offense or that the
person has one prior conviction within seven years for a violation of §
82127(3) of the Act, former § 15a(3) of Public Act 74 of 1968, a local
ordinance substantially corresponding to § 82127(3) or a law of another
state substantially corresponding to § 82127(3), the court shall order that
the person not operate a snowmobile for not less than six months or more than
two years and shall require that the person take and successfully complete
the snowmobile safety education and training program before operating a
snowmobile.



         b.   If the court finds that the person has one or more
prior convictions within seven years for a violation of § 82127(1), (4) or
(5) of the Act, former § 15a(1), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of 1968 or
former § 15a, a local ordinance substantially corresponding to § 82127(1)
or § 15a or a law of another state substantially corresponding to §
82127(1), (4) or (5) or former § 15a or that the person has two or more
prior convictions within ten years for a violation of § 82127(1), (3), (4)
or (5) of the Act, former § 15a(1), (3), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of 1968
or former § 15a or another snowmobile substance abuse offense, the court
shall order, without an expiration date, that the person not operate a
snowmobile.



      (2)   For a conviction under section 49-38(C):



         a.   If the court finds that the convicted person has no
prior conviction within seven years for a violation of § 82127(1), (3), (4)
or (5) of the Act, former § 15a(1), (3), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of
1968, former § 15a or another snowmobile substance abuse offense, the court
shall order that the person not operate a snowmobile for not less than 90
days or more than one year;



         b.   If the court finds that the person has one prior
conviction within seven years for a violation of § 82127(1), (3), (4) or (5)
of the Act, former § 15a(1), (3), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of 1968,
former § 15a or another snowmobile substance abuse offense, the court shall
order that the person not operate a snowmobile for not less than six months
or more than two years;



         c.   If the court finds that the person has two or more
prior convictions within ten years for a violation of § 82127(1), (3), (4)
or (5) of the Act, former § 15a(1), (3), (4) or (5) of Public Act 74 of
1968, former § 15a or another snowmobile substance abuse offense, the court
shall order, without an expiration date, the person not to operate a
snowmobile.



   (B)   As used in this section, ANOTHER SNOWMOBILE SUBSTANCE ABUSE
OFFENSE means a local ordinance substantially corresponding to § 82127(1) or
(3) of the Act or a law of another state substantially corresponding to §
82127(1), (3), (4) or (5) of the Act.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82142



49-51.  IMPLIED CONSENT; CHEMICAL TESTS OF BLOOD, BREATH, OR URINE;
CIRCUMSTANCES GOVERNING AND CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS; ADMINISTRATION OF TEST.



   (A)   A person who operates a snowmobile is considered to have given
consent to chemical tests of his or her blood, breath or urine for the
purpose of determining the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance or both in his or her blood in all of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The person is arrested for a violation of § 49-38(A) or
(C).



   (B)   A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes or a
condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a
physician shall not be considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of
blood.



   (C)   A chemical test described in subsection (A)(1) of this section
shall be administered as provided in §§ 49-45 and 49-46.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82143



49-52.  REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO CHEMICAL TESTING; OBTAINMENT OF COURT O RDER;
WRITTEN REPORTS TO SECRETARY OF STATE; REFUSAL OR RESULTS OF OR IN EXCESS OF
0.10%.



   (A)   If a person refuses the request of a police officer to submit
to a chemical test offered pursuant to §§ 49-45 or 49-46, a test shall not
be given without a court order, but the officer may seek to obtain the court
order.



   (B)   If a person refuses a chemical test offered pursuant to §§
49-45 or 49-46, or submits to the chemical test and the test reveals a blood
alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, the police officer who
requested the person to submit to the test shall immediately forward a
written report to the Secretary of State. The report shall state that the
officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person had committed a
crime described in § 49-51(A) and either that the person has refused to
submit to the test upon the request of the police officer and has been
advised of the consequences of the refusal or that the test revealed a blood
alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210
liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine. The form of the report shall
be prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82144



49-53.  REFUSAL TO SUBMIT TO CHEMICAL TESTING; HEARING; NOTICE; FORM;
FAILURE TO REQUEST HEARING; ORDER TO NOT OPERATE SNOWMOBILE; RIGHT TO COUNSEL.



   (A)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test pursuant to
§ 49-52, the police officer shall immediately notify the person in writing
that within 14 days of the date of the notice the person may request a
hearing as provided in § 82146 of the Act. The form of the notice shall be
prescribed and furnished by the Secretary of State.



   (B)   The notice shall specifically state that failure to request a
hearing within 14 days will result in issuance of an order that the person
not operate a snowmobile. The notice shall also state that there is not a
requirement that the person retain counsel for the hearing, though counsel is
permitted to represent the person at the hearing.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82145



49-54.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF OPERATOR'S OR CHAUFFEUR'S LICENSE;
EFFECT ON OPERATION OF SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   This section is effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   If the operator’s or chauffeur’s license of a person who
is a resident of this state is suspended or revoked by the Secretary of State
under the Michigan Vehicle Code, or if the driver license of a person who is
a nonresident is suspended or revoked under the law of the state in which he
or she resides, that person shall not operate a snowmobile under this article
for the same period.



   (C)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500 or both.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82147a



49-55.  VIOLATIONS OF ORDERS NOT TO OPERATE SNOWMOBILES.



   A person who is ordered not to operate a snowmobile and who has been
notified of the order by personal service or first-class mail shall not
operate a snowmobile. A person shall not knowingly permit a snowmobile owned
by the person to be operated by a person who is subject to such an order. A
person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by a fine of not more than $500 or
both.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82152



49-56.  IMPOUNDMENT OF SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   When a person is convicted under § 49-55, the snowmobile, if
it is owned by that person, shall be ordered impounded for not less than 30
or more than 120 days from the date of judgment.



   (B)   An order of impoundment issued pursuant to subsection (A) of
this section is valid throughout the state. Any police officer may execute
the impoundment order. The order shall include the implied consent of the
owner of the snowmobile to the storage for insurance coverage purposes.



   (C)   The owner of a snowmobile impounded pursuant to this section
is liable for expenses incurred in the removal and storage of the snowmobile
whether or not the snowmobile is returned to him or her. The snowmobile shall
be returned to the owner only if the owner pays the expenses for removal and
storage. If redemption is not made or the snowmobile is not returned as
provided in this section within 30 days after the time set in the impoundment
order for return of the snowmobile, the snowmobile shall be considered
abandoned.



   (D)   Nothing in this section affects the rights of a conditional
vendor, chattel mortgagee or lessor of a snowmobile registered in the name of
another person as owner who becomes subject to this part.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82153



49-57.  NOLO CONTENDERE PLEAS.



   A conviction based on a plea of nolo contendere shall be treated in the
same manner as a conviction based on a plea of guilty or a finding of guilt
for all purposes under this article.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82154



49-58.  POLICE OFFICERS; POWER TO STOP SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   The operator or person in charge of a snowmobile being used or
operated in this state, who is by hand, voice, emergency light or siren or a
visual or audible signal directed to bring his or her snowmobile to a stop by
any police officer who is in uniform and empowered to enforce this article or
rules established under this article shall immediately bring the snowmobile
to a stop or maneuver it in a manner that permits the officer to come
alongside. A vehicle or snowmobile that is used by an officer at night for
purposes of enforcing this part shall be identified as an official law
enforcement vehicle or snowmobile. The operator or person in charge of the
snowmobile and any other person on board shall give his or her correct name
and address, exhibit the certificate of registration awarded for the
snowmobile and submit to a reasonable inspection of the snowmobile and to a
reasonable inspection and test of the equipment of the snowmobile.



   (B)   A person who willfully fails to obey the direction by
increasing his or her speed or extinguishing his or her lights or who
otherwise attempts to flee or elude the officer is guilty of a misdemeanor.



   (C)   A person who is detained for a violation of this article and
who furnishes a peace officer false, forged, fictitious or misleading verbal
or written information identifying the person as another person is guilty of
a misdemeanor.



   (D)   A police officer who observes a violation by a person of this
part or of a local ordinance or rule established under this part may arrest
the person without a warrant.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.82158



49-59-49-65.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE IV.  OFF-ROAD RECREATIONAL VEHICLES



49-66.  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions set forth in the Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection Act (referred to hereinafter as the "Act"), as amended and as it
may be amended from time to time, including all amendments through the
effective date of this section, shall apply for purposes of this article. Any
conflict between definitions shall be resolved as explained in § 49-1.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81101



49-67.  OPERATION ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS, STREETS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY.



   (A)   A person shall not operate an ORV that is not registered under
the state code upon a public highway, street or right-of-way of a public
highway or street, unless otherwise provided by local ordinance under §
81131 of the Act or under the following conditions and circumstances:



      (1)   The operator of a vehicle may cross a public highway,
other than a limited access highway, at right angles, for the purpose of
getting from one area to another, if the operation can be done in safety. The
operator shall bring the vehicle to a complete stop before proceeding across
a public highway and shall yield the right-of-way to oncoming traffic;



      (2)   A vehicle may be operated on a street or highway for a
special event of limited duration and conducted according to a prearranged
schedule only under permit from the city. A special event involving ORVs may
be conducted on the frozen surface of public waters only under permit from
the Department;



      (3)   A farmer, employee of a farmer or family member of a
farmer who is at least 16 years of age may operate an ORV on the extreme
right side of a roadway or highway right-of-way when it is not practicable to
operate off that roadway or highway right-of-way. Such operation shall be
limited to traveling to or from the farmer’s residence or work location or
field during the course of farming operations. An ORV shall not be operated
pursuant to this subdivision during the period of 30 minutes before sunset to
30 minutes after sunrise, when visibility is substantially reduced due to
weather conditions or in a manner so as to interfere with traffic. An
operator of an ORV under this subdivision shall have attached to the ORV a
flag made of reflective material. The flag shall extend not less than eight
feet from the surface of the roadway and not less than four feet above the
top of the ORV. The flag shall be not less than 12 inches high by 18 inches
long and not measure less than 100 square inches.



   (B)   In a court action in this state where competent evidence
demonstrates that a vehicle that is permitted to operate on a highway
pursuant to the code is in a collision with an ORV on a roadway, the operator
of the ORV involved in the collision shall be considered prima facie
negligent.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81122



49-68.  OPERATORS OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   Subject to subsections (B), (C) and (M), a parent or legal
guardian of a child less than 16 years of age shall not permit the child to
operate an ORV unless the child is under the direct visual supervision of an
adult and the child has in his or her immediate possession an ORV safety
certificate issued pursuant to state law or a comparable ORV safety
certificate issued under the authority of another state or a province of
Canada.



   (B)   A parent or legal guardian of a child less than 12 years of
age shall not permit the child to operate a four-wheeled ATV unless the child
is not less than ten years of age and is on private land owned by a parent or
legal guardian of the child. This subsection does not apply to the operation
of an ATV used in agricultural operations.



   (C)   A parent or legal guardian of a child less than 16 years of
age shall not permit the child to operate a three-wheeled ATV.



   (D)   Subject to subsections (E), (F) and (M), the owner or person
in charge of an ORV shall not knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated by
a child less than 16 years of age unless the child is under the direct visual
supervision of an adult and the child has in his or her immediate possession
an ORV safety certificate issued pursuant to state law or a comparable ORV
safety certificate issued under the authority of another state or a province
of Canada.



   (E)   The owner or person in charge of a four-wheeled ATV shall not
knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated by a child less than 12 years of
age, unless the child is not less than ten years of age and is on private
land owned by a parent or legal guardian of the child. This subsection does
not apply to the operation of an ATV used in agricultural operations.



   (F)   The owner or person in charge of a three-wheeled ATV shall not
knowingly permit the vehicle to be operated by a child less than 16 years of
age.



   (G)   The owner or person in charge of an ORV shall not knowingly
permit the vehicle to be operated by a person who is incompetent to operate
the vehicle because of mental or physical disability, unless otherwise
provided by city ordinance pursuant to § 81131 of the Act.



   (H)   Subject to subsections (I), (J) and (M), a child who is less
than 16 years of age may operate an ORV if the child is under the direct
visual supervision of an adult and the child has in his or her immediate
possession an ORV safety certificate issued pursuant to this state law or a
comparable ORV safety certificate issued under the authority of another state
or a province of Canada.



   (I)   A child who is less than 12 years of age shall not operate a
four-wheeled ATV, unless the child is not less than ten years of age and is
on private land owned by a parent or legal guardian of the child. This
subsection does not apply to the operation of an ATV used in agricultural
operations.



   (J)   A child who is less than 16 years of age shall not operate a
three-wheeled ATV.



   (K)   When operating an ORV under subsection (H), a child shall
present the ORV safety certificate to a police officer upon demand.



   (L)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, an
operator who is under 12 years of age shall not cross a highway or street. An
operator who is not less than 12 years of age but less than 16 years of age
may cross a highway or street or operate on the right-of-way or shoulder of
designated access routes pursuant to § 81131 of the Act if the operator has
a valid ORV safety certificate in his or her immediate possession and meets
any other requirements under this section for operation of the vehicle.



   (M)   The requirement of possession or presentation of an ORV safety
certificate under this section shall not take effect until implementation of
the program for the vehicle proposed to be operated required by § 81129(8)
of the Act.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81129



49-69.  OPERATION OF VEHICLES; MANNER, HOURS, EQUIPMENT, AREA.



   A person shall not operate an ORV:



   (A)   At a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and proper or in
a careless manner having due regard for conditions then existing;



   (B)   Unless the person and any passenger in or on the vehicle is
wearing on his or her head a crash helmet and protective eyewear approved by
the United States Department of Transportation. This subdivision does not
apply if the vehicle is equipped with a roof that meets or exceeds standards
for a crash helmet and the operator and each passenger is wearing a properly
adjusted and fastened safety belt;



   (C)   During the hours of one-half hour after sunset to one-half
hour before sunrise without displaying a lighted headlight and lighted
taillight;



   (D)   Unless equipped with a braking system that may be operated by
hand or foot, capable of producing deceleration at 14 feet per second on
level ground at a speed of 20 miles per hour; a brake light, brighter than
the taillight, visible when the brake is activated to the rear of the vehicle
when the vehicle is operated during the hours of one-half hour after sunset
and one-half hour before sunrise; and a throttle so designed that when the
pressure used to advance the throttle is removed, the engine speed will
immediately and automatically return to idle.



   (E)   In a state game area or state park or recreation area, except
on roads, trails or areas designated for this purpose; on state owned lands
under the control of the Department other than game areas, state parks or
recreational areas where the operation would be in violation of rules
promulgated by the Department; in a forest nursery or planting area; on
public lands posted or reasonably identifiable as an area of forest
reproduction and when growing stock may be damaged; in a dedicated natural
area of the Department; or in any area in such a manner as to create an
erosive condition or to injure, damage or destroy trees or growing crops.
However, the Department may permit an owner and guests of the owner to use an
ORV within the boundaries of a state forest in order to access the owner’s
property.



   (F)   On the frozen surface of public waters within 100 feet of a
person not in or upon a vehicle or within 100 feet of a fishing shanty or
shelter or an area that is cleared of snow for skating purposes, except at
the minimum speed required to maintain controlled forward movement of the
vehicle or as may be authorized by permit in special events.



   (G)   Unless the vehicle is equipped with a spark arrester type
United States Forest Service approved muffler, in good working order and in
constant operation. Exhaust noise emission shall not exceed 86 Db(A) or 82
Db(A) on a vehicle manufactured after January 1, 1986, when the vehicle is
under full throttle, traveling in second gear and measured 50 feet at right
angles from the vehicle path with a sound level meter which meets the
requirement of ANSI S1.4 1983, using procedure and ancillary equipment
therein described; or 99 Db(A) or 94 Db(A) on a vehicle manufactured after
January 1, 1986 or that level comparable to the current sound level as
provided for by the United States Environmental Protection Agency when tested
according to the provisions of the current SAE J1287, June 86 test procedure
for exhaust levels of stationary motorcycles, using sound level meters and
ancillary equipment therein described. A vehicle subject to this article,
manufactured or assembled after December 31, 1972 and used, sold or offered
for sale in this state shall conform to the noise emission levels established
by the United States Environmental Protection Agency under the Noise Control
Act of 1972, Pub. L. 92-574, 86 Stat. 1234.



   (H)   Within 100 feet of a dwelling at a speed greater than the
minimum required to maintain controlled forward movement of the vehicle,
except on property owned or under the operator’s control or on which the
operator is an invited guest or on a roadway, forest road or forest trail
maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the Department or on an ORV access
route as authorized by city ordinance.



   (I)   In or upon the lands of another without the written consent of
the owner, owner’s agent or lessee, when required by Part 731 of the Act.
The operator of the vehicle is liable for damage to private property,
including but not limited to damage to trees, shrubs, growing crops or injury
to living creatures or damage caused through vehicle operation in a manner so
as to create erosive or other ecological damage to private property. The
owner of the private property may recover from the person responsible nominal
damages of not less than the amount of damage or injury. Failure to post
private property or fence or otherwise enclose in a manner to exclude
intruders or of the private property owner or other authorized person to
personally communicate against trespass does not imply consent to ORV use.



   (J)   In an area on which public hunting is permitted during the
regular November firearm deer season from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. and from
2:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., except during an emergency or for law enforcement
purposes, to go to and from a permanent residence or a hunting camp otherwise
inaccessible by a conventional wheeled vehicle to remove a deer, elk or bear
from public land which has been taken under a valid license; or except for
the conduct of necessary work functions involving land and timber survey,
communication and transmission line patrol and timber harvest operations; or
on property owned or under control of the operator or on which the operator
is an invited guest. A hunter removing game pursuant to this subdivision
shall be allowed to leave the designated trail or forest road only to
retrieve the game and shall not exceed five miles per hour. A vehicle
registered under the code is exempt from the subdivision while operating on a
public highway or public or private road capable of sustaining automobile
traffic. A person holding a valid permit to hunt from a standing vehicle
issued pursuant to Part 401 of the Act or a person with disabilities using an
ORV to access public lands for purposes of hunting or fishing through use of
a designated trail or forest road is exempt from this subdivision.



   (K)   While transporting on the vehicle a bow unless unstrung or
encased, or a firearm unless unloaded and securely encased or equipped with
and made inoperative by a manufactured keylocked trigger housing mechanism.



   (L)   On or across a cemetery or burial ground or land used as an
airport.



   (M)   Within 100 feet of a slide, ski or skating area, unless the
vehicle is being used for the purpose of servicing the area.



   (N)   On an operating or nonabandoned railroad or railroad
right-of-way or public utility right-of-way other than for the purpose of
crossing at a clearly established site intended for vehicular traffic, except
railroad, public utility or law enforcement personnel while in performance of
their duties and except if the right-of-way is designated as established in
§ 81127 of the Act.



   (O)   In or upon the waters of any stream, river, bog, wetland,
swamp, marsh or quagmire except over a bridge culvert or similar structure.



   (P)   To hunt, pursue, worry, kill or attempt to hunt, pursue, worry
or kill a bird or animal, wild or domesticated.



   (Q)   In a manner so as to leave behind litter or other debris.



   (R)   In a manner contrary to operating regulations on public lands.



   (S)   While transporting or possessing in or on the vehicle
alcoholic liquor in a container that is open or uncapped or upon which the
seal is broken, except under either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The container is in a trunk or compartment separate from
the passenger compartment of the vehicle;



      (2)   If the vehicle does not have a trunk or compartment
separate from the passenger compartment, the container is encased or enclosed.



   (T)   While transporting any passenger in or upon an ORV, unless the
manufacturing standards for the vehicle make provisions for transporting
passengers.



   (U)   On adjacent private land, in an area zoned residential, within
300 feet of a dwelling at a speed greater than the minimum required to
maintain controlled forward movement of the vehicle except on a roadway,
forest road or forest trail maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the
Department or on an ORV access route as authorized by city ordinance.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81133



49-70.  OPERATION WHILE UNDER INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCE; PENALTIES.



   (A)   This section becomes effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   A person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor or
a controlled substance, as defined by § 7104 of the Public Health Code,
Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. § 333.7104, or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance shall not operate an ORV.



   (C)   A person who has an alcohol content of 0.10 grams or more per
100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of
urine shall not operate an ORV.



   (D)   The owner or person in charge or in control of an ORV shall
not authorize or knowingly permit the ORV to be operated by a person who is
under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person who is
convicted of a violation of subsection (B), (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days
or a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500, or both, together with
costs of the prosecution. As part of the sentence for a violation of
subsection (B) or (C) of this section, the court shall order the person
convicted not to operate an ORV for a period of not less than six months or
more than two years.



   (F)   As part of the sentence for a violation of subsection (B) or
(C) of this section, the court may order the person to perform service to the
community, as designated by the court, without compensation, for a period not
to exceed 12 days. The person shall reimburse the state or appropriate local
unit of government for the cost of insurance incurred by the state or local
unit of government as a result of the person’s activities under this
subsection.



   (G)   Before imposing sentence for a violation of subsection (B) or
(C), the court shall order the person to undergo screening and assessment by
a person or agency designated by the office of substance abuse services to
determine whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative
services, including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment
programs. As part of the sentence, the court may order the person to
participate in and successfully complete one or more appropriate
rehabilitative programs. The person shall pay for the costs of the screening,
assessment and rehabilitative services.



   (H)   Before accepting a plea of guilty under this section, the
court shall advise the accused of the statutory consequences possible as the
result of a plea of guilty in respect to suspension of the person’s right
to operate an ORV and the penalty imposed for violation of this section.



   (I)   Each Municipal Judge and each Clerk of a Court of Record shall
keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged with a
violation of this section. The Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court of
Record shall prepare and immediately forward to the Secretary of State an
abstract of the Court of Record for each case charging a violation of this
section.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81134



49-71.  OPERATION WHILE VISIBLY IMPAIRED DUE TO INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE; PENALTIES.



   (A)   This section becomes effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   A person shall not operate an ORV if, due to the consumption
of intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance, as defined by § 7104 of the
Public Health Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, M.C.L. § 333.7104, or a
combination of intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance, the person has
visibly impaired his or her ability to operate the ORV. If a person is
charged with violating § 49-70, a finding of guilt is permissible under this
section.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a person
convicted of a violation of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $300, or both, together with costs of the prosecution. As part of the
sentence, the court shall order the person convicted not to operate an ORV
for a period of not less than 90 days or more than one year.



   (D)   As part of the sentence for a violation of this section, the
court may order the person to perform service to the community, as designated
by the court, without compensation, for a period not to exceed 12 days. The
person shall reimburse the city for the cost of insurance incurred by the
city as a result of the person’s activities under this subsection.



   (E)   Before imposing sentence for a violation of this section, the
court shall order the person to undergo screening and assessment by a person
or agency designated by the office of substance abuse services to determine
whether the person is likely to benefit from rehabilitative services,
including alcohol or drug education and alcohol or drug treatment programs.
As part of the sentence, the court may order the person to participate in and
successfully complete one or more appropriate rehabilitative programs. The
person shall pay for the costs of the screening, assessment and
rehabilitative services.



   (F)   Before accepting a plea of guilty under this section, the
court shall advise the accused of the statutory consequences possible as a
result of a plea of guilty in respect to suspension of the person’s right
to operate an ORV and the penalty imposed for violation of this section.



   (G)   Each Municipal Judge and each Clerk of a Court of Record shall
keep a full record of every case in which a person is charged with a
violation of this section. The Municipal Judge or Clerk of the Court of
Record shall prepare and immediately forward to the Secretary of State an
abstract of the Court of Record for each case charging a violation of this
section.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81135



49-72.  CHEMICAL TESTS TO DETERMINE IMPAIRMENT.



   (A)   In a criminal prosecution for violating §§ 49-70 or 49-71,
the amount of alcohol in the operator’s blood at the time alleged as shown
by chemical analysis of the operator’s blood, urine or breath shall be
admissible into evidence.



   (B)   If a chemical test of an operator’s blood, urine or breath
is given, the results of the test shall be made available to the person
charged with an offense enumerated in subsection (A) of this section or the
person’s attorney upon written request to the prosecution with a copy of
the request filed with the court. The prosecution shall furnish the report at
least two days before the day of the trial and the results shall be offered
as evidence by the prosecution in a criminal proceeding. Failure to fully
comply with the request shall bar the admission of the results into evidence
by the prosecution.



   (C)   Except in a prosecution relating solely to a violation of §
49-70(B), the amount of alcohol in the operator’s blood at the time alleged
as shown by chemical analysis of the operator’s blood, urine or breath
shall give rise to the following presumptions:



      (1)   If at the time the operator had an alcohol content of
0.07 grams or less per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or
per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the operator was not
under the influence of intoxicating liquor;



      (2)   If at the time the operator had an alcohol content of
more than 0.07 grams but less than 0.10 grams per 100 milliliters of blood,
per 210 liters of breath or per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed
that the operator’s ability to operate an ORV was impaired within the
provisions of § 49-71 due to the consumption of intoxicating liquor;



      (3)   If at the time the operator had an alcohol content of
0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath or
per 67 milliliters of urine, it shall be presumed that the operator was under
the influence of intoxicating liquor.



   (D)   A sample or specimen of urine or breath shall be taken and
collected in a reasonable manner. Only a licensed physician, or a licensed
nurse or medical technician under the direction of a licensed physician and
qualified to withdraw blood acting in a medical environment, at the request
of a peace officer, may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the
alcoholic content of the blood under this article. Liability for a crime or
civil damages predicated on the act of withdrawing blood and related
procedures shall not attach to a qualified person who withdraws blood or
assists in the withdrawal in accordance with this article unless the
withdrawal is performed in a negligent manner.



   (E)   A person arrested for a crime enumerated in subsection (A) of
this section who takes a chemical test administered at the request of a
police officer, as provided in this article, shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to have a person of his or her own choosing administer one of the
chemical tests described in this section within a reasonable time after his
or her detention, and the results of the test shall be admissible and shall
be considered with other competent evidence in determining the defendant’s
innocence or guilt of a crime enumerated in subsection (A) of this section.
If the person arrested is administered a chemical test by a person of his or
her own choosing, the person arrested shall be responsible for obtaining a
chemical analysis of the test sample. The person shall be informed that he or
she has the right to demand that a person of his or her choosing administer
one of the chemical tests described in this section, that the results of the
test shall be admissible and shall be considered with other competent
evidence in determining the innocence or guilt of the defendant and that the
person arrested shall be responsible for obtaining a chemical analysis of the
test sample.



   (F)   A person arrested shall be advised that if the person refuses
the request of a police officer to take a test described in this section, a
test shall not be given without a court order. The person arrested shall also
be advised that the person’s refusal of the request of a police officer to
take a test described in this section shall result in the suspension of the
person’s right to operate an ORV.



   (G)   This section shall not be construed as limiting the
introduction of any other competent evidence bearing upon the question of
whether or not the defendant was impaired by or under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance, a combination of intoxicating
liquor and a controlled substance or whether the person had a blood alcohol
content of 0.10 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of
breath or per 67 milliliters of urine.



   (H)   If a jury instruction regarding a defendant’s refusal to
submit to a chemical test under this section is requested by the prosecution
or the defendant, the jury instruction shall be given as follows:



   “Evidence was admitted in this case which, if believed by the jury,
could prove that the defendant had exercised his or her right to refuse a
chemical test. You are instructed that such a refusal is within the statutory
rights of the defendant and is not evidence of the defendant’s guilt. You
are not to consider such a refusal in determining the guilt or innocence of
the defendant."



   (I)   If after an accident the operator of an ORV involved in the
accident is transported to a medical facility and a sample of the
operator’s blood is withdrawn at that time for the purpose of medical
treatment, the results of a chemical analysis of that sample shall be
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime described in subsection (A)
of this section to show the amount of alcohol or presence of a controlled
substance, or both, in the person’s blood at the time alleged, regardless
of whether the person had been offered or had refused a chemical test. The
medical facility or person performing the chemical analysis shall disclose
the results of the analysis to a prosecuting attorney who requests the
results for use in a criminal prosecution as provided in this subsection. A
medical facility or person disclosing information in compliance with this
subsection shall not be civilly or criminally liable for making the
disclosure.



   (J)   If after an accident the operator of an ORV involved in the
accident is deceased, a sample of the decedent’s blood shall be withdrawn
in a manner directed by the medical examiner for the purpose of determining
blood alcohol content or presence of a controlled substance or both. The
medical examiner shall give the results of the chemical analysis to the law
enforcement agency investigating the accident and that agency shall forward
the results to the Department of State Police.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81136



49-73.  IMPLIED CONSENT TO CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF BLOOD, BREATH OR URINE;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (B) of this section, a person
who operates an ORV is considered to have given consent to chemical tests of
his or her blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount
of alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in his or her blood
and may be requested by a police officer to submit to chemical tests of his
or her blood, breath or urine for the purpose of determining the amount of
alcohol or presence of a controlled substance or both in his or her blood if:



      (1)   The person is arrested for a violation of § 49-70(B) or
(C) or § 49-71.



   (B)   A person who is afflicted with hemophilia, diabetes or a
condition requiring the use of an anticoagulant under the direction of a
physician shall not be considered to have given consent to the withdrawal of
blood.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81137



49-74.  RIGHT TO REFUSE CHEMICAL TEST; REPORT.



   (A)   A person who is requested pursuant to § 49-73(A) to take a
chemical test shall be advised of the right to refuse to submit to chemical
tests; and if the person refuses the request of a police officer to submit to
chemical tests, a test shall not be given without a court order.



   (B)   If a person refuses the request of a police officer under §
49-73(A) to submit to a chemical test, a written report shall be forwarded to
the Secretary of State by the police officer. The report shall state that the
officer had reasonable grounds to believe that the person committed a
violation described in § 49-73(A) and that the person refused to submit to a
chemical test upon the request of the police officer and was advised of the
consequences of the refusal. The form of the report shall be prescribed and
furnished by the Secretary of State.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81138



49-75.  SUSPENSION OF OPERATOR’S OR CHAUFFEUR’S LICENSE; EFFECT ON
OPERATION OF ORV.



   (A)   This section becomes effective October 1, 2000.



   (B)   If the operator’s or chauffeur’s license of a person who
is a resident of this state is suspended or revoked by the Secretary of State
under the Michigan Vehicle Code, or if the driver license of a person who is
a nonresident is suspended or revoked under the law of the state in which he
or she resides, that person shall not operate an ORV under this part for the
same period.



   (C)   A person who violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81140a



49-76.  PRELIMINARY CHEMICAL BREATH ANALYSIS.



   (A)   A police officer who has reasonable cause to believe that a
person was operating an ORV and that the person, by the consumption of
intoxicating liquor, may have affected his or her ability to operate the ORV
may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



   (B)   A police officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part
upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis.



   (C)   The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis shall be
admissible in a criminal prosecution for a crime enumerated in § 49-72(A) or
in an administrative hearing held under § 81140 of the Act solely to assist
the court or hearing officer in determining a challenge to the validity of an
arrest. This subsection does not limit the introduction of other competent
evidence offered to establish the validity of an arrest.



   (D)   A person who submits to a preliminary chemical breath analysis
shall remain subject to the requirements of §§ 81136, 81137, 81138, 81139
and 81140 of the Act for the purposes of chemical tests described in those
sections.



   (E)   A person who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical
breath analysis upon a lawful request by a police officer is responsible for
a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than
$100.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81141



49-77.  OPERATION AFTER SUSPENSION OF PRIVILEGES; PENALTY.



   (A)   A person whose right to operate an ORV has been suspended
pursuant to the Act and who operates an ORV is guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more
than $500, or both.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81142



49-78.  ACCIDENTS INVOLVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
injuries to, or the death of, a person or resulting in property damage in an
estimated amount of $100 or more shall immediately, by the quickest available
means of communication, notify the Police Department. The Police Department
shall complete a report of the accident on forms prescribed by the Director
of the Department of State Police and forward the report to the Department of
State Police and the Department.



   (B)   A medical facility to which a person injured in an accident
involving an ORV is transported shall report the accident to the Department
of State Police.



   (C)   The operator of a vehicle involved in an accident upon public
or private property resulting in injury to or the death of a person shall
immediately stop at the scene of an accident and shall render to any person
injured in the accident reasonable assistance in securing medical aid or
transportation.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81143



49-79.  ARREST WITHOUT WARRANT.



   If a police officer has reasonable cause to believe that a person was,
at the time of an accident, the operator of an ORV involved in the accident
and was operating the ORV while under the influence of an intoxicating
liquor, a controlled substance as defined in § 7104 of the Public Health
Code, Public Act 368 of 1978, being M.C.L. § 333.7104, or a combination of
intoxicating liquor and a controlled substance or was operating the ORV while
his or her ability to operate an ORV was impaired due to the consumption of
intoxicating liquor, a controlled substance or a combination of intoxicating
liquor and a controlled substance, the police officer may arrest the alleged
operator of the ORV without a warrant.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81144



49-80.  APPEARANCE TICKETS FOR VIOLATIONS; OWNER PRESUMED TO BE OPERATOR.



   (A)   Police officers may issue appearance tickets for violations of
this article.



   (B)   In a proceeding for a violation of this article involving
prohibited operation or conduct, the registration number or numbered decal or
vehicle identification number displayed on an ORV shall constitute prima
facie evidence that the owner of the vehicle was the person operating the
vehicle at the time of the offense; unless the owner identifies the operator
to law enforcement officials, the vehicle was reported as stolen at the time
of the violation or the vehicle was stolen or not in use at the time of the
violation.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81145



49-81.  STOPPING VEHICLES FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS OR LANDOWNERS.



   (A)   An operator of an ORV who is given by hand, voice, emergency
light or siren a visual or audible signal by a police officer acting in the
lawful performance of his or her duty directing the operator to bring the
vehicle to a stop and who willfully fails to obey the signal by increasing
speed, extinguishing lights or otherwise attempting to flee or elude the
officer is guilty of a misdemeanor. The officer giving the signal shall be in
uniform, and the officer’s vehicle shall be easily identifiable as an
official law enforcement vehicle.



   (B)   The operator of a vehicle on the private premises of another,
when visibly hailed by the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, shall
bring the vehicle to an immediate stop and provide personal identification.
Refusal to obey such a request to stop or subsequent escape or attempt to
escape is a misdemeanor.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81146



49-82.  PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, a person who
violates a provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not less than $50 or
more than $500 or both, for each violation of the article.



   (B)   A person who violates § 49-69(B), (C), (D), (F), (G), (H),
(J), (L) and (M) is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to
pay a civil fine of not more than $500.



   (C)   A person shall not remove, deface or destroy a sign or marker
placed by the Department indicating the boundaries of an ORV trail or area or
that marks a route.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties otherwise provided under this
article, a court of competent jurisdiction may order a person to restore, as
nearly as possible, any land, water, stream, bank, streambed or other natural
or geographic formation damaged by the violation of this article to the
condition it was in before the violation occurred.



   (E)   Any police officer may impound the ORV of a person who
violates a provision of this article that is punishable as a misdemeanor or
who causes damage to the particular area in which the ORV was used in the
commission of the violation.



   (F)   Upon conviction of a person for violation of a provision of
this article that is punishable as a misdemeanor or any other provision of
this article that results in damage to the particular area in which the ORV
was used, a court of competent jurisdiction may order an ORV and any personal
property on the ORV seized as a result of the violation returned to the owner
or upon recommendation of the City Attorney turned over to the Department. If
the ORV and any other property is turned over to the Department, they shall
be disposed of in the manner provided for condemnation of property in Part 16
of the Act.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81147



49-83.  EMERGENCY TRESPASS.



   A person shall not have an ORV condemned pursuant to § 49-82 if the
trespass is the result of an emergency situation.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



Statutory reference:



   Similar provisions, see M.C.L. § 324.81148



49-84-49-90.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE V.  EMERGENCY AND OTHER SERVICES



DIVISION 1.  EMERGENCY EXPENSES.



49-91.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   EMERGENCY SERVICES. The making of a public safety response to the
operation of a motor vehicle, snowmobile or ORV while the operator is
impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled
substance or has an unlawful blood alcohol content.



   EXPENSE.



      (1)   The salaries, wages or other compensation, including
overtime pay, of Police Department personnel for time spent providing
emergency and other services;



      (2)   The salaries, wages or other compensation, including
overtime pay, of Fire Department personnel for time spent in providing
emergency and other services; and



      (3)   The cost of medical and other supplies lost or expended
by Police and Fire Department personnel in providing emergency and other
services.



   OTHER SERVICES. The arresting, processing, investigating, collecting
and analyzing of evidence (including determining the blood alcohol content
and determining the presence and identifying controlled substances in the
blood) in relation to an operator of a motor vehicle, snowmobile or ORV who
was operating while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor
or a controlled substance or with an unlawful blood alcohol content.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-92.  LIABILITY FOR THE EXPENSES OF EMERGENCY AND OTHER SERVICES.



   (A)   Any person who operates a motor vehicle, snowmobile or ORV
while impaired by or under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a
controlled substance or with an unlawful blood alcohol content shall be
liable to the city for the expense of providing emergency and other services.



   (B)   A person who operates a motor vehicle, snowmobile or ORV with
a blood alcohol level of .07% to .09% by weight of alcohol shall be presumed
impaired by and a person who operates a motor vehicle, snowmobile or ORV with
a blood alcohol level of .10% or higher by weight of alcohol shall be
presumed under the influence of intoxicating liquor.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-93.  ADMINISTRATION AND PAYMENT OF EXPENSES.



   (A)   The City Treasurer shall administer this article. He or she
shall promptly prepare and deliver to a person who is liable for the payment
of expenses for emergency or other services or both a detailed invoice by
first class mail or personal service.



   (B)   A person who is liable for the payment of expenses for
emergency services or other services or both shall make payment in full to
the City Treasurer within ten days of receipt of a detailed invoice.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-94.  FAILURE TO PAY EXPENSES WITHIN TEN DAYS.



   (A)   A person liable for the payment of expenses for emergency
services, other services or both who fails to make payment in full to the
City Treasurer within ten days of receipt of a detailed invoice shall be
responsible for a civil infraction.



   (B)   The city may commence a civil action against a person who is
liable for the payment of expenses for emergency services or other services
who fails to make payment in full to the City Treasurer within ten days of
receipt of a detailed invoice to recover the expenses, statutory interest,
court costs and reasonable attorney fees.



(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 10-17-00)



49-95 - 49-100.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  RECOVERY OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE COSTS.



49-101.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this division, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   COSTS.  Any reasonably identifiable costs to or incurred by the city,
including but not limited to maintenance costs of vehicles and equipment;
fuel costs; insurance costs; staffing or personnel labor costs (including,
without limitation, fringe benefit costs calculated using a multiplier);
training costs; administrative costs (established as a percentage factor);
housing costs for personnel and vehicles; supplies and equipment costs; costs
of equipment operation and maintenance; costs of materials; transportation
costs; costs of material disposal; depreciation costs; damaged equipment
costs; costs associated with outside contractors, independent consultants,
and others engaged by the city or assisting the city; attorney fees;
litigation costs; any costs, charges, fines, or penalties to the city imposed
by any court or state or federal governmental entities; and any other costs
associated with any response or service provided by police and/or fire
personnel.  These costs also include, without limitation, the cost of all
city personnel responding to the incident or providing the service and all
city personnel engaged in any related investigation, supervision, and report
preparation.  As an alternative to calculating actual costs, the city's
Finance Director may calculate the city's costs as a lump sum figure or
figures based upon empirical data and mathematical calculations designed to
recover the city's approximate costs in each response circumstance.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE RESPONSE COSTS.  The costs incurred by the
city for emergency medical service response services, including treatment
without transport, routine transport, interfacility medical transport, basic
life support transport, and advanced life support transport.  The term
includes, but is not limited to, ambulance or other emergency response and
transport and all associated services provided before, during, and after the
transport.



   RESPONSIBLE PARTY.  Any individual, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, commercial entity, consortium, joint venture, government entity,
or any other legal entity responsible for, or receiving the benefit of, an
emergency response.



   UNSAFE SCENE RESPONSE.  An emergency response requiring police, fire,
and/or Department of Public Works assistance, or involving the deployment of
police, fire, and/or Department of Public Works personnel, to ensure public
safety at an unsafe scene.  An UNSAFE SCENE RESPONSE includes, without
limitation, the cleanup of spills, debris removal, protection/monitoring of
downed power or utility lines, establishing a safe environment around an
incident scene, closure of a roadway, or a response to any similar public
safety concern involving more than 30 minutes of time on the scene.



   UTILITY LINE FAILURE.  The failure, exposure, damage, or disabling of
any transmission or service line, cable, conduit, pipeline, wire, or other
transmission device used to provide, collect, or transport electricity,
natural gas, communication or electronic signals, water, or sanitary or storm
sewage, regardless of the cause, if the failure, exposure, damage, or
disabling is determined by the city to be causing harm, or posing any risk of
potential harm, to the public and/or the ecosystem or environment.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



49-102.  COST RECOVERY AUTHORIZATION.



   (A)   The city is authorized to recover its costs from any or all
responsible parties jointly or severally for any Unsafe Scene Response.



   (B)   The City Manager's designee shall determine the total response
costs and shall in consultation with other city personnel involved in an
Unsafe Scene Response determine whether to assess any, all, or part of such
costs against any of the responsible parties.  In making the determination,
the following factors shall be considered and at least one must be deemed to
warrant cost recovery by the city due to the expense that would otherwise be
incurred by the taxpayers:



      (1)   The total costs above and beyond routine response costs,
including but not limited to overtime costs, extraordinary time for personnel
on the scene, unusual equipment mobilization, utilization of private
personnel or agencies to assist with the response, and utilization of
assistance from other public agencies;



      (2)   The risk the incident imposed on the city, its
residents, and their property;



      (3)   Whether there was any injury or damage to persons or
property;



      (4)   Whether the incident required evacuation;



      (5)   Whether the incident required an unusual or
extraordinary use of city personnel and equipment;



      (6)   Whether the incident required an unusual or
extraordinary use of personnel and equipment contributed by outside agencies;
and



      (7)   Whether, and the extent to which, any damage to the
environment was caused.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



Statutory reference:



   Related state law, see M.C.L. § 333.20948



49-103.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE RESPONSE COST AUTHORIZATION.



   The city is authorized to assess and collect a fee for all emergency
medical service responses.  The assessment may be to any or all responsible
parties jointly or severally.  The fee schedule for recovery of emergency
medical service response costs shall be established in the city's annual
appropriations ordinance.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



Statutory reference:



   Related state law, see M.C.L. § 333.20948



49-104.  BILLING AND COLLECTION OF COSTS.



   (A)   After the City Manager's designee determines to assess the fee
or costs authorized by this division against a responsible party, an itemized
invoice shall be issued to the responsible party's insurance carrier or
government insurance program, if known, with an informational copy to the
responsible party directly at his/her/its last known address.  If no
insurance carrier or program information is known to the city, the invoice
shall be issued directly to the responsible party at his/her/its last known
address.  The Fire Department shall enact an operations guideline to
establish a protocol for determining insurance coverage information.



   (B)   The invoice shall be due and payable by the deadline date
established on the invoice, which shall not be less than 30 days from the
date of mailing.  A late payment fee may be added thereafter by the city, if
the city is directly billing the responsible party, or by the city's billing
vendor.  The City Manager shall enact administrative procedures to establish
protocols for collections based on insurance coverage and residency.



   (C)   The invoice shall include notice of the hardship appeal
procedure established in this division.  If a responsible party submits an
appeal, the fees or costs, if upheld in whole or in part, shall be due and
payable 30 days from the date of determination of the appeal of the decision
of the City Manager.



   (D)   Any additional expense that becomes known following the
transmittal of the invoice shall be billed in the same manner.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



49-105.  NO LIMITATION OF LIABILITY.



   The recovery of costs pursuant to the provisions of this division does
not limit the liability of a responsible party under applicable local, state,
or federal law.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



49-106.  APPEAL; HARDSHIP.



   Responsible parties who receive an invoice for an emergency medical
response fee pursuant to this division may submit a letter of appeal to the
City Manager for consideration of a financial hardship.  Such appeal letters
must be submitted prior to the deadline for payment of the invoice.  The
City Manager or a designee shall determine whether to reduce or waive a fee
or costs after investigating and reviewing the nature and extent of the
hardship pursuant to administrative procedures implemented by the City
Manager that authorize payment plans, options, and criteria for billing
reductions and/or waivers.



(Ord. No. 452, § 2, 6-20-17)



CHAPTER 51:  VEGETATION



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



51-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   The word TREES, as used in this article, shall not be construed to
include shrubs which do not grow higher than 15 feet; the words PUBLIC
HIGHWAY shall be construed to mean all the land laying between private
property lines on either side of all public streets, boulevards and alleys;
and the words PUBLIC PLACE shall be deemed to mean any park, park lot,
parkway or other property under the control or jurisdiction of the city.



(1978 Code, § 33-1)



51-2.  APPLICATION FOR AND APPROVAL OF PERMITS REQUIRED BY ARTICLE.



   Applications for any permit required by the provisions of this article
shall be available in the office of the City Manager. No permit shall be
granted until it has been approved by the City Manager or his or her designee.



(1978 Code, § 33-2)



Cross reference:



   Permits generally, see Ch. 29



51-3.  JURISDICTION OF CITY MANAGER WITH RESPECT TO TREES, PLANTS AND GRASSY
AREAS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall have exclusive
jurisdiction, authority, control, supervision and direction over all trees,
plants, shrubs and grassy areas planted or growing in or upon the public
highways and public places of the city and the planting, removal, care,
maintenance and protection thereof, and he or she may promulgate and adopt
rules and regulations to effectuate the provisions of this article.



(1978 Code, § 33-3; Ord. No. 359, § 1, 1-2-02)



51-4.  FAILURE OF PROPERTY OWNER OR OCCUPANT TO PERFORM WORK OR PAY MONIES
REQUIRED BY ARTICLE.



   If the owner or occupant of any premises fails to perform any duty
and/or make any deposit or payment required of him or her by this article,
the City Manager may serve notice upon the owner or occupant directing that
the work be done and/or deposit or payment be received within 30 days.  Upon
his or her failure to comply with the notice, the city may enter upon the
premises and perform the work required and charge the cost to the owner or
occupant.  If the City Council authorizes that an assessment for amounts due
the city pursuant to this article be levied as a lien against the premises
benefitted, the Treasurer shall take such action as is necessary to enable
the city to impose the lien against the premises and collect the amounts due,
including administrative and legal costs.



(1978 Code, § 33-4; Ord. No. 359, § 2, 1-2-02)



Cross reference:



   Special assessments, see Ch. 47



51-5.  INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PERSONNEL PERFORMING WORK REQUIRED BY ARTICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere or
cause or authorize or procure any interference or delay with the City Manager
or any of his or her employees, agents or servants, while they are engaged in
and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing
of any trees, plants or shrubs in or upon any public highway or public place
or upon any private grounds, as authorized in this article, or in removing
any device attached to such tree, plant or shrub as may be necessary for the
protection and care of any such tree, plant or shrub in accordance with the
requirements of this article.



(1978 Code, § 33-5) Penalty, see § 1-9



51-6.  GENERAL REGULATIONS FOR PLANTING, TRIMMING, ETC. TREES UPON PUBLIC
HIGHWAYS AND PLACES.



   The following regulations are established for the planting, trimming
and care of the trees in or upon the public highways and public places of the
city:



   (1)   Trees must not be less than one and one-half inch in diameter
of trunk one foot above the ground;



   (2)   All trees from one and one-half to three inches in diameter of
trunk one foot above the ground must be protected and supported by tree
guards. When guarded with one stake only, the stake must be toward the
prevailing wind;



   (3)   No tree shall hereafter be planted at the intersection of two
or more streets or within 20 feet of such intersection;



   (4)   In cutting down trees, the same must be removed with the root
stump grubbed out, when so required by the City Manager or his or her
designee;



   (5)   Trees shall hereafter be planted at least 30 feet apart,
except when a special permit is obtained from the City Manager or his or her
designee;



   (6)   No tree shall be planted where the clear space between the
curb and the sidewalk is less than five feet;



   (7)   The trimming and care of trees shall be performed in
accordance with the Pruning Standards for Shade Trees as adopted and amended
by the National Arborists Association;



   (8)   No tree shall be planted where the soil is too poor to insure
the growth of such tree, unless the owner excavates a suitable hole of not
less than 36 cubic feet and replaces the material removed with suitable loam
or soil stripped from pasture land;



   (9)   No tree shall be planted nearer than one foot from the
curbline or outer line of the sidewalk, unless a special permit is granted by
the City Manager or his or her designee;.



   (10)   The general regulations shall be supplemented by the
provisions of the city street tree and stump removal policy as adopted and
amended by the City Manager and endorsed by the City Council.



(1978 Code, § 33-6; Ord. No. 359, § 3, 1-2-02)



Charter reference:



   Authority of Council to regulate planting of trees and shrubbery in
streets, see § 16.06



51-7.  CERTAIN TREES PROHIBITED WITHIN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or have or keep growing a
poplar, box elder, silver maple, elm, willow, horse chestnut, tree of heaven
or catalpa tree within any public highway within the limits of the city;
provided, however, existing trees shall be allowed unless the City Manager or
his or her designee determines that removal is appropriate in accordance with
the city's street tree and stump removal policy.



(1978 Code, § 33-7; Ord. No. 359, § 4, 1-2-02) Penalty, see § 1-9



51-8.    PERMIT TO PLANT, REMOVE, ETC. TREES IN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS AND PLACES.



   (A)   No person, except the city, shall plant, remove or destroy any
ornamental shade tree or shrub in any public highway or public place without
first procuring a permit from the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (B)   No person shall cut, mutilate, remove, saw or trim any tree
within any public highway or public place in the city to make room for any
telegraph, telephone or electric lines, moving buildings or machinery or
other things or for repairing sidewalks without first procuring a permit from
the City Manager or his or her designee.



   (C)   If required under the provisions of the city street tree and
stump removal policy, the owner or occupant shall pay the amount due for a
replacement tree as approved by the Council in the annual appropriations
ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 33-8; Ord. No. 359, § 5, 1-2-02)



51-9.  PAYMENT REQUIRED FOR REMOVAL OF TREE FROM PUBLIC PLACE.



   Any person desiring to remove a live tree from any public place for the
construction of walks, drives, buildings or any other structures for his or
her own benefit shall pay into the city tree fund monies equal to the value
of the tree or trees removed, as computed from the International Society of
Arboriculture shade tree value formula or substitute valuation formula
designated by the City Manager or his or her designee.



(1978 Code, § 33-9; Ord. No. 359, § 6, 1-2-02)



51-10.  TRIMMING TREES BY UTILITIES.



   No person owning or operating any bus line or other motor
transportation over the city streets or any public utility lines upon, above
or below the surface shall trim, cut or cause to be trimmed or cut any tree,
shrub or plant along any public highway or public place without first having
submitted to the City Manager a plan of the work to be done and having
procured a permit for such work. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to apply to the removal, under the direction of the City Manager or his or
her designee, of any stump, roots, tree, shrub, vine, plant or part thereof,
wherever such removal shall be found necessary in the construction or repair
of any street, sidewalk, sewer, pavement or other public improvement.



(1978 Code, § 33-10; Ord. No. 359, § 7, 1-2-02)



51-11.  ATTACHING WIRES, SIGNS, ETC., TO TREES IN PUBLIC HIGHWAYS OR
HITCHING ANIMALS THERETO.



   No person shall attach, tack or in any manner fasten to any tree in a
public highway any wire, rope, chain, cable, sign, card, board, poster or
other article or hitch any animal thereto.



(1978 Code, § 33-11; Ord. No. 359, § 8, 1-2-02)



Cross references:



   Animals, see Ch. 8;



   Posting advertising matter generally, see §§ 3-16 et seq.



51-12.  TRIMMING OF TREES, SHRUBS, ETC., NEAR PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   The owner or person in charge or control of any lot or parcel of land
within the city upon which any tree, shrub, vine or plant may be standing
adjacent to any public highway shall trim or cause to be trimmed, either at
the property line or to a clear height of at least eight feet above the
surface of such public highway, all branches thereof which overhang any
portion of such public highway or which obstruct or interfere with the
passage of light from any street lighting system and shall not plant or
maintain any thereof so close to any property line as to obstruct thereby the
vision of travelers along the streets. The city may enter upon any such
private premises to do such trimming as it determines necessary or to remove
such obstructions herein prohibited upon the failure of the owner to do so
after notice to him or her in writing. The said owner shall, or the city may,
remove from such tree, shrub, plant or vine all dead, decayed, unsightly,
broken or dangerous limbs and branches that overhang or are close to the
public highway; and when any such tree, shrub, plant or vine is dead, the
owner shall remove the same, or after such notice of such intention to the
owner, the city may do so and charge the cost thereof to such owner.



(1978 Code, § 33-12; Ord. No. 359, § 9, 1-2-02)



Cross reference:



   Shrubbery interfering with vision at street intersections, see zoning
ordinance § 28.03



51-13.  IMPEDING PASSAGE OF WATER, AIR OR FERTILIZER TO ROOTS OF TREES AND
PLANTS IN PUBLIC PLACES.



   No person shall place or maintain upon the ground in any public highway
or public place of the city any stone, brick, sand, concrete or other
material or article which may injure or which may in any way impede the full
and free passage of water, air or fertilizer to the roots of any tree, shrub,
vine or plant without leaving an open space of ground not less than four feet
in diameter surrounding same.



(1978 Code, § 33-13; Ord. No. 359, § 10, 1-2-02)



51-14.  PROTECTION OF TREES, PLANTS AND SHRUBS DURING CONSTRUCTION WORK.



   In any excavation, or the erection, alteration or repair of any
building or structure or other work, the owner thereof or someone for him or
her shall place or cause to be placed such guards around all nearby trees,
shrubs and plants in the public highway as will effectually prevent injury to
them.



(1978 Code, § 33-14; Ord. No. 359, § 11, 1-2-02)



51-15.  PLANTING OF TREE IN RIGHT-OF-WAY IN FRONT OF NEW DWELLING.



   (A)   Any person desiring a building permit for the construction of
a new dwelling in the city shall, in the discretion of the City Manager, be
required to, in the alternative, either:



      (1)   Deposit with the Office of Building Services the sum
provided for in the annual appropriations ordinance for each permit issued,
which shall be used by the City Manager or his or her designee to purchase a
tree to be placed in the public right-of-way in front of the dwelling. 
Where the dwelling is located on a corner lot, a tree shall be placed in the
public right-of-way in front and in the side yard of the dwelling.  The City
Manager or his or her designee shall have complete discretion as to the type
of tree to be planted, the time of such planting and shall supervise the
planting of the tree; or



      (2)   Deposit with the Office of Building Services a bond in
the sum provided for in the annual appropriations ordinance for each permit
issued to insure that the permittee shall plant a tree in the public
right-of-way in front of the dwelling and a second tree in the public
right-of-way in the side yard of corner lots. The City Manager or his or her
designee shall have complete discretion as to the type of tree to be planted
and the time of such planting. The bond shall be returned to the permittee
one year from the date of the planting of such tree, if the tree is still
living. If the tree has died or is dying, the bond shall be forfeited to the
city and shall be used by the City Manager or his or her designee to purchase
a tree to be placed in the public right-of-way in front of the dwelling.



   (B)   Any tree planted by the city under the supervision of the City
Manager or his or her designee shall be guaranteed by the city for a period
of one year after the date of planting; provided however, that the city shall
not be responsible for the replacement of trees which are damaged or
destroyed by the acts or omissions of the abutting property owner.



(1978 Code, § 33-15; Ord. No. 277, § 1, 9-5-89; Ord. No. 359, § 12, 1-2-02)



51-16.  DESTRUCTION OF DISEASED TREES, ETC.



   The owner or occupant of any premises on which is located any tree or
other growth, if infected by disease or by injurious insects or in a
dangerous condition, shall destroy same when such destruction is necessary
for the protection of other trees and growth and for the public safety,
health and welfare.



(1978 Code, § 33-16)



Charter reference:



   Authority of Council to provide for the destruction of diseased trees
and shrubbery on private  property, see § 16.06



51-17-51-26.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  RESERVED



51-27-51-35.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  TREE PRESERVATION



51-36.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   Rapid growth, the spread of development and increasing demands
upon natural resources have had the effect of encroaching upon, despoiling or
eliminating many of the trees and other forms of vegetation and natural
resources and associated processes which, if preserved and maintained in an
undisturbed and natural condition, constitute important physical, aesthetic,
recreational and economic assets to existing and future residents of the
city. Specifically, the city finds that woodlands and trees:



      (1)   Protect public health by absorbing air pollutants and
contamination, by providing buffering to reduce excessive noise, wind and
storm impacts and by maintaining visual screening with its accompanying
cooling effect during the summer months;



      (2)   Provide for public safety through the prevention of
erosion, siltation and flooding;



      (3)   Contribute significantly to the general welfare of the
city by providing natural beauty and recreational opportunities for existing
and future residents; and



      (4)   Are matters of paramount public concern, as provided by
Article IV, Section 52 of the Michigan Constitution of 1963, and the
Environmental Protection Act of 1970, Public Act 127 of 1970 (M.C.L. §§
691.1201 et seq., M.S.A. §§ 14.528 (201) et seq.), as amended.



   (B)   The purposes of this article are to:



      (1)   Provide for the protection, preservation, replacement,
proper maintenance and use of desirable trees and woodlands located in the
city in order to minimize disturbance to them and prevent damage from erosion
and siltation and loss of wildlife habitat and vegetation, consistent with
rights of a developer or property owner to reasonably develop or use his or
her property in an economically viable manner.  It is the intent of this
article to require a developer desiring to develop any project to perform a
tree survey prior to development to enable the developer and the city to
evaluate what woodlands and trees are desirable and worthy of preservation,
considering the number of trees, their species, condition, and location, and
the likelihood of their continued long-term viability after completion of the
improvements in the development.  It is the intent of this article to
balance the community's interest in preserving desirable woodland areas as a
whole which serve as part of an ecosystem, with the rights of a developer to
develop or use his or her property in a reasonable, economically productive
manner;



      (2)   Protect the woodlands and trees of the city in order to
support local property values and to promote the natural beauty of the city;



      (3)   Prevent owners or developers of property from removing
trees from land prior to or in anticipation of development;



      (4)   Provide for the replacement of trees removed where no
feasible alternative site development is available; and



      (5)   Respond to the public concern for the preservation of
these natural resources in the interest of health, safety and general welfare
of the residents of the city.



(1978 Code, § 33-36; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 1,
5-17-05)



51-37.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD OF ORDINANCE APPEALS. The Board of Ordinance Appeals of the city
created pursuant to § 2-150.30 of the City Code.



   BUILDER. A person who builds or contracts to build a building or
structure within the city.



   BUILDING ENVELOPE. The area designated by the developer or builder for
the construction of the principal building(s) upon the site in accordance
with the following.



      (1)   In platted residential subdivisions or residential site
condominiums. The buildable area remaining on the lot, parcel or unit after
complying with zoning setback and maximum lot or site coverage requirements
or such smaller building area designated by the developer for construction of
buildings upon a lot, parcel or unit within the development.



      (2)   In all other developments. The building area(s), plus
ten feet around the perimeter of the building(s), provided such areas do not
encroach into any required setback.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or his or her designate.



   COMMERCIAL NURSERY or TREE FARM. A plant or tree nursery or farm in
which trees are planted and grown for sale to the general public in the
ordinary course of business.



   CRITICAL ROOT ZONE.   The area where a tree's roots are located.  The
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE i s described by a circle around the tree with a radius of
one foot for each inch of diameter at breast height.



   DEVELOPER. A person who installs or contracts for the installation of
improvements such as sewers, streets and water mains in a residential,
office, commercial or industrial development.



   DEVELOPMENT.   Any lawful site improvement authorized by the zoning
ordinance.



   DIAMETER BREAST HEIGHT (D.B.H.). A tree’s diameter in inches measured
four and one-half feet above the ground.



   DRIP LINE. An imaginary vertical line extending downward from the
outermost tips of the tree branches to the ground.



   DRIVEWAY ENVELOPE. An area designated by the developer or builder not
more than 20 feet in width to provide vehicular access to the building or
parking areas.



   GROUNDCOVER. Low growing shrubs, wood vegetation, wild flowers and
other small herbaceous plants within a woodland area.



   GRUBBING. The effective removal of understory vegetation, groundcovers,
shrubs or trees but not including removal of any trees of greater than three
inches d.b.h.



   LAND CLEARING. Operations which remove trees and vegetation in
connection with the installation of storm or sanitary sewers, public or
private utilities, streets and any other clearing or grading of the property
at any time prior to construction of a building.



   LANDMARK TREE.   A tree that is naturally prevalent in the city and
surrounding areas and that stands apart from neighboring trees due to unique
characteristics such as size and species and will not be removed unless
absolutely necessary.  All trees 32 inches d.b.h. and greater and trees
included in the following table of the specified size or greater are
considered LANDMARK TREES .



 

Common Name
 
Species
 
Size D.B.H.




American Basswood
 
Tilia americana
 
24


American Beech
 
Fagus grandifolia
 
18


American Chestnut
 
Castanea dentate
 
8


Birch
 
Betula spp.
 
18


Black Alder
 
Alnus glutinosa
 
12


Black and White Walnut
 
Juglans nigra, J cirnerea
 
20


Buckeye
 
Aesculus glabra
 
18


Cedar, red
 
Juniperus spp.
 
12


Crabapple (cultivar)
 
Malus spp.
 
12


Eastern Hemlock
 
Tsuga canadensis
 
12


Flowering Dogwood
 
Conus florida
 
8


Ginkgo
 
Ginkgo biloba
 
18


Hickory
 
Carya spp.
 
18


Horse Chestnut
 
Aesculus carnea
 
18


Kentucky Coffeetree
 
Bymnociadus dioicus
 
18


Larch/Tamarack
 
Larix laricina (Eastern)
 
12


Locust
 
Gleditsia triacanthos
 
24


London Planetree/Sycamore
 
Plantanus spp.
 
18


Maple
 
Acer spp.
 
18


Oak
 
Quercus spp.
 
16


Pine
 
Pinus spp.
 
18


Sassafras
 
Sassafras albidum
 
15


Spruce
 
Picea spp.
 
18


Tuliptree
 
Liriodendron
 
18


Wild Cherry
 
Prunus spp.
 
18




 



   LOCATE. To construct, place, insert or excavate.



   MATERIAL. Soil, sand, gravel, clay, peat, mud, debris, refuse or other
material, organic or inorganic.



   OPERATIONS. Locating, moving, depositing or grading of any material or
any construction, use or activity or combination of such activities which
modifies the conditions of property subject to this article.



   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association,
organization or other legal entity, including governmental agencies.



   PLANNING COMMISSION. The Planning Commission of the city established
pursuant to § 2-101 of the City Code.



   REGULATED TREE.  Any self-supported, woody plant of a species which
normally grows to an overall height of 13 feet or more, including coniferous
and deciduous trees, and has a d.b.h. of six  inches or more.



   REMOVE or REMOVAL. The act of removing a tree by digging up or cutting
down or the effective removal through damage.



   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any one-family or multiple-family residential
development, including one-family residential subdivision, one-family cluster
housing, residential condominiums, residential site condominiums and
multiple-family developments.



   STRUCTURE. Any assembly of materials above or below the surface of the
property, including but not limited to residences, buildings, sheds, swimming
pools and other fixtures attached to the ground.



   TREE. Any self-supported, woody plant of a species which normally grows
to an overall height of 13 feet or more, including coniferous and deciduous
trees.



   TREE SURVEY. A minimum one inch to 100 feet scale drawing that provides
the location of all trees of six inches or greater d.b.h., plotted by
accurate techniques, including the common or botanical name of those trees
and their d.b.h.



   UNDEVELOPED. A parcel of land which is substantially unimproved with
buildings or structures on May 22, 2005.



   WOODLAND. Any property containing one or more acres (excluding existing
rights-of-way) which has been designated as a woodland on the official
woodlands map. The term WOODLAND includes all trees, shrubs and groundcover
located upon such property (regardless of size).



   WOODLANDS MAP. The map approved by the City Council identifying all
woodland areas in the city.



(1978 Code, § 33-37; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 2,
5-17-05)



51-38.  APPLICATION OF ARTICLE.



   This article shall apply to any parcel of property which is undeveloped
on May 22, 2005, or to any parcel of property that is located in any zoning
district other than a single-family residential district, unless the
development has received (1) preliminary site plan approval within one year
of May 22, 2005, or (2) tentative preliminary or final preliminary plat
approval which has not yet expired.



(1978 Code, § 33-38; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 3,
5-17-05)



51-39.  TREE REMOVAL PERMITS.



   (A)   Permit required.  Except as provided in § 51-40, no person
shall do any of the following without first having obtained a tree removal
permit in accordance with the provisions of §§ 51-41, 51-42 and 51-43:



      (1)   Remove, damage or destroy any tree or similar woody
vegetation of any d.b.h. in a woodland;



      (2)   Remove, damage or destroy any tree or similar woody
vegetation of six inches d.b.h. or greater which is not located in a woodland;



      (3)   Remove, damage or destroy any landmark tree; or



      (4)   Conduct any land clearing activities.



   (B)   Development on parcels of one acre or greater.  The following
requirements shall apply to all property containing one or more acres upon
which any operations as defined herein are undertaken after May 22, 2005:



      (1)   The developer of any development which requires site
plan approval under the zoning ordinance shall, as part of the permit
approval under this article, identify the location of all proposed streets,
loading and unloading areas, off-street parking areas and maneuvering lanes
providing general circulation within the development.  In addition, the
developer shall designate envelopes for the construction of buildings,
driveways, known accessory structures and other proposed on-site improvements
to be made.  Once a tree removal permit has been obtained by the developer
for these areas, no additional tree removal permit shall be required for
erection of a structure or the installation of improvements within an
approved envelope.  Only activities which extend beyond the confines of the
envelopes shall require additional tree removal permits;



      (2)   Except as provided in § 51-44, the developer of one or
more acres shall preserve and leave standing a minimum of 37% of the total
number of regulated trees within the development.  The Planning Commission
(or such other body or administrative official approving the final
development) may reduce the preservation requirement if the developer can
provide evidence satisfactory to such body or administrative official that
unique conditions present on the site or the characteristics of the proposed
use make development of the land economically unfeasible without removing
additional trees.  Trees contained within building envelopes of proposed
single-family residential lots or units may not be used to satisfy the
minimum preservation percentage;



      (3)   Where a developer has submitted and obtained approval of
a tree preservation plan at the same time as tentative preliminary plat
approval of a subdivision, or preliminary site plan approval for any other
development, such tree preservation approval, together with any additional
terms and conditions attached to the approval, shall satisfy the requirements
of this article.



   (C)   Tree removal permits in conjunction with construction by
buildings on building sites.  A builder who wishes to clear any property or
construct any building upon a site which is subject to the provisions of this
chapter as specified in § 51-38 or perform any operation within a woodland
which is regulated by this chapter must first obtain a tree removal permit in
order to remove, damage or destroy any tree of six inches d.b.h. or greater
from the property or work within a woodland as designated on the official
woodlands map.  This requirement shall not apply to a builder who is
constructing a building or known accessory structure or is installing a site
improvement in an envelope for which the developer has previously obtained
approval.



(1978 Code, § 33-39; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-A, §§ 1-3,
8-20-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 4, 5-17-05)



Cross reference:



   Licenses and permits, see Ch. 29



51-40.  EXCEPTIONS.



   Notwithstanding the provisions of § 51-39, the following activities
are permitted without a tree removal permit unless otherwise prohibited by
statute or ordinance:



   (1)   On owner-occupied single-family residential parcels located in
non single-family residential zoning districts, the removal of five regulated
trees per calendar year or not more than 5% of the total number of regulated
trees on the lot or parcel, whichever is greater, is permitted without
requiring a tree removal permit.  This exception shall not apply to landmark
trees;



   (2)   The removal or trimming of any trees by or on behalf of a
resident owner of a one-family dwelling unit, one-family cluster housing
unit, site condominium unit or residential condominium unit from an area
under the owner's exclusive control. This exception shall not apply to
removal of trees from common areas;



   (3)   The removal of or trimming of trees necessitated by the
installation, repair or maintenance work performed in a public utility
easement or approved private easement for public utilities;



   (4)   The removal or trimming of trees if performed by or on behalf
of the city, Macomb County Road Commission, Michigan Department of
Transportation and Macomb County Public Works Office or other public agencies
or a public utility company in a public right-of-way upon public property or
upon a private easement for public utilities in connection with a publicly
awarded construction project, the installation of public streets or public
sidewalks or installation of public utilities within a private or public
easement established for such purposes;



   (5)   The trimming and pruning of trees as part of normal
maintenance of landscaping or orchards, if performed in accordance with
accepted forestry or agricultural standards and techniques;



   (6)   The removal or trimming of dead, diseased, undesirable, or
damaged trees if performed by or on behalf of the city, Macomb County Road
Commission, Michigan Department of Transportation or Macomb County Public
Works Office or other public agencies in a public right-of-way or upon public
property if done to prevent injury or damage to persons or property.  An ISA
certified arborist, municipal forester, or state registered forester must
verify the condition of dead, diseased, or damaged trees prior to their
removal;



   (7)   The removal or trimming of dead, diseased, undesirable, or
damaged trees provided that the damage resulted from an accident or nonhuman
cause and provided further that the removal or trimming is accomplished
through the use of standard forestry practices and techniques.  An ISA
certified arborist, municipal forester, or state registered forester must
verify the condition of dead, diseased, or damaged trees prior to their
removal;



   (8)   The removal or transplanting of trees during the operation of
a commercial nursery or tree farm;



   (9)   Actions made necessary by an emergency, such as tornado,
windstorm, flood, freeze, dangerous and infectious insect infestation or
disease or other disaster in order to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property or restore order.



(1978 Code, § 33-40; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 5,
5-17-05)



51-41.  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION FOR TREE REMOVAL PERMIT.



   (A)   Required information, one acre or larger parcels. An applicant
for a tree removal permit if required by this article for a parcel of one
acre or more shall submit the following materials to the city:



      (1)   A completed tree removal permit application on a form
prescribed by the city which shall include the following information:



         a.   The name, address and telephone number of the
applicant and/or the applicant’s agent;



         b.   The name, address and telephone number of the owner
of the property;



         c.   The project location, including as applicable, the
address, the street, road or highway, section number, lot or unit number and
the name of the subdivision or development;



         d.   A detailed description and statement of the
activity to be undertaken.



      (2)   A tree removal permit application fee in the amount
established by  the annual appropriations ordinance.



      (3)   If the applicant is not the owner of the property, a
written authorization from the owner allowing the proposed activity.



      (4)   Ten copies of a tree survey and a plan for proposed tree
removal.  Tree surveys must be prepared and sealed or signed by a qualified
professional and verified or sealed or signed by a registered arborist or
forester containing all of the following information:



         a.   The shape and dimensions of the property and the
location of any existing and proposed structure or improvement;



         b.   The identification and tagging in the field of all
trees with identifying numbers, using non-corrosive metal tags, and shown on
the plan with the corresponding number;



         c.   The location of all existing trees of six inches or
greater d.b.h., identified by tag number, and a tree inventory list
identifying the size and common or botanical name for each tree.  The tree
survey shall identify the desirable trees that are to be preserved and the
undesirable trees which are to be removed.  Desirable trees shall generally
include those species identified in the City of Sterling Heights Zoning
Ordinance No. 278, Article 24, § 24.02.  The tree survey and inventory list
shall also identify all landmark trees present on the site;



         d.   The location and identification of all trees
proposed to remain, to be transplanted or to be removed shall be
designated.  A cluster of trees standing three to five feet apart or closer
may be designated as a "stand" of trees and the predominant species,
estimated number and average size shall be indicated.  Clusters of trees
located within an approved open space which are to be preserved may be
designated as an "open space stand" and identified in the same manner as a
"stand" without individual identification and location;



         e.   The total number of trees on site, the total number
of trees to be removed, and the total number of replacement trees credits
required to be planted on the site in tabular form on the plan;



         f.   A tree replacement plan showing the proposed
location of all replacement trees, including a list of proposed replacement
tree species, sizes, and replacement credit values;



         g.   The location and dimension of all setbacks required
by existing zoning requirements;



         h.   The location of tree protection fences and a
statement that all retained trees will be identified by a method, such as
painting or flagging.  The statement shall include a description of how the
retained trees are to be protected during construction, with an
acknowledgment that the barriers must be in place before operations commence;



         i.   A statement showing how trees to remain are to be
protected on a permanent basis, including the proposed use of tree wells,
protective barriers, tunneling, or retaining walls, shall be included on the
plan;



         j.   A statement indicating that the trees to be removed
and tree protection measures will be inspected and approved by the City
Planning Department or City Forester prior to any tree removal or
construction activity occurring on site; and



         k.   A general grading plan prepared by a registered
engineer or land surveyor showing the anticipated drainage patterns,
including the location of any areas where cut and fill operations are likely
to occur to enable the city to determine the impact of the proposal on the
viability of the existing trees.



   (B)   Required information parcels of less than one acre.  An
applicant for a tree removal permit, if required by this article upon an
undeveloped parcel of less than one acre, shall submit the following material
to the city:



      (1)   All of the information required under § 51-41(A)(1),
(2) and (3);



      (2)   Five copies of a tree survey, including all information
required by § 51-41(A)(4)a, b, c and d;



      (3)   Five copies of a detailed grading plan prepared by a
registered engineer or land surveyor showing the proposed grade elevations of
the property, which elevations shall not adversely affect the viability of
the existing trees.



   (C)   Alternate site plant information-all sites. Where the request
for a tree removal permit relates to any site which contains no trees of six
inches or greater d.b.h., the applicant shall so indicate in his or her
application and submit a "no tree" affidavit.  In such case, the city shall
conduct an inspection of the site.  If the inspection substantiates the
applicant’s claim, the applicant shall be relieved from the requirement of
obtaining a tree removal permit.



(1978 Code, § 33-41; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 6,
5-17-05; Ord. No. 388, § 26, 1-3-07)



51-42.  APPLICATION REVIEW PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Procedure. The city shall review the submitted application for
a tree removal permit required by this article to determine that all required
information has been provided. At the request of the applicant or the city,
an administrative review meeting may be held to review the request in light
of the purpose and the review standards of this article. A field inspection
of the site may be conducted by the City Manager. The city shall, after
review of the proposed activity, submit a report and recommendation to the
City Manager as to the tree removal permit request. Where the site proposed
for development requires review or approval by the Planning Commission of the
subdivision layout, qualification for one-family cluster or special land use
approval, the Planning Commission shall be responsible for approval or denial
of the request for a tree removal permit (subject to affirmance, reversal or
modification by the City Council with respect to tentative preliminary plat
approval or any other approval for which City Council has final authority).
In all other instances, the review of tree removal permit requests shall be
the responsibility of the City Manager. All decisions shall be made in
accordance with the review standards of § 51-43.



   (B)   Denial. If an application for a tree removal permit is denied,
the permit applicant shall be notified in writing of the reasons for denial
by the reviewing authority.



   (C)   Approval; conditions; performance requirements. If an
application for a tree removal permit is granted, the reviewing authority may
do any or all of the following:



      (1)   Attach to the granting of the permit reasonable
conditions considered necessary by the reviewing authority to ensure the
intent of this article is fulfilled and to minimize damage to, encroachment
in or interference with natural resources and processes within wooded areas;



      (2)   Fix a reasonable time to complete tree removal
operations;



      (3)   Require a permit holder to make a cash deposit or file
an irrevocable bank letter of credit acceptable to the city in an amount
determined necessary by the city to ensure compliance with the terms of this
article, including the planting of any required replacement trees.  Once the
trees designated to be removed have been removed and any required replacement
trees have been planted and inspected, the city shall release 80% of the
deposit or letter of credit, with the balance to be held to ensure that
required maintenance as required by § 51-44 is completed.  If the permit
holder has provided a performance guarantee to the city under any other
ordinance or regulation, and such guarantee is deemed adequate by the city to
ensure compliance with this article, no additional performance guarantee
shall be required under this section.



(1978 Code, § 33-42; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



51-43.  APPLICATION REVIEW STANDARDS.



   The following standards shall govern the approval or denial of an
application for a tree removal permit if required by this article.



   (1)   The protection and conservation of natural resources from
pollution, impairment or destruction is of paramount concern. Therefore, all
woodlands, trees and related natural resources shall be preserved to the
greatest extent reasonably possible. The applicant shall consider and pursue
all development options available under the zoning ordinance in order to
preserve the woodlands and trees.



   (2)   The integrity of woodland areas shall be maintained to the
greatest extent reasonably possible irrespective of whether such woodlands
cross property lines.



   (3)   Where the proposed activity consists of land clearing, it
shall be limited to designated street rights-of-way, drainage and utility
easements, building and driveway envelopes and other areas (such as
off-street parking and loading and unloading areas) necessary for site
improvements considering the development options which are available to the
applicant under the zoning ordinance.



   (4)   The reviewing authority shall evaluate the quality of the
woodland area or the trees to be removed, including consideration of:



      a.   Tree species (including diversity of tree species);



      b.   Tree size and density;



      c.   Health and vigor of the trees;



      d.   Soil conditions and drainage characteristics of the site;



      e.   Other factors such as the value of the woodland area as a
scenic asset, windblock, noise buffer or other environmental benefit (i.e.,
cooling effect).



   (5)   The removal of trees for which a tree removal permit is
required shall be limited to any of the following instances:



      a.   When necessary for the location of a structure or site
improvements and when no reasonable alternative location for the structure or
improvements can be had without causing undue hardship, considering all
development options which are available to the applicant under the zoning
ordinance;



      b.   Where necessary to provide reasonable drainage upon the
site and when no reasonable alternative drainage is available without the
removal of the trees;



      c.   Where the prospective owner of the residential dwelling
unit has requested the builder in writing to remove the trees in order to
facilitate the homeowner making certain specified improvements which must be
undertaken within 12 months of the date of the certificate of occupancy for
the dwelling unit.



   Notwithstanding the foregoing, no application shall be denied solely on
the basis that some trees are growing on the property under construction.



   (6)   The burden of satisfying the criteria of this section shall be
upon the applicant.



(1978 Code, § 33-43; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



51-44.  RELOCATION OR REPLACEMENT OF TREES; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Replacement or relocation. Whenever a tree removal permit has
been issued authorizing removal of a regulated tree or any landmark tree, the
permit holder shall replace or relocate each such tree in accordance with
this section.  Replacement trees may not be used to satisfy the landscaping
requirements of the zoning ordinance.



   (B)   Replacement required.



      (1)   The permit holder shall provide one replacement credit
for each regulated, non-landmark tree to be removed according to the
following schedule.  The minimum size for replacement trees is eight feet in
height for coniferous trees and two and a half inches in caliper for
deciduous trees.



 

CONIFEROUS


Replacement Tree Size (Height)
 
Replacement Credit Value


8 feet
 
1 credit


8.01 – 10 feet
 
1.5 credits


Greater than 10 feet
 
2 credits



 



 

DECIDUOUS


Replacement Tree Size (Caliper)
 
Replacement Credit Value


2.5 – 3 inches
 
1 credit


3 – 3.99 inches
 
1.5 credits


4 inches or greater
 
2 credits



 



      (2)   a.   As an alternative to the above, the Planning
Commission may approve replacement trees that are smaller in caliper size in
situations where the intent is to create or recreate a densely wooded area or
woodlot.  Such trees may be park-grade trees, shall be at least one inch in
caliper and shall be planted in tightly-grouped clusters.



         b.   When this alternative is used, three  replacement
trees must be provided for each tree replacement credit required.  Such
trees shall be planted not less than five feet on center and not more than 20
feet on center.



   (C)   Landmark tree replacement required.  When a landmark tree is
proposed to be removed, the permit holder shall provide deciduous replacement
trees with a cumulative caliper equaling at least 37% of the d.b.h. of the
landmark tree to be removed (rounded up to the nearest whole number).



   (D)   Replacement tree diversity.  If 15 or more replacement tree
credits are required, no one species of replacement tree shall account for
more than 25% of all replacement trees proposed on a site.



   (E)   Approval.  All replacement trees shall satisfy American
Association of Nurseryman standards and shall be:



      (1)   Nursery grown or if comparable, relocated from same
parcel;



      (2)   State Department of Agriculture inspected;



      (3)   Tree spade transplanted while in the dormant state, or,
if not in the dormant state, having been balled and burlapped with a solid,
well-laced root ball when in the dormant state;



      (4)   No. 1 grade with a straight, unscarred trunk and a
well-developed uniform crown (park grade trees are acceptable);



      (5)   Guaranteed for one year;



      (6)   Approved through inspection by the city; and



      (7)   Of a species included on the "List of Acceptable
Replacement Trees" on file with the City Clerk.



   (F)   Location.  The location of any replacement tree shall be on
the same parcel as the removed tree wherever feasible.  If tree location or
replacement on the same parcel is not feasible, the City Manager or his or
her designee may designate another planting location for the replacement tree
within the city.  If tree relocation or replacement is not feasible either
on the parcel or on another approved location within the city, the City
Manager or his or her designee may allow the permit holder to pay into the
City Tree Fund monies for tree replacement on a per tree basis representing
the current market value for the tree replacement that would otherwise be
required.  The City Tree Fund shall be utilized for the planting,
maintenance and preservation of trees and woodland areas within the city.



   (G)   Maintenance. Replacement trees shall be staked, fertilized,
watered and mulched to ensure their survival in a healthy, growing condition.



(1978 Code, § 33-44; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 7,
5-17-05)



51-45.  TERM OF PERMIT.



   (A)   Any and all tree removal permits issued by the city to a
developer shall expire (unless extended) at the same time as the
contemporaneous approval granted by the city for the development, if any
(i.e., tentative preliminary plat, preliminary site plan, special land use,
site plan approval, etc.).



   (B)   Any and all tree removal permits issued by the city to any
person for an activity regulated under this article for which a
contemporaneous approval of the development is not required under city
ordinance (i.e., removal of trees by a builder in connection with
construction of a residence upon a lot or parcel) shall expire one year from
the date of issuance.



   (C)   Any activity regulated under this article which is to be
commenced after expiration of a tree removal permit shall require a new
application, additional fees and new review and approval.



(1978 Code, § 33-45; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



51-46.  PROTECTION OF TREES AND WOODLANDS DURING CONSTRUCTION; DISPLAY OF
PERMIT.



   (A)   A person shall not conduct an activity within the critical
root zone of any tree designated to remain, including but not limited to
placing solvents, building material, construction equipment or soil deposits.



   (B)   During construction, a person shall not attach a device or
wire to any remaining tree, except to cordon off protected areas as required
by (C)(1) below.



   (C)   Before development, land clearing, filling or any property
alteration for which a tree removal permit is required, the developer or
builder shall erect and maintain fences around the critical root zone of any
tree or grouping of trees to be preserved.  Tree protection fences shall
have a minimum height of four feet, and shall be constructed of wood, cyclone
fence, or a similar sturdy and durable material staked with metal stakes ten
feet on center which will shield and protect trees.  Snow fencing is
specifically prohibited from being used for a tree protection fence. 
Protective barriers shall remain in place until the City Manager or his or
her designee authorizes their removal or issues a final certificate of
occupancy, whichever occurs first.  Barriers are required for all trees
designated to remain, except in the following cases:



      (1)   Street right-of-way and utility easements may be
cordoned by placing stakes a minimum of 50 feet apart and tying ribbon,
plastic tape or other brightly visible materials at least two and one-half
feet above the ground from stake to stake along the outside perimeters of
areas to be cleared;



      (2)   Large property areas separate from the construction or
land clearing area onto which no equipment will venture may also be cordoned
off as described in subsection (1).



   (D)   The permit holder shall conspicuously display the tree removal
permit on-site.  The permit shall be displayed continuously while trees are
being removed or while activities authorized under the permit are performed
and for ten days following completion of those activities. The permit holder
shall allow the City Manager or his or her designee to enter and inspect the
premises during reasonable business hours.  Failure to allow an inspection
authorized under this section is a violation of this article.



   (E)   If a tree originally indicated and intended to be saved is
removed or excessively damaged to the point that it puts the tree at risk of
death during construction in violation of an approved tree protection plan,
the applicant shall be required to replace the tree.  Such replacement trees
shall have a minimum caliper of four inches.  If the removed or damaged tree
is a landmark tree, the applicant shall provide replacement trees with a
cumulative caliper equal to the d.b.h. of the removed or damaged landmark
tree.



(1978 Code, § 33-46; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 292-C, § 8,
5-17-05)



51-47.  OFFICIAL WOODLANDS MAP.



   (A)   The designated woodlands areas are hereby established as shown
on the official woodlands map which is on file in the office of the City
Clerk and which with all notations, references and the information shown
thereon shall be as much a part of this article as if fully described in this
section. If because of problems with scale or detail there is any ambiguity
as to whether a particular area is a part of a woodlands, that determination
shall be made by the body or official reviewing the proposed operation for
that area.



   (B)   The Council may revise the official woodland area map at any
time that new and substantial data for woodlands is available. Where the
official woodlands map is amended to add an individual property or several
adjacent properties as a designated woodland, notice of the proposed
amendment and hearing shall be given to all owners of such property at least
15 days before the hearing.



(1978 Code, § 33-47; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



51-48.  ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION; PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.



   (A)   To insure enforcement of this article and the approved plan
for tree removal, various inspections will be performed at the site at the
direction of the City Manager. The applicant will be responsible for all
inspection fees in accordance with City Council resolution.



   (B)   The City Manager shall have the authority to promulgate
regulations to implement the terms of this article.



(1978 Code, § 33-48; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



51-49.  PENALTIES; RESTITUTION.



   (A)   Reserved.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in § 1-11 of this code,
any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall forfeit and pay
to the city a civil penalty equal to the total value of those trees illegally
removed or damaged, as computed from the International Society of
Arboriculture shade tree value formula. Such sum shall accrue to the city and
may be recovered in a civil action brought by the city. Such sum so collected
shall be placed in the City Tree Fund. Replacement of illegally removed trees
may be required as restoration in lieu of money. This replacement will be
computed on an inch-for-inch ratio based on the total diameter measured at
d.b.h. in inches of the illegally removed trees. If, because of destruction
of the removed trees, exact inch-for-inch measurements cannot be obtained,
the city may use other means to estimate the tree loss. A combination of
money and tree replacement may be required.



   (C)   Any person authorized by the City Manager to enforce or
administer this article may issue a stop work order to any person conducting
any operation in violation of this article, including but not limited to
failing to conspicuously display the tree removal permit upon the site. The
written stop work order shall be posted upon the premises. A person shall not
continue, or cause or allow to be continued, any operation in violation of
such an order, except as authorized by the enforcing agency to abate a
dangerous condition or remove the violation, the City Manager lifting the
stop work order as authorized in paragraph (E) below or as authorized by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction.



   (D)   If a stop work order is not obeyed, the enforcing agency may
apply to the circuit court for the county in which the premises are located
for an order enjoining the violation of the order. This remedy is in addition
to, and not in limitation of, any other remedy provided by law or ordinance
and does not prevent criminal prosecution for failure to obey the order.



   (E)   Any person aggrieved by a stop work order may request review
by the City Manager of the stop work order within one working day of its
issuance. The City Manager shall then determine whether the stop work order
was properly issued due to operations being conducted in violation of the
terms of this article. The City Manager may lift the stop work order if the
operations are in compliance with this article.



   (F)   Any use or activity in violation of the terms of this article
is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se and may be abated by order of any
court of competent jurisdiction. The City Council, in addition to other
remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent,
abate or restrain the violation. All costs, fees and expenses in connection
with such action shall be assessed as damages against the violation.



   (G)   The city may assess the cost incurred by the city in enforcing
the terms of this chapter against the property upon which the violation has
occurred as provided in paragraphs (G) and (H) of this section. Such costs
may include, but are not limited to, administrative fees, attorney fees,
consulting fees and any court costs incurred in such enforcement. If the city
decides to assess any costs incurred by the city in enforcing the terms of
this chapter as a lien against the affected property, the City Manager, Code
Enforcement Official or other enforcing official shall request that the City
Council determine whether and the extent to which such costs will be assessed
against the property. The owner of the affected property shall be given
written notice as provided in § 33-5(B) of the date of the City Council
meeting at which the assessment of costs will be considered by the City
Council.



   (H)   If the City Council authorizes the assessment of the costs be
levied as a lien against the property, the City Treasurer shall take the
necessary action to impose the lien against the property and collect all of
the costs incurred in enforcement, including but not limited to
administrative costs, attorney fees, consulting fees and any court costs
incurred in such enforcement. The imposition of the lien against the property
shall not be the sole means of collection available to the city but shall be
in addition to any other remedies available.



(1978 Code, § 33-49; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91; Ord. No. 328, § 7,
11-5-97; Ord. No. 292-B, § 1, 1-5-99)



51-50.  VARIANCES.



   The standards contained in this article are not intended to be
arbitrary or inhibitive to creative solutions. Site and project conditions
may justify modifications of these standards when conditions arise where full
compliance is impractical or under circumstances where achievement of the
city’s objectives can be better obtained through modified requirements.
Therefore, in specific instances, the Board of Ordinance Appeals shall have
the authority to hear and decide appeals from and grant variances relating to
any order, requirement, decision or determination made by any administrative
official or body charged with enforcing or administering the terms of this
article (other than determinations which are made by the Planning Commission
or City Council), where, owing to special conditions such as topography,
soil, drainage or other site conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter would involve practical difficulties or cause
unnecessary hardships. In such instances, the Board of Ordinance Appeals
shall have the power upon appeal or request for variance in specific cases to
modify the provisions of the article with such conditions and safeguards as
it may reasonably determine, provided that such conditions are in harmony
with the spirit of this article in preserving and enhancing environmental
quality.



(1978 Code, § 33-50; Ord. No. 292, § 1, 4-16-91)



CHAPTER 52:  VEHICLES FOR HIRE



ARTICLE I.  IN GENERAL



52-1-52-15.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  TAXICABS



DIVISION 1.  GENERALLY



52-16.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CALL BOX STAND. A place alongside a street or elsewhere where the
Council has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity to install a telephone or call box for the taking of calls and the
dispatching of taxicabs.



   CERTIFICATE. A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued
by the Council, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business
in the city.



   CRUISING. The driving of a taxicab on the streets, alleys or public
places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire.



   DRIVER’S LICENSE. The permission granted by the Council to a person
to drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city.



   HOLDER. A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and
necessity has been issued.



   MANIFEST. A daily record prepared by a taxicab driver of all trips made
by the driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of
passengers and the amount of fare of each trip.



   OPEN STAND. A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere
in the city which has been designated by the Council as reserved exclusively
for the use of taxicabs.



   RATE CARD. A card issued by the Council for display in each taxicab
which contains the rates of fare then in force.



   TAXICAB. A motor vehicle regularly engaged in the business of carrying
passengers for hire, having a seating capacity of less than ten persons and
not operated on a fixed route.



   TAXIMETER. A meter instrument or device attached to a taxicab which
measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the
fare is based.



   WAITING TIME. The time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of
acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge but does not
include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other
than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers.



(1978 Code, § 34-16)



52-17.  ENFORCEMENT OF ARTICLE.



   The Police Department of the city is given the authority to enforce
this article and is instructed to watch and observe the conduct of holders
and drivers operating under this article. Upon discovering a violation of the
provisions of this article, the Police Department shall, in addition to any
other action which it may take under this article or other laws, report the
same to the Council, which may order or take appropriate action.



(1978 Code, § 34-17)



52-18.  IDENTIFICATION; COLOR; ETC.



   Each taxicab shall bear on the outside of the vehicle, in painted
letters not less than two inches nor more than four inches in height, the
name of the taxicab company, and in addition may bear an identifying design
and other information as approved by the Council. No vehicle covered by the
terms of this article shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying
design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the
Council, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design,
monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under
this article, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or
defraud the public. If after a license has been issued for a taxicab
hereunder the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof
is changed, in the opinion of the Council, so as to be in conflict with or
imitate any color scheme identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any
other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tend
to deceive the public, the license of or certificate covering such taxicab or
taxicabs shall be suspended or revoked.



(1978 Code, § 34-18; Ord. No. 216, § 1, 2-5-80)



52-19.  INSPECTION; MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   Prior to the use and operation of any vehicle under the
provisions of this article, the vehicle shall be thoroughly examined and
inspected by the Police Department and found to comply with such reasonable
rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Council. These rules and
regulations shall be promulgated to provide safe transportation and shall
specify such safety equipment and regulatory devices as the Council shall
deem necessary therefor. When the Police Department finds that a vehicle has
met the standards established by the Council, the Department shall issue a
license to that effect, which shall also state the authorized seating
capacity of said vehicle.



   (B)   Every vehicle operating under this article shall be
periodically inspected by the Police Department at such intervals as shall be
established by the Council.



   (C)   Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition according to rules and regulations promulgated
by the Council.



(1978 Code, § 34-19)



52-20.  REQUIRED SERVICE.



   All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under
the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public
desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and
necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open
24 hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching cabs. They
shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate
limits of the city, as soon as they can do so and, if said services cannot be
rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective
passengers how long it will be before the said call can be answered and give
the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in
the corporate limits of the city at any time when such holder has available
cabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a
violator of this article and the certificate granted to such holder may be
revoked at the discretion of the Council.



(1978 Code, § 34-20)



52-21.  ATTACHMENT OF ADVERTISING MATTER ON VEHICLES.



   Subject to the rules and regulations of the Council, it shall be lawful
for any person owning or operating a taxicab or motor vehicle for hire to
permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such
taxicabs or motor vehicles for hire.



(1978 Code, § 34-21)



Cross reference:



   Advertising, Ch. 3



52-22.  TAXIMETERS.



   All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be
equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them
at all times, day and night. After sundown, the face of the taximeter shall
be illuminated. Said taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism
of standard design and construction driven either from the transmission or
from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving
mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections, which, if
manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter
shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it
is not employed, and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of
such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip.
The said taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the
Police Department. Any inspector or other officer of the Department is
authorized, either on complaint of any person or without such complaint, to
inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify
the person operating the taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon, the taxicab
shall be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the
required working condition.



(1978 Code, § 34-23)



52-23.  RATES OF FARE; RATE CARD REQUIRED.



   (A)   Mileage rates: $0.80 for the first one-ninth mile or fraction
thereof; plus $0.10 for each additional one-ninth mile or fraction thereof;
$0.10 per minute waiting time.



   (B)   Every taxicab operated under this article shall have a rate
card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as
to be in view of all passengers.



(1978 Code, § 34-23; Ord. No. 216, § 1, 2-5-80)



52-24.  RECEIPTS.



   The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render
to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically
printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name
of the owner, license number or motor number, amount of meter reading or
charges and date of transaction.



(1978 Code, § 34-24)



52-25.  REFUSAL OF PASSENGER TO PAY LEGAL FARE.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of
any of the vehicles mentioned in this article after having hired the same,
and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined
with intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such
service.



(1978 Code, § 34-25) Penalty, see § 1-9



52-26.  OPEN STANDS.



   (A)   The City Council is authorized and empowered to establish open
stands in such place or places upon the streets of the city as it deems
necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. The Council shall not
create an open stand without taking into consideration the need for such
stands by the companies and the convenience to the general public. The
Council shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such open
stands. The Council shall not create an open stand in front of any place of
business where the abutting property owners object to the same or where such
stand would tend to create a traffic hazard.



   (B)   Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first
come first served basis. The driver shall pull on to the open stand from the
rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull of. Drivers shall stay
within five feet of their cabs; they shall not solicit passengers or engage
in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this article
shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his or
her choice that is parked at an open stand.



   (C)   Private or other vehicles for hire shall not at any time
occupy the space upon the streets that has been established as open stands.



(1978 Code, § 34-26)



Cross reference:



   Provisions of traffic ordinance relative to establishment and use of
taxicab stands, see § 49-212



52-27.  RESTRICTION ON NUMBER OF PASSENGERS; ACCEPTANCE OF ADDITIONAL
PASSENGERS WHEN PREVIOUSLY ENGAGED.



   (A)   No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab
as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his or her taxicab, as
stated in the license for the vehicle issued by the Police Department. A
child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger.



   (B)   No driver shall permit any other person to occupy or ride in
the taxicab, unless the person or persons first employing the taxicab shall
consent to the acceptance of an additional passenger or passengers. No charge
shall be made for an additional passenger, except when the additional
passenger rides beyond the previous passenger’s destination and then only
for the additional distance so traveled.



(1978 Code, § 34-27)



52-28.  REFUSAL TO CARRY ORDERLY PASSENGERS.



   No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person or
persons upon request, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the
provisions of this article to do so.



(1978 Code, § 34-28)



52-29.  PASSENGERS NOT TO BE RECEIVED OR DISCHARGED ON ROADWAY.



   Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the
roadway, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible
or, in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road
and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets, where
passengers may be discharged at either the right or left-hand sidewalk or
side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk.



(1978 Code, § 34-29)



52-30.  RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.



   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to permit any person
to ride outside the vehicle while it is in motion. It shall be unlawful for
any person to ride outside the vehicle while it is in motion.



(1978 Code, § 34-30) Penalty, see § 1-9



52-31.  DRIVERS SOLICITING BUSINESS; CRUISING.



   (A)   No driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab, except when
sitting in the driver’s compartment of such taxicab or while standing
immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any taxicab
shall remain in the driver’s compartment or immediately adjacent to his or
her vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except
that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his or her taxicab for not
more than ten consecutive minutes, and provided, further, that nothing herein
contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street
or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such
vehicle.



   (B)   No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone
of voice or by sign or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the
movement of any persons or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting
patronage.



   (C)   No driver shall cruise in search of passengers at any time,
and whenever a taxicab is unoccupied, the driver shall proceed at once by the
most direct route to the garage where the vehicle is housed or to the taxicab
stand customarily occupied by such taxicab.



   (D)   No driver, owner or operator shall solicit passengers at the
terminal of any other common carrier, nor at any intermediate points along
any established route of any other common carrier.



(1978 Code, § 34-31)



52-32.  DRIVERS SOLICITING FOR HOTELS, DEALING IN LIQUOR OR DRUGS, ETC.



   It shall be a violation of this article for any driver of a taxicab to
solicit business for any hotel or to attempt to divert patronage from one
hotel to another. Neither shall such driver engage in the sale or
distribution of intoxicating liquors, drugs, narcotics or solicit business
for any house of ill repute or use his or her vehicle for any purpose other
than the transporting of passengers.



(1978 Code, § 34-32)



Cross reference:



   Alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 5



52-33.  DRIVERS’ MANIFESTS.



   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are
recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and
destination of each trip and amount of fare and all such completed manifests
shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his or her
tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by
the owner and shall be of a character approved by the Council.



   (B)   Every holder of a certificate of public convenience and
necessity shall retain and preserve all drivers’ manifests in a safe place
for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year and
said manifests shall be available to the Council and Police Department.



(1978 Code, § 34-33)



52-34.  HOLDER’S RECORDS AND REPORTS.



   (A)   Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from
operations, operating and other expenses, capital expenditures and such other
operating information as may be required by the Council. Every holder shall
maintain the records containing such information and other data required by
this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the Council.



   (B)   Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and
statistics of operation to the Council for each calendar year, in accordance
with a uniform system prescribed by the Council. The reports shall reach the
Council on or before the first day of March of the year following the
calendar year for which such reports are prepared.



   (C)   All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation
of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person or in damage to any
vehicle or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of $200 shall be
reported immediately to the Police Department on a form of report to be
furnished by the Department.



   (D)   It shall be mandatory for all holders to file with the Council
copies of all contracts, agreements, arrangements, memoranda or other
writings relating to the furnishing of taxicab service to any hotel, theatre,
hall, public resort, railway station or other place of public gathering,
whether such arrangement is made with the holder or any corporation, firm or
association with which the holder may be interested or connected. Failure to
file such copies within seven days shall be sufficient cause for the
revocation of a certificate of any offending holder or the cancellation of
any cab stand privileges.



(1978 Code, § 34-34)



52-35-52-44.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 2.  CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY



52-45.  REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him
or her to be operated as a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city
without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and
necessity from the Council.



(1978 Code, § 34-45)



52-46.  FILING, VERIFICATION AND CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.



   An application for a certificate shall be filed with the Council upon
forms provided by the city, and the application shall be verified under oath
and shall furnish the following information:



   (1)    The name and address of the applicant;



   (2)   The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts
of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the
transaction or acts giving rise to said judgments;



   (3)   The experience of the applicant in the transportation of
passengers;



   (4)   Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that
public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate;



   (5)   The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the
applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals;



   (6)   The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the
vehicle or vehicles of the applicant;



   (7)   Such further information as the Council of the city may
require.



(1978 Code, § 34-46)



52-47.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.



   All applications shall be forwarded to the Police Department. The Chief
of Police shall cause an investigation to be made of the fitness of the
applicant for a certificate as to character and ability. This investigation
shall include the financial status of the applicant, including the number and
amounts of all unpaid judgments, the experience of the applicant in the
transportation of passengers, whether or not the applicant has a criminal
record and any other facts which, in the opinion of the Chief, are relevant
to the fitness of the applicant to operate a taxicab or motor vehicle for
hire service. The Chief shall transmit the application with his or her
attached recommendation to the Council.



(1978 Code, § 34-47)



52-48.  APPLICANT’S INSURANCE.



   No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued or
continued in operation unless there is in full force and effect a liability
insurance policy issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in
the State of Michigan for each vehicle authorized, in the amount of $100,000
for bodily injury to any one person; in the amount of $300,000 for injuries
to more than one person which are sustained in the same accident; and $25,000
for property damage resulting from any one accident. The insurance policy
shall inure to the benefit of any person who shall be injured or who shall
sustain damage to property proximately caused by the negligence of a holder,
his or her servants or agents. The insurance policy or policies or insurance
certificates shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk.



(1978 Code, § 34-49; Ord. No. 216, § 1, 2-5-80)



52-49.  PAYMENT OF LICENSE FEES PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE.



   No certificate shall be issued or continued in operation, unless the
holder thereof has paid an annual license fee  established by the annual
appropriations ordinance for the right to engage in the taxicab business
and  an additional per vehicle fee established by the annual appropriations
ordinance for each vehicle operated under a certificate of public convenience
and necessity. The license fees shall be for the calendar year and shall be
in addition to any other license fees or charges established by proper
authority and applicable to the holder or the vehicle or vehicles under his
or her operation and control.



(1978 Code, § 34-49) (Ord. No. 388, § 27, 1-3-07)



Cross reference:



   License generally, see Ch. 29



52-50.  ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.



   (A)   If the Council finds that further taxicab service in the city
is required by the public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is
fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to
the provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the Council, then
the Council shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the
applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under the certificate and the
date of issuance, otherwise, the application shall be denied.



   (B)   In making the above finding, the Council shall take into
consideration the number of taxicabs already in operation, whether existing
transportation is adequate to meet the public needs, the probable effect of
increased service on local traffic conditions and the character, experience
and responsibility of the applicant.



   (C)   The Council shall refuse a certificate when, in its opinion,
there are licensed a sufficient number of taxicabs or motor vehicles for hire
to adequately service the public, when the use of the streets by additional
taxicabs or motor vehicles for hire would interfere with the public use of
the streets, congest traffic or endanger the person or property of
pedestrians or those using the streets or when, in the opinion of the
Council, the applicant does not possess good moral character or fitness.



(1978 Code, § 34-50)



52-51.  TRANSFER.



   No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold,
assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred, without the consent of the
Council.



(1978 Code, § 34-51)



52-52.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   A certificate issued under the provisions of this division may be
revoked or suspended by the Council, if the holder thereof has violated any
of the provisions of this article; has discontinued operations for more than
30 days; or has violated any ordinances of the city or the laws of the United
States or the State of Michigan, the violation of which reflects unfavorably
on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. Prior to
suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed
action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard.



(1978 Code, § 34-52)



52-53-52-57.  RESERVED.



DIVISION 3.  DRIVER’S LICENSE



52-58.  REQUIRED.



   No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the
city, no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be so
driven and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be so driven at any time for
hire, unless the driver of the taxicab has a driver’s license issued under
the provisions of this division.



(1978 Code, § 34-58)



52-59.  APPLICATION GENERALLY.



   Each applicant for a taxicab license shall fill out, upon a blank form
to be provided by the Police Department, a statement giving his or her full
name, residence, place of residence for five years previous to moving to his
or her present address, age, height, color of eyes and hair, place of birth,
length of time he or she has resided at present address, whether a citizen of
the United States, place of previous employment, whether he or she has ever
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if convicted, the nature of
the crime and the date when and the place of the conviction, whether he or
she has previously been licensed as a driver or chauffeur, and, if so, when
and where and whether his or her license has ever been revoked and for what
cause, which statement shall be signed and sworn by the applicant and filed
with the Police Department as a permanent record.



(1978 Code, § 34-59)



52-60.  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; ADDITIONAL RULES OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.



   Investigation of all applications for licenses under the provisions of
this division shall be conducted by the Police Department, and when such
investigation is completed, it shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police who
shall endorse his or her recommendation thereon and forward same to the
officer or personnel in charge of issuing such licenses; provided, however,
that a temporary license may be issued pending such investigation but not to
exceed 20 days. The Police Department is authorized and empowered to
establish such additional rules and regulations governing the issuance of
driver’s licenses, not inconsistent herewith, as may be necessary and
reasonable.



(1978 Code, § 34-60)



52-61.  QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT GENERALLY.



   Each applicant for a taxicab driver’s license must:



   (1)   Be of the age of 18 years or over;



   (2)   Be of sound physique and good eyesight and not subject to
epilepsy, vertigo, heart trouble or any other infirmity which would interfere
with his or her operation of a public vehicle and furnish results of a
physical examination to the city on the forms provided by the city’s aid
physical examination to have taken place not more than 90 days prior to the
filing of any application;



   (3)   Be able to speak, read and write the English language;



   (4)   Be clean in dress and person and not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquors, drugs or narcotics;



   (5)   Produce, on forms to be provided by the Police Department,
certificates of his or her good character from two reputable citizens who
have known him or her personally and observed his or her conduct during two
months next preceding the date of his or her application.



(1978 Code, § 34-61)



52-62.  EXAMINATION OF APPLICANT.



   Each applicant for a driver’s license under the provisions of this
division shall be examined by a person designated by the Police Department as
to his or her knowledge of the provisions of this article, the traffic
ordinance and the geography of the city, and if the result of the examination
be unsatisfactory he or she shall be refused a license. Each such applicant
shall, if required by the Police Department, demonstrate his or her skill and
ability to safely handle the vehicle by driving it through a crowded section
of the city accompanied by an officer designated by the Police Department.



(1978 Code, § 34-62)



52-63.  PHOTOGRAPHS OF APPLICANT.



   Each applicant for a driver’s license shall file with his or her
application three recent photographs of himself or herself of a size which
may be easily attached to the license, one of which shall be attached to the
license, when issued, and the other shall be filed, together with the
application, with the Police Department. The photograph shall be so attached
to the license that it cannot be removed and another photograph substituted
without detection.



(1978 Code, § 34-63)



52-64.  ISSUANCE; CONTENTS; FEE; TERM; ETC.



   Upon satisfactory fulfillment of the foregoing requirements, there
shall be issued to the applicant a license which shall be in such form as to
contain the photograph and signature of the licensee. Any licensee who
defaces, removes or obliterates any official entry made upon his or her
license shall, in addition to any other punishment imposed by this article,
have his or her license revoked by the Police Department. Driver’s licenses
shall be issued as of January 1 of each and every year and shall be valid to
and including December 31 next succeeding. No person shall permit any
employee to operate a public taxicab or motor vehicle for hire within the
city without first obtaining a license as a public driver from the Police
Department. The Police Department is authorized to grant a public driver’s
license to any applicant therefor upon payment of a  fee established by the
annual appropriations ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 34-64) (Ord. No. 388, § 28, 1-3-07)



52-65.  DISPLAY.



   Every driver shall have his or her license, together with his or her
photograph, conspicuously displayed on the inside of his or her taxicab or
motor vehicle for hire and with a light shining on it at night so that it may
be easily seen both in the day and night time by occupants of the taxicab or
motor vehicle for hire.



(1978 Code, § 34-65)



52-66.  RENEWAL.



   The Police Department may cause the renewal of a driver’s license
from year to year by appropriate endorsement by the Police Department upon
the application for renewal. A driver, in applying for renewal of his or her
license, shall make such application upon a form to be furnished by the
Police Department, entitled "application for renewal of license," which shall
be filled out with the name and address of the applicant, together with a
statement of the date upon which his or her original license was granted and
the number thereon. The fee for such renewal shall be established by the
annual appropriations ordinance and paid each calendar year, unless the
license for the preceding year has been revoked.



(1978 Code, § 34-66)  (Ord. No. 388, § 29, 1-3-07)



52-67.  SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.



   (A)   The Council is given the authority to suspend any driver’s
license issued under this division for a driver’s failing or refusing to
comply with the provisions of this article, such suspension to last for a
period of not more than 30 days. The Council is also given authority to
revoke any driver’s license for failure to comply with the provisions of
this article. However, a license may not be revoked, unless the driver has
received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his or her
behalf.



   (B)   Every driver licensed under this division shall comply with
all city, state and federal laws. Failure to do so will justify the Council
suspending or revoking his or her license.



(1978 Code, § 34-67)



CHAPTER 53:  WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL



ARTICLE I . WATER SUPPLY AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM GENERALLY



53-1.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BONDS. Whenever the word BONDS shall be used in this article, it shall
be understood to refer to the water supply and sewage disposal system revenue
bonds issued by the City of Sterling and dated April 1,1964.



   CITY OF STERLING HEIGHTS, CITY. The City of Sterling Heights is a
municipal corporation of the State of Michigan and is the successor
municipality to the City of Sterling, County of Macomb, State of Michigan.



   REVENUES; NET REVENUES.  Whenever the words REVENUES and NET REVENUES
are used in this article, they shall be understood to have the meaning as
defined in Public Act 94 of 1933, § 3, as amended (M.S.A. § 5.2733; M.C.L.
§ 141.103).



   SYSTEM. The SYSTEM is the water supply and sewage disposal system of
the City of Sterling Heights and shall include all water mains and laterals,
pumping stations, sewage treatment facilities, sewers, storage facilities or
appurtenances used or useful in connection with the supplying and
distributing of water or the collection, treatment or disposal of sewage,
either now in existence or hereafter acquired. Such SYSTEM shall be deemed to
include, but not by way of limitation, all such facilities acquired,
constructed and owned by the City of Sterling Heights and such facilities
constructed to service the city by the County of Macomb, or any other public
agency, and operated and maintained by the city pursuant to contract
authorized by law. Said combined water supply and sewage disposal system is
sometimes herein referred to as the SYSTEM.



(1978 Code, § 35-1; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-2.  JURISDICTION OF CITY MANAGER RELATIVE TO OPERATION, MAINTENANCE, ETC.



   The operation, repair and management of the system and the acquiring of
the public improvements herein authorized shall be under the immediate
supervision and control of the City Manager, subject to the general
supervision and control of the City Council. The City Manager may make such
rules, orders and regulations as he or she deems necessary to assure the
efficient management and operation of the system.



(1978 Code, § 35-2; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-3.  OPERATING YEAR.



   The system shall be operated on the basis of an operating year
commencing on July 1 and ending on June 30.



(1978 Code, § 35-3; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-4.  BONDS PAYABLE FROM SYSTEM REVENUES; LIEN ON SUCH REVENUES; BOND
HOLDERS’ RIGHTS.



   (A)   The bonds and the attached coupons shall not be a general
obligation or indebtedness of the city but shall be payable solely from the
net revenues derived from the operation of the system and to secure such
payment there is created a statutory first lien upon the whole of the net
revenues of the system to continue until the payment in full of the principal
of and interest on said bonds.



   (B)   The holder or holders of said bonds or coupons representing in
the aggregate not less than 20% of the entire issue then outstanding may, by
suit, action, mandamus or other proceedings, protect and enforce the
statutory first lien upon the revenues of said system and may by suit,
action, mandamus or other proceedings enforce and compel performance of all
duties of the officers of the city, including the fixing of sufficient rates,
the collection of revenues, the proper segregation of the revenues of the
system and the proper application thereof; provided, however, that the
statutory lien upon said revenues shall not be construed to compel the sale
of the system.



   (C)   If there be any default in the payment of the principal of or
interest upon any of said bonds, any court having jurisdiction in any proper
action may appoint a receiver to administer and operate said system on behalf
of the city and under the direction of such court and by and with the
approval of such court perform all of the duties of the officials of said
city more particularly set forth herein and in Public Act 94 of 1933, as
amended.



   (D)   The holder or holders of any such bonds or any coupons
therefrom shall have all other rights and remedies given by Public Act 94 of
1933, as amended, for the collection and enforcement of said bonds and the
security therefor.



(1978 Code, § 35-4; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



Statutory reference:



   The 1933 Act referred to above is codified in M.S.A. §§ 5.2731 et
seq.; M.C.L. §§ 141.101 et seq.



53-5.  DEBT SERVICE CHARGES AND RATES-PRESCRIBED; BILLING.



   (A)   The debt service charges for water and sewage services
furnished by the systems shall be as follows:



   Water Debt Service Charge



   The water debt service charge shall consist of:



   (1)   Capital charge per unit as established by the annual
appropriations ordinance. A unit shall be regarded as a normal house service
connection for a single-family residence. Based upon this unit charge,
charges for other types of connections are as follows:



 



Type of Use
 
Unit


Residential:
 


   Single family
 
1.0 per building


   Two family
 
1.0 per unit


   Mobile home
 
1.0 per mobile home


   Multiple family (condominiums & townhouses)
 
1.0 per unit


Schools:
 


   Elementary
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


   Junior High
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


   Senior High
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


Industrial use
 
0.50 per m sq. ft.


Commercial use
 
0.50 per m sq. ft.


Temporary use-Over 30 days and less than 6 months
 
½ unit per connection


Non-Accessory Use (metered City Parks and Road Rows)
 
0.5 per acre of land sprinkling




 



   Capital charges not listed or for unusual conditions shall be
determined by the City Council.



   (2)   The capital charge shall be the only debt service charge that
is payable by premises that have either installed the water line in front of
their property at their own expense or have paid a special assessment to
defray a portion or all of the cost of installing the water line. Property
that does not fall into either of the above categories shall, in addition to
the capital charge, pay a front footage charge  in an amount established by
the annual appropriations ordinance per front foot of property that abuts the
water main as a debt service charge in addition to the capital charge.
Property of irregular shape shall be computed by the water and sewer
department formulae for frontage charge.



   All new construction must pay the debt service charge in cash. Existing
structures shall have the option of making the debt service payment in cash
or may pay the debt service charge over a period of ten years in equal
quarterly installments as part of the water bill. If the time payment method
of payment is elected, the amount of the debt service charge shall be
increased  by the percentage established in the annual appropriations
ordinance.



   Fire Hydrant Rental Payable by City



   For water used through fire hydrants and for the availability of such
water, the city shall pay a hydrant rental charge  as established by the
annual appropriations ordinance per hydrant.



   Tap Charge



   Water tap charges shall be deposited in advance in the amount
established by the annual appropriations ordinance.  Such deposit shall be
payment in full for the water service connection.



   The fee for a water service connection shall not be less than the
amount specified  in the annual appropriations ordinance; provided, however,
for a three-inch or larger water service connection, the water service
connection may be installed by the owner when the installation is being made
concurrently with an on-site extension of the city water system under the
jurisdiction and inspection of the city, and in such instances, a minimum tap
charge  in the amount established by the annual approprations ordinance
shall be paid to cover administrative costs.



   The water service connection shall consist of the tap to the water
main, the extension of the water service pipe to the curb stop and curb stop
box or service control valve and service control valve box/service control
valve gate well, whichever is applicable. The water service connection shall
be installed completely within the street right-of-way or public easement
provided. The person(s) for whose benefit the connection is made shall, on
behalf of himself or herself, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, hold the city harmless for any loss or damage that may in any way be
occasioned by the making of such connection. In addition to the above
charges, there shall be a meter charge based on the city’s cost for said
meter, including costs of installation plus an administrative cost of 15%.



   For existing nonremote water meters, there shall be a $20 charge for
the remote water meters installed by the city to upgrade the existing meters.
The $20 charge shall be added to the premises’ next water bill following
installation of any five-eighths inch to one and one-half inch remote water
meter. A charge of the cost of the remote water meter, plus 15% of that cost,
shall be added to the premises’ next water bill following the installation
of any remote water meter greater than one and one-half inches in size.



   Private Use of Fire Hydrants



   Before the use of fire hydrants is authorized for private purposes, a
permit shall be obtained from the city.  the monthly service charge for the
use of one or more fire hydrants shall be established by the annual
appropriations ordinance and shall be paid in advance.  Furthermore, the
applicant must maintain  a deposit with the city  in the amount established
by the annual appropriations ordinance which must be replenished on a monthly
basis, and against which charges for current water usage in accordance with
the current rate structure may be charged. In addition, this deposit shall be
available to reimburse the city for any additional charges levied as a result
of inspection and/or repair to the system.



   Billing Period



   The billing period for water and sewer service for all
individually-metered residences shall be quarterly. The billing period for
all other connections shall be monthly.



   Sewer Debt Service Charge



   The sewer debt service charge shall consist of:



   (1)   Capital charge per unit as established by the annual
appropriations ordinance. A unit shall be regarded as a normal house service
connection for a single-family residence. Based upon this unit charge,
charges for other types of connections are as follows:



 



Type of Use
 
Unit


Residential:
 


   Single family
 
1.0 per building


   Two family
 
1.0 per unit


   Mobile home
 
1.0 per mobile home


   Multiple family (condominiums & townhouses)
 
1.0 per unit


Schools:
 


   Elementary
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


   Junior High
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


   Senior High
 
0.35 per m sq. ft.


Industrial use
 
0.50 per m sq. ft.


Commercial use
 
0.50 per m sq. ft.


Temporary use-Over 30 days and less than 6 months
 
½ unit per connection




 



   Capital charges not listed or for unusual conditions shall be
determined by the City Council.



   (2)   The capital charge shall be the only debt service charge that
is payable by premises that have either installed the sewer line in front of
their property at their own expense or have paid a special assessment to
defray a portion or all of the cost of installing the sewer line. Property
that does not fall into either of the above categories shall, in addition to
the capital charge, pay a front footage charge  per front foot of property
that abuts the sewer in the amount established by the annual appropriations
ordinance, as a debt service charge in addition to the capital charge.
Property of irregular shape shall be computed by the Water and Sewer
Department formulae for frontage charge.



   All new construction must pay the debt service charge in cash. Existing
structures may have the option of making the debt service payment in cash or
may pay the debt service charge over a period of ten years in equal quarterly
installments as part of the sewer bill. If the time payment method of payment
is elected, the amount of the debt service charge shall be increased 20%.



   Tap Charge



   No tap (sewer connection) charges except for inspection shall be made
when sewer risers and sewer leads are installed by the property owner at the
property owner’s cost or when sewer risers and sewer leads are installed by
the city and the cost has been included in a special assessment against the
property owner.



   A tap (sewer connection) charge in the amount  established by the
annual approprations ordinance shall be made when a sewer riser or sewer lead
is installed by the city at the time of connection on a street with a
right-of-way of 60 feet or less and no special soil conditions exist. In the
event the street has a right-of-way of more than 60 feet or special soil
conditions exist, the tap (sewer connection) charge shall  include a charge
for 115% of any additional costs.



   An inspection charge as established by  the annual appropriations
ordinance shall be made for approval of each tap (sewer connection).



   (B)   The water and sewer rates for water and sewage services
furnished by the system shall be in accordance with the annual appropriations
ordinance.



(1978 Code, § 35-5; Ord. No. 182-B, § 1, 3-14-78; Ord. No. 182-C, § 1,
10-10-78; Ord. No. 182-D, § 1, 12-19-78; Ord. No. 182-E, § 1, 3-4-80; Ord.
No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-G, § 1, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 182-H, §
1, 6-19-84; Ord. No. 182-J, § 1, 1-19-88; Ord. No. 182-K, § 1, 6-21-88;
Ord. No. 182-L, § 1, 9-20-88; Ord. No. 290, § 1, 3-19-91; Ord. No. 182-M,
§ 1, 9-21-93; Ord. No. 388, § 30, 1-3-07)



Charter reference:



   Authority of city to fix and collect charges for use of water and sewer
systems, see § 16.11;



   Rates and charges for utility services, see §§ 14.03, 14.04



53-6.  SAME-COLLECTION AS LIEN ON PROPERTY; DEPOSIT TO ASSURE PAYMENT IN
CASE OF TENANTS; DISCONTINUING SERVICE FOR FAILURE TO PAY.



   (A)   Responsibility of property owner. The charges for water and
sewer services, pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 94 of 1933, § 21,
being M.C.L. § 141.121, M.S.A. § 5.2751, as amended, of Public Act 216 of
1978, § 1 and Public Act 178 of 1979, § 162, being M.C.L. § 123.162,
M.S.A. § 5.2531(2), are made a lien on all premises served immediately upon
the distribution of water or the provision of the sewage system service to
the premises or property supplied, unless proper notice by affidavit is given
by the property owner to the city that a named tenant is responsible for such
charges by the terms of their written lease. Whenever water and sewer charges
are made a lien against a parcel of property and payment for such charges is
delinquent for six months, the City Manager or his or her designate shall
certify semi-annually, not later than July and December 1 of each year, the
fact of such delinquency to the city tax assessing officer. That officer
shall then enter upon the next tax roll a charge against the premises. The
charge shall be collected and the lien enforced in the same manner as general
city taxes on such premises are collected.



   (B)   Responsibility of residential, commercial and/or industrial
tenants. Whenever notice is given by the property owner to the city through a
signed affidavit, in compliance with M.C.L. § 125.165 and M.S.A. §
5.2531(5), that the tenant is responsible for payment of all water and sewer
service charges to that property during that lease, the tenant shall be
responsible for such charges and the bills for water and sewer services shall
be sent to the tenant. However, no water and sewer service may be rendered to
commercial and industrial property unless a cash deposit of not less than a
sum equal to the estimated billing for such premises for four billing periods
is made to the city by the tenant as security for payment of water and sewer
services. No water and sewer service may be rendered to residential property
unless a cash deposit of not less than a sum of $200 is made to the city by
the tenant as security for payment of water and sewer services. The city
shall send the tenant notice of his or her obligation to pay the charges for
water and sewer services for that premises and the amount of the security
deposit.



   (C)   Discontinuance of service if bill unpaid. In addition to other
remedies provided, unless otherwise prohibited by law, the city shall have
the right to shut off and discontinue the supply of water and sewer services
to residential, commercial and industrial premises where the bill remains
unpaid for a period in excess of 30 days past the due date. Service which is
discontinued shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing shall be
paid. A charge of $25 shall be made for restoring services.



(1978 Code, § 35-6; Ord. No. 182-E, § 1, 3-4-80; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1,
3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-1, § 1, 9-22-87; Ord. No. 182-K, § 2, 6-21-88)



53-7.  RESERVED.



53-8.  SAME-SUFFICIENCY.



   The present rates established are estimated to be sufficient to provide
for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation and such
expenses for maintenance of said system as are necessary to preserve the same
in good repair and working order, to provide for the payment of the interest
upon and the principal of all bonds, as and when the same become due and
payable, and the creation of the reserve therefor required by this article,
and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as this
article may require and the city covenants and agrees that it will revise
said rates from time to time as may be necessary to produce sufficient funds
to provide for the foregoing.



(1978 Code, § 35-8; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-9.  FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED.



   No free service shall be furnished by said system to any person, firm
or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency or instrumentality.



(1978 Code, § 35-9; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-10.  ADDITIONAL CHARGE FOR OR TREATMENT OF CERTAIN INDUSTRIAL SEWAGE.



   If the character of sewage from any manufacturing or industrial plant
or any other building or premises shall be such as to impose an unreasonable
additional burden upon the sewers of the system, then an additional charge
may be made over and above the regular rates or it may be required that such
sewage be treated by the person, firm or corporation responsible therefor
before being emptied into the sewer, or the right to empty such sewage may be
denied if necessary for the protection of the sewer and sewage disposal
facilities of the system or the public health or safety.



(1978 Code, § 35-10; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-11.  SYSTEM FUNDS GENERALLY.



   (A)   Receiving Fund. The revenues of the system are ordered to be
set aside, as collected, and deposited in a bank or trust company duly
qualified to do business in Michigan, in an account to be designated Water
Supply and Sewage Disposal System Receiving Fund (hereinafter referred to as
the "Receiving Fund"), and said revenues so deposited are pledged for the
purpose of the following funds and shall be transferred from the receiving
fund periodically in the manner and at the times hereinafter specified. The
bank or trust company shall be designated from time to time by the City
Council.



   (B)   Operation and Maintenance Fund. Out of the revenues in the
receiving fund there shall be first set aside, quarterly, into a separate
depository account designated Operation and Maintenance Fund, a sum
sufficient to provide for the payment of the next quarter's current expenses
of administration and operation of the system and such current expenses for
the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the same in good
repair and working order. The City Council, prior to the commencement of each
operating year, shall adopt a budget covering the foregoing expenses for each
year, and such total expenses shall not exceed the total amount specified in
said budget, except by a vote of five-sevenths of the members of the City
Council.



   (C)   Bond and Interest Redemption Fund-generally. There shall next
be established and maintained a separate depository account designated Bond
and Interest Redemption Fund, which shall be used solely for the purpose of
paying the principal of and interest on the bonds authorized. The monies in
the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund (including the Bond Reserve Account
hereinafter established) shall be kept on deposit with the bank or trust
company where the principal and interest on the bonds herein authorized are
currently payable. Out of the revenues remaining in the receiving fund, after
provision has been made for expenses of operation and maintenance of the
system, there shall next be set aside, quarterly, in the Bond and Interest
Redemption Fund, a sum proportionately sufficient to provide for the payment
of the principal of and interest on all outstanding bonds payable from the
revenues of the system, as and when the same become due and payable. The
amount so set aside for interest each quarter shall be not less than one-half
of the total amount of interest becoming due on said bonds on the next
interest payment date, and the amount so set aside for principal each quarter
shall be not less than one-fourth of the total amount of principal becoming
due on the next principal payment date. If there shall be any deficiency in
the amount previously required to be set aside, then the amount of such
deficiency shall be added to the current requirements.



   (D)   Same-Bond Reserve Account. There is established in the Bond
and Interest Redemption Fund a separate account to be known as the Bond
Reserve Account, into which, after provision has been made for the Operation
and Maintenance Fund and the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, the sum of
$100,000 has been accumulated. The monies from time to time in the Bond
Reserve Account shall be used solely for the payment of principal and
interest on said bonds as to which there would otherwise be default. If at
any time it shall be necessary to use monies in the Bond Reserve Account for
such payment, then the monies so used shall be replaced from the net revenues
first received thereafter which are not required by this article to be used
for operation and maintenance or for current principal and interest
requirements; provided, however, that such Bond Reserve Account shall not be
regarded as monies otherwise appropriated or pledged for the purpose of
determining the sufficiency of funds available for redemption of callable
bonds.



   (E)   Same-When payments may stop. No further payments need be made
into the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund after enough of the bonds have
been retired so that the amount then held in said fund (including the Bond
Reserve Account) is equal to the entire amount of principal and interest
which will be payable at the time of maturity of all the bonds then remaining
in standing.



   (F)   Replacement Fund. There shall next be established and
maintained a separate depository account designated as the Replacement Fund,
the monies from time to time on deposit therein to be used solely for the
purpose of making major repairs and replacements to the system. There has
been accumulated in such fund the sum of $100,000. If at any time it shall be
necessary to use monies in said fund for such purpose, the monies so used
shall be replaced from the net revenues in the Receiving Fund which are
required by this article to be used for the Operation and Maintenance Fund or
the Bond and Interest and Redemption Fund, including the Bond Reserve Account.



   (G)   Improvement Fund. There shall next be established and
maintained a separate depository account designated Improvement Fund, the
monies from time to time on deposit therein to be used solely for the purpose
of acquiring and constructing additions, extensions and improvements to the
system. There shall be deposited into said Fund, quarterly, such sum as may
be determined by the City Council, after meeting of priority requirements of
the Operation and Maintenance Fund, the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund
(including the Bond Reserve Account) and the Replacement Fund.



   (H)   Transfer of surplus money in Receiving Fund. Monies remaining
in the Receiving Fund at the end of any operating year, after full
satisfaction of the requirements of the foregoing funds may, at the option of
the City Council, be either:



      (1)   Transferred to the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund and
used for calling bonds for redemption in the manner herein specified;



      (2)   Transferred to the Improvement Fund and used for the
purpose for which said funds are established.



(1978 Code, § 35-11; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-12.  DEFICIENCIES IN RECEIVING FUND.



   In the event the monies in the Receiving Fund are insufficient to
provide for the current requirements of the Operation and Maintenance Fund or
the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, any monies and/or securities in other
funds of the system shall be transferred: first, to the Operation and
Maintenance Fund, and second, to the Bond and Interest Redemption Fund, to
the extent of any deficit therein.



(1978 Code, § 35-12; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-13.  INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.



   The monies in funds or accounts of the system may be invested in the
United States government obligations subject to the limitations provided in
Public Act 94 of 1933 (M.S.A. §§ 5.2731 et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 41.101 et
seq.), as amended, and the income derived from such investments shall be
credited to the fund from which such investments were made. In the event of
any such investment, the securities representing the same shall be kept on
deposit with the bank having the deposit of the fund or funds from which
purchase was made.



(1978 Code, § 35-13; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-14.  COVENANTS WITH BOND HOLDERS.



   The city covenants and agrees with the successive holders of the bonds
and coupons that, so long as any of the bonds remain outstanding and unpaid
as to either principal or interest:



   (1)   It will maintain the system and all its facilities in good
repair and working order, will operate the same efficiently and will
faithfully and punctually perform all duties with reference to the system
required by the Constitution and laws of the State of Michigan and as may be
required by the loan agreement between the city and the housing and home
finance agency under the terms of which a portion of the public improvements
may be financed, including the establishing, fixing and collecting of
sufficient rates and charges for services furnished by the system to meet all
the requirements established by this article and the segregation and
application of the revenues of the system in the manner provided in this
article;



   (2)   It will cause to be maintained and kept proper books of record
and account, separate from all other records and accounts of the city, in
which shall be made full and correct entries of all transactions relating to
the system. Not later than 60 days after the close of each operating year,
the city will cause to be prepared forms furnished by the Municipal Finance
Commission, if such forms are available, a statement in reasonable detail,
sworn to by its chief accounting officer, showing the cash income and
disbursements of the system during each operating year, the assets and
liabilities of the system at the beginning and close of the operating year
and such other information as is necessary to enable any taxpayer of the
city, user of the service furnished or any holder or owner of the bonds or
anyone acting in their interest, to be fully informed as to all matters
pertaining to the financial operation of the system during such year. A
certified copy of such statement shall be filed within 90 days after the
close of each operating year with the Municipal Finance Commission and a copy
sent to the manager of the account purchasing the bonds and to the housing
and home finance agency if any of the bonds are awarded to the United States
of America. Such statement and books of record shall be at all reasonable
times open to inspection by any taxpayer of the city, user of the service or
holder or holders of any bonds or anyone acting in their behalf. The city
will also cause an annual audit of such books of record and account for the
preceding operating year to be made each year by a recognized independent
certified public accountant and will mail a copy of such audit to the manager
of the syndicate or account purchasing the bonds and to the housing and home
finance agency if any of the bonds are awarded to the United States of
America. Such audit shall be completed and so made available not later than
three months after the close of each operating year. The city will furnish
copies of such audit reports to any bond holder who shall request the same in
writing;



   (3)   It will procure and maintain insurance covering the system as
follows.



      (a)   It shall require that each of its construction
contractors and his or her subcontractors shall maintain during the life of
his or her contract worker’s compensation insurance and public liability
and property damage insurance in amounts and on terms satisfactory to the
United States of America, Housing and Home Finance Agency (hereinafter in
this subparagraph referred to as the "HHFA"), if any portion of the bonds are
purchased by HHFA; and if the HHFA does not purchase any of said bonds, in
amounts and on terms satisfactory to the city. It will either itself maintain
or require that each of its contractors maintain during the life of his or
her contract builder’s risk insurance in amounts and on terms satisfactory
to the HHFA, if the HHFA purchases any portion of said bonds; and if the HHFA
does not purchase any of said bonds, on terms and in amounts satisfactory to
the city.



      (b)   Fire and extended coverage in amounts sufficient to
provide for not less than full recovery whenever a loss from perils insured
against does not exceed 89% of the full insurable value. In the event of any
damage to or destruction of any portion of the system, the city shall apply
the proceeds of said insurance to the repair or reconstruction of the damaged
or destroyed portion thereof. In the event of total loss, the city, in lieu
of reconstruction, may apply the proceeds to payment of the outstanding bonds.



      (c)   As long as any of the bonds are outstanding, it will
procure and maintain public liability insurance with limits of not less than
$100,000 for one person and $300,000 for more than one person involved in one
accident to protect the city from claims for bodily injury or death which may
arise from operations of the system and not less than $10,000 property damage
insurance to protect the city from claims for damage to property of others
which may arise from operations of the system.



      (d)   So long as any of the bonds are outstanding, it will
procure and maintain vehicular public liability insurance with limits of not
less than $100,000 for one person and $300,000 for more than one person
involved in one accident to protect the city from claims for bodily injury or
death which may arise from the operation of motor vehicles in connection with
said system and not less than $10,000 property damage insurance to protect
the city against claims for property damage to property of others which may
arise from the operation of motor vehicles in connection with the system.



      (e)   Each of its officials or employees having custody of
funds during the acquisition, construction, development and operation of the
system shall be bonded at all times in an amount at least equal to the total
funds in his or her custody at one time.



   (4)   It will not sell, lease or dispose of the system and the lands
and interest in lands comprising the site of the system, or any substantial
part thereof, until all of the bonds have been paid in full, both as to
principal and interest. The city further will cause the operation of the
system to be carried on as economically as possible, will cause to be made to
the system all repairs and replacements necessary to keep the same in good
repair and working order and will not do or suffer to be done any act which
would affect the system in such a way as to impair or affect unfavorably the
security of the bonds.



(1978 Code, § 35-14; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-15.  ISSUANCE OF ADDITIONAL BONDS.



   The right is reserved, in accordance with the provisions of Public Act
94 of 1933 (M.S.A. §§ 5.2731 et seq.; M.C.L. §§ 141.101 et seq.), as
amended, to issue additional bonds payable from the revenues of the system,
which shall be of equal standing with the bonds herein authorized, but only
for the following purposes:



   (1)   To complete the public improvements in accordance with the
plans and specifications therefor, and such bonds shall not be authorized
unless the consulting engineers or the successor engineers in charge of
construction shall execute a certificate evidencing the fact that additional
funds are needed to complete the public improvements in accordance with the
plans and specifications therefor. If such certificate shall be so executed
and filed with the City Clerk, it shall be the duty of the City Council to
provide for and issue additional revenue bonds in the amount stated in the
certificate to be necessary to complete the public improvements in accordance
with the plans and specifications.



   (2)   For subsequent additions, extensions and improvements to the
system; provided, that no such additional bonds shall be issued in accordance
with this subsection unless the average annual net revenues for the last two
preceding completed operating years of the system, or the net revenues for
the last completed operating year, whichever is lower, shall be equal to at
least 135% of the largest annual principal and interest requirements
thereafter maturing on the bonds herein authorized, on any then previously
issued bonds of equal standing with the bonds herein authorized, and on such
additional bonds then being issued. For the purpose of determining net
revenues under the above requirements, there shall be added to the net
revenues for the last two operating years the net revenues estimated to
accrue from the additions, extensions and improvements. Prior to the issuance
of any additional bonds pursuant to this paragraph, there shall be filed with
the City Clerk a statement showing the average annual net revenues for the
two preceding completed operating years, the additional or augmented revenues
from the improvements to be acquired and the annual principal and interest
requirements on all outstanding bonds payable from revenues of the system and
the bonds proposed to be issued. The statement shall be executed by a
registered engineer appointed by the city. Permission of the Municipal
Finance Commission (or such other state body having jurisdiction over the
issuance of municipal bonds) to issue such additional bonds shall constitute
a conclusive presumption of the existence of conditions permitting the
issuance thereof.



   Except as herein authorized, no additional bonds having equal standing
with the bonds of this issue shall be authorized or issued.



(1978 Code, § 35-15; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-16-53-25.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE II.  WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM AND WATER USE STANDARDS



53-26.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. An approved device installed in a water service
pipe to prevent water from flowing back to the municipal water main.



   COMMON AREA. An area of property (usually landscaped) owned or used by
more than one person for a common purpose, such as a landscaped greenbelt,
landscaped boulevard island, park commons, signage easement or conservation
easement.



   COMMON AREA IRRIGATION SYSTEM. A lawn or landscape irrigation system
installed upon a common area to maintain the common area landscaping, trees
and vegetation.



   CORPORATION STOP. A valve which is inserted into the municipal main for
the connection of the water supply service pipes in sizes up to and including
two inches in diameter.



   CURB STOP. A valve for insertion in the water supply service pipes of
two-inch diameter size or smaller.



   CURB STOP BOX. A box or metal housing which encloses, protects and
provides access to a curb stop.



   METER PIT. An approved vault for housing a water meter.



   PLUMBER. A person licensed and registered with the State of Michigan to
do plumbing in accordance with the statutes and ordinances relating to such
work.



   PREMISES. A parcel of land in its entirety which is described as a
separate unit on the tax assessment rolls of the city. Such definition
includes but is not limited to a building under one roof owned, leased or
occupied by one party as a business or residence; a combination of
residential buildings or of commercial buildings leased or occupied by one
party in common enclosure; or one part of a two-family dwelling having a
solid vertical partition wall; or a building owned by one party having more
than one internal division, such as apartments, offices, stores and the like,
which may have a common or separate entrance.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley,
walkway or other public purpose as indicated in the master road plan.



   SERVICE CONTROL VALVE. A gate valve installed in a water supply service
pipe of three-inch diameter size or larger.



   SERVICE CONTROL VALVE BOX. A box or metal housing which encloses,
protects and provides access to the service control valve of water service
pipes of three to six inch diameter.



   SERVICE CONTROL VALVE GATE WELL. A structure enclosing, protecting and
providing access to a service control valve of eight inch diameter size or
larger.



   TAP. A water service pipe connection into a municipal water main.



   TEMPLATE. A spacer temporarily installed in a water supply service pipe
to provide for future installation of a water meter.



   WATER MAIN, MUNICIPAL. A municipal water pipe located upon or abutting
property to which a water service connection can be made.



   WATER METER. A device designed to measure the volume of water utilized
by premises, including the remote cable and outside remote reader.



   WATER SERVICE. Piping from the water main to and including the water
meter, consisting of a corporation stop, curb stop, piping and water meter.



(1978 Code, § 35-26; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-M, § 2,
9-21-93)



53-27.  PERMIT REQUIREMENTS; APPLICATION.



   (A)   No person shall make any connection to or alter or replace any
connection to the municipal water system within the city without first having
obtained a permit for such connection. Any person doing such work without a
permit shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article and shall be
subject to such penalties as are provided in this Code.



   (B)   The application must state in detail the proposed location of
the water service connection. In the case of service connections for
commercial and industrial uses, the application must include a drawing of the
building with sufficient dimensions to determine the square footage of all
structures, including all floors, basements, penthouses and mezzanines to be
served by the connection. The application shall note whether or not more than
one building is intended to be served by the same connection with the street
main. Furthermore, the application must disclose whether or not there are any
previously installed service lines servicing the property in question.



   (C)   Upon review to determine that all provisions of this article
are complied with, and upon receipt of the necessary fees required for
issuance of a permit, as well as any other charges for such service
connection, the Department of Public Works shall issue a permit for such
water service connection.



   (D)   In the case of an application for a temporary tap, the
applicant must state the length of time for which the connection is
anticipated to be used. If a temporary tap is to be used for a longer period
than originally requested, the applicant must obtain an extension of the
duration of the permit for the temporary tap from the city.



(1978 Code, § 35-27; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-28.  INSTALLATION OF WATER SERVICE PIPES-SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL.



   (A)   A request for a water tap from the city shall be made at least
ten working days prior to its anticipated need. If the proposed use calls for
a tap in excess of two inch diameter, additional notice shall be given so
that the special materials necessary for installation of the larger tap may
be ordered and received. Prior to installation of a water service pipe, the
permit holder shall contact "Miss Dig" and obtain the location of all
existing utilities. The proposed location of the water service pipe shall be
at least three feet from any existing gas lines and five feet from the
sanitary sewer service lead.



   (B)   At least 24 hours prior to the anticipated installation of the
water service pipe, the permit holder shall notify the Department of Public
Works so that the location of the tap and the point to which the water
service pipe must be run can be determined. The Department of Public Works
Inspector shall leave a stake indicating the proposed location of the tap and
the point to which the water service pipe shall be installed.



   (C)   Once the tap location is determined, the permit holder shall
install the water service pipe in a trench of at least five feet in depth,
where the final grades are known, leaving a sufficient length of pipe to
connect it to the service control valve. Where the final grades are not
known, the top of the service pipe shall be at least six feet below pavement
grade. The water service pipe and its installation shall conform strictly to
standards established from time to time by the city.



   (D)   When the building to which water service is to be connected
has a basement or cellar, the water service pipe must be extended to same and
no branches taken therefrom except on the outlet side of the meter in the
cellar or basement.



   (E)   No pipes shall be installed along the outside wall or in any
other position inside the building where there is a danger of freezing. In
addition, no new service connections or new attachments to old connections
which require a running stream to prevent freezing shall be permitted.



   (F)   Upon completion of the installation of the water service pipe
and prior to the backfilling of the trench, the permit holder shall request
an inspection and obtain approval from the Department of Public Works of the
installation of the water service pipe and the depth of the trench before
proceeding.



   (G)   Upon inspection and approval of the water service pipe, the
Department of Public Works shall install the water tap and the service line
from the water main to a location within the easement or to a point within
seven feet of the lot line. The Department of Public Works shall tap the
main, insert the corporation stop with proper couplings and lay the service
pipe and provide a curb stop with a stop box and an approved cover.



   (H)   All curb stops and service control valves used on water
service connections must meet the current specifications of the city as
established from time to time.



(1978 Code, § 35-28; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-29.  SAME-COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL.



   (A)   A request for a water tap shall be made at least 15 working
days prior to its anticipated need. If the particular installation requires a
tap in excess of two inches, additional notice is required so that the
special materials necessary for installation may be ordered and received.
Prior to the installation of water service pipe, the permit holder shall
contact "Miss Dig" and obtain the location of all existing utilities. The
proposed location of the water service pipe shall be at least three feet from
any existing gas lines and five feet from the sanitary sewer service lead.



   (B)   Where the water tap is to be made to an on-site water main,
the water service pipe shall be run to within six feet of the main. In
addition, a sufficient length of water service pipe shall be left exposed so
that the city may connect the water service pipe to the box. The permit
holder shall place a stake at the end of the water service pipe so that it
may easily be located.



   (C)   Where the tap and connection is to be made within the
right-of-way, the water service pipe shall be installed into the right-of-way
a minimum distance of seven feet. A sufficient length of water service pipe
shall be left exposed so that the city may connect the water service pipe to
the box. A stake indicating the location of the water service pipe shall be
left by the person installing the water service pipe. Where final grades of
the street are established, the water service pipe shall be installed at
least five feet below the pavement grade. Where the final grade of the street
is not known, the water service pipe shall be installed at least six feet
below the surface of the earth.



   (D)   Upon completion of the installation of the water service pipe
and prior to the backfilling of the trench, the permit holder shall request
an inspection and obtain approval of the installation of the water service
pipe and the depth of the trench.



   (E)   Following inspection and approval of the water service pipe,
the Department of Public Works will ordinarily install the water tap in the
service line from the water main to a location within seven feet of the lot
line. This work shall include tapping the main, inserting the corporation
stop with proper couplings, laying the service pipe and providing a curb stop
with a stop box and an approved cover. In instances where larger taps are
installed and the city permits the owner to install the water tap in lieu of
the city, such installation shall be conducted in strict conformance to the
standards established by the city. All new service pipes connecting to the
water main shall have an inside diameter of at least one inch and shall
extend between the connection to the water main and the water meter. In
addition, all water service pipes, curb stops, service control valves,
corporation stops, service control valve boxes, service control valve gate
wells and service control valves shall meet the current specifications of the
city as established from time to time.



   (F)   A backflow preventor approved by the city shall be installed
for each service connection to a building. The owner shall be responsible for
the proper operation, maintenance and repair of the backflow preventer.



   (G)   The following minimum requirements are established for
multiple-family dwellings:



 

Number of Units
 
Minimum Service Size


3-6
 
1½ inch


7-12
 
2 inches


13-20
 
2 to 3 inches


21-36
 
3 inches


37-60
 
4 inches


60 or more
 
to be determined by the city



 



(1978 Code, § 35-29; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-30.  SAME-GENERALLY.



   (A)   There shall be a separate water service pipe for each building
unless special approval is obtained from the City Council. Where two or more
buildings are originally serviced by one water service pipe and ownership of
the buildings subsequently is divided, individual water service pipes shall
be installed at the time of such transfer of ownership.



   (B)   Water service pipes shall not be permitted to cross public
streets or rights-of-way without specific permission from the city and the
agency with jurisdiction over said street or right-of-way.



   (C)   All service connections not currently used or contemplated to
be used or not meeting current city standards shall be disconnected at the
street main. This disconnection shall be done by the city upon payment of the
required fee as established by the  annual appropriations ordinance. No
permit for the installation of a new service line shall be issued until the
fees for disconnection for the previous line have been paid.



   (D)   The builder, contractor or plumber is required to install the
water service pipe prior to the installation of the water tap by the city.
Exceptions to this requirement will be permitted only with prior approval by
the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his or her designate.



   (E)   Where a building is served by city water and also has water
from another source or is subject to the provisions of § 53-33 hereunder,
then all water service pipes containing potable city water shall be painted
or color-coded light blue and all other water pipes painted or color-coded
brown. Where a different color code has already been in existence to
distinguish city potable water from other water within the building, such
code will be permitted provided charts defining the various colors are
displayed prominently by the water meter and all required backflow
preventors. Failure to comply with the above provisions within 90 days of
written notice of said violation shall be deemed sufficient cause to
disconnect the water supply to the building.



   (F)   The property owner shall pay the cost and be responsible for
any alteration to the premises’ water service line necessary to accommodate
the remote water meter installation from the point of connection at the curb
stop box to the water meter, including the plumbing required at the meter.



(1978 Code, § 35-30; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-J, § 2,
1-19-88; Ord. No. 388, § 31, 1-3-07)



53-30.5  INSTALLATION OF COMMON AREA IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.



   (A)   A developer or association of owners may request a water
service connector for a common area irrigation system to provide irrigation
to landscaping located within a common area.



   (B)   The common area irrigation system and any water meter
installed as part of such a system shall be installed in accordance with
regulations established by the City Manager under the authority of § 53-2 of
the City Code.



   (C)   The developer or association requesting a water service
connector for a common area irrigation system shall enter into a written
agreement with the city in a form satisfactory to the city providing for the
collection of fees and charges due under any city ordinance or regulation
relating to the installation, maintenance, usage or removal of a common area
irrigation system. This agreement must provide for the imposition of liens to
insure collection of such charges.



   (D)   If the developer or association installing a common area
irrigation system is unable to impose a lien upon the property served by the
common area irrigation system because such common area is not under its
control or ownership, the city may allow installation of a common area
irrigation system if the developer or association enters into an agreement
with the city in a form satisfactory to the city providing:



      (1)   For the deposit in advance of a sum equal to 150% of the
estimated water usage charges for such year;



      (2)   For the replenishment of such fund based upon usage; and



      (3)   For the discontinuance of water service to the common
area if the fees and charges due are not paid on a timely basis.



   (E)   Any person installing a common area irrigation system shall
pay all applicable tap fees, connection charges, capital charges, usage fees
or other fees or charges imposed by ordinance or regulation relating to such
installation.



   (F)   The owner, developer, association or occupant responsible for
maintenance of the common area upon which the common area irrigation system
is located shall exercise reasonable care and caution to insure that the
water meter for such system is not damaged in any way, including but not
limited to taking precautions against freezing or damage, injury or
interference by any person.



(Ord. No. 182-M, § 3, 9-21-93)



53-31.  LOCATION OF FIRE HYDRANTS.



   All fire hydrants shall be located a minimum distance of two feet from
any street, pavement or sidewalk and a minimum of four feet from any
driveway, tree or other permanent structure. The property owner whose
property abuts a fire hydrant shall be responsible for preventing any
interference or obstruction to its use.



(1978 Code, § 35-31; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-32.  INSTALLATION OF WATER METERS.



   (A)   All premises using city water shall be metered. All
installations of water meters shall be of a remote water meter type and a
remote meter reader. All existing nonremote meters shall be upgraded to
remote water meters and remote water meter readers. The remote meter reader
shall be located on the front exterior of all single-family residential
structures. The remote meter reader shall be located on the exterior of
commercial or industrial buildings in an area most suitable for easy reading.
No person shall tamper with or remove the remote water meter or remote water
meter reader or interfere with the reading thereof.



   (B)   The expense of the meter and its installation shall be borne
by the owner of the premises. Water meters shall at all times remain within
the ownership and control of the city. All charges for the meter shall be
paid at the time that the applicant obtains a permit. The maintenance of a
meter shall be at the expense of the Department of Public Works, except in
situations where the replacement, repair or adjustment of the meter is made
necessary by the acts, neglect or carelessness of the owner or occupants of
the premises, in which case the cost incurred may be charged against and
collected from the owner of the premises.



   The city may contract for the installation of the remote water meters
and remote water meter readers installed to upgrade existing water meters.
The premises shall be billed for this installation as set forth in § 53-5.



   (C)   There shall be a separate water meter for each water service.
Where conditions of use or occupancy warrant the use of multiple meters, the
City Council may approve an exception to this requirement. In such cases, an
agreement must be signed by the owner protecting the city against any
liability arising from such metering or any loss of revenue caused thereby.



   (D)   The minimum size of water meters for residential uses shall be
as follows:



 



Single-family dwelling:
 
3/4 inch


Two-family dwelling:
 
1 inch


3-6 units:
 
1 inch


7-12 units:
 
1½ inch


13-20 units:
 
2 inch


21-36 units:
 
3 inch


37-60 units:
 
4 inch


More than 60 units:
 
As reflected on approved plans




 



   (E)   A template and coupling up to and including one and one half
inch diameter will be furnished by the Department of Public Works without
additional charge provided the application for permit is properly completed
and the permit fees paid. The meter must be set before the building becomes
occupied.



   (F)   The Department of Public Works shall install all meters of one
and one half inch diameter in size and smaller. As to meters for applications
in excess of that size, the city will provide the larger water meters and all
detector check meters but the same must be installed by a plumber on the job
site. All such meters in commercial buildings, apartment buildings and
industrial buildings shall be installed on an outside wall with a four-inch
pipe extended through the wall which is capped on the outside of the building
to enable testing and repair of the meters on a regular basis without entry
into the building.



   (G)   All meter installations shall be done in an area which is dry,
clean, easily accessible and warm, with sufficient room for the meter to be
eight inches from the floor and six inches from any walls or other
obstructions. The meters shall be set horizontally with valves on both sides
so that a small leak in the flowage of water will cause no damage.



   (H)   When due to faulty work or an inability to obtain access it is
necessary to make more than one trip to set a meter, a charge of $20 will be
made for each additional trip.



   (I)   No person shall interfere with or remove a water meter from
any service connection without first obtaining the approval from the
Department of Public Works. Whenever any meter is removed with such approval,
the meter shall be immediately returned to the Department of Public Works. In
the event that a meter is missing from a location where it is known that a
meter had previously been installed, the owner of the premises will be
charged for a new meter.



(1978 Code, § 35-32; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-J, § 3,
1-19-88)



53-33.  WATER SUPPLY CROSS-CONNECTIONS; LABELING OF WATER OUTLETS NOT
SUPPLIED BY POTABLE SYSTEM.



   (A)   The city adopts by reference the water supply cross-connection
rules of the State Department of Public Health, being 8325.431 to 8325.440 of
the Michigan Administrative Code.



   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Department of Public Works to
cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water
supply where cross-connections with the public water supply are deemed
possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections, based on potential
health hazards involved, shall be as established by the Department of Public
Works and as approved by the State Department of Public Health.



   (C)   The representative of the Department of Public Works shall
have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a
connection to the public water supply system of the city, for the purpose of
inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross-connections. On
request, the owner, lessees or occupants of any property so served shall
furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the
piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or
refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence
of cross-connections.



   (D)   The Department of Public Works is authorized and directed to
discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any
connections in violation of this section exist and to take such other
precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until the cross-connection has been eliminated
in compliance with the provisions of this section.



   (E)   The potable water supply made available on the properties
served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible
contamination as specified by this section and by the state and city plumbing
codes. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes
and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a
conspicuous manner as "Water Unsafe for Drinking."



   (F)   This section does not supersede the state plumbing code and
the city plumbing ordinance but is supplementary to them.



(1978 Code, § 35-33; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



Cross reference:



   Plumbing Code, see §§ 11-58-11-60



53-34.  INSPECTIONS; RIGHT-OF-ENTRY; DENIAL OF ACCESS.



   (A)   Entry for purposes of inspection, sampling, etc. The
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and any other duly
authorized employee of the city bearing proper city credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter upon any property for the purpose
of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance
with the terms of this article.



   (B)   Entry for purposes of remote water meter installation. The
employee of the contractor or subcontractor responsible for the installation
of new water meters and remote water meter readers bearing proper
identification as an employee of that contractor shall be permitted to enter
upon any property for the purpose of remote water meter installation.



   (C)   Denial of access to premises; notification of owner;
termination of water service. After reasonable notice by the city to the
owner of the premises, the city may terminate water service to that premises
if access to that premises for the purposes stated within this chapter has
been denied.



(1978 Code, § 35-34; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81; Ord. No. 182-J, § 4,
1-19-88)



53-35.  VIOLATION AND DUTY TO ABATE.



   Except as specifically provided to the contrary herein, correction of
any violation of any of the provisions contained herein shall be made within
ten days after notification by the city. Except in cases of emergency as
determined by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works, or where
there is a break in the on-site water service, water service as authorized by
this article may be terminated only after 30 days notice in writing to either
the owner or occupant of the abutting premises that the City Council has
determined that the use of such privilege is being carried on in violation of
the provisions of this article. In the case of an emergency, or where a break
in on-site water service occurs, the Superintendent of the Department of
Public Works, or his or her designate, may terminate service without notice.



(1978 Code, § 35-35; Ord. No. 182-F, § 1, 3-31-81)



53-36.  DAMAGE TO WATER MAIN OR HYDRANT; NOTICE TO REPAIR.



   In all cases where a water main, remote water meter, hydrant or any
other appurtenance to the water supply system is damaged by the acts or
negligence of the property owner whose property abuts the water main, remote
water meter, hydrant or appurtenance, it shall be the duty of the
Superintendent of Public Works, after determining the cause and
responsibility for such damage, to give notice to the owners or parties in
interest of the property serviced by such facilities or equipment of the need
to have such facilities or equipment repaired, except where emergency
conditions require immediate remedial action without notice. The city shall
make the repairs to the water main and to public property damage incidental
to such repairs. The city shall be reimbursed for the cost of such repairs.
Such expenses incurred for repairs shall be charged to the owners or parties
in interest of the property abutting such facilities or equipment, and if not
paid, such charges shall be assessed against the abutting premises serviced
by such facilities and equipment as a special assessment levied and collected
by the city in the same manner as taxes and special assessments.



(Ord. No. 182-M, § 4, 9-21-93)



53-37-53-45.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE III.  SEWAGE DISPOSAL, SEWER CONNECTION AND USE STANDARDS



53-46.  AUTHORITY.



   By the virtue of the obligations placed upon the City of Sterling
Heights by the amended consent judgment in the cause of United States of
America vs. State of Michigan, Case No. 77-1100, in the United States
District Court, Eastern District of Michigan, Southern Division as well as
the rate settlement agreement in that same cause, by the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500, as amended), State of Michigan
Act 245 of 1979, as amended, and the National Pollution Discharge Elimination
System Permit No. MI 0022N02, as well as existing and future contracts
between the City of Sterling Heights and the Board of Water Commissioners of
the City of Detroit, these regulations shall apply to every user whose waste
water is conveyed, directed or drained into the sewer system of the City of
Sterling Heights.



(1978 Code, § 35-46; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-47.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.



   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure in five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter
(mg/l).



   BUILDING DRAINS. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other
drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the
building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.



   BUILDING SEWER. The extension of the building drain and/or sanitary
building drain to the public sewer.



   CITY. The City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY CODE. The Municipal Code of Ordinances of the City of Sterling
Heights.



   CITY CODE OF DETROIT. The Municipal Code of the City of Detroit (1964).



   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.



   COUNCIL. The Council of the City of Sterling Heights.



   COUNCIL OF DETROIT. The City Council of the City of Detroit.



   DIRECTOR DWSD. Director of the Water and Sewerage Department.



   GARBAGE.  Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of
food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy
or combination thereof resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing,
business, trade or research, including the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources.



   INTERNAL SANITARY BUILDING DRAIN.  That part of the lowest horizontal
piping of the drainage system which conveys internal sanitary sewage to the
building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building
wall.



   INTERNAL STORM BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal
piping of a drainage system which conveys the internal storm water to the
storm sewer or to discharge on the ground.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. As
defined in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, 33 USC 1342, Pub. L.
92-500, Section 402 and 40 CFR 125.



   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or groundwater.



   PERSONS or USER. Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group.



   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.



   PRIVATE DRAIN. Any drain or storm sewer connecting a private source to
a public storm sewer.



   PRIVATE SEWERS. A sanitary sewer not under the jurisdiction or
ownership of a governmental entity.



   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The waste from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.



   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A street, easement or alley under government
jurisdiction that is for public use.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all the owners of abutting properties
have equal rights and which is controlled by a public authority or
governmental agency.



   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that carries liquid or water-carried waste from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions,
together with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are
not admitted intentionally.



   SEWAGE. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
businesses, buildings, institutions and/or industrial establishments,
together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present.



   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.



   SEWER. A pipe or conduit carrying liquid and/or liquid-bearing waste.



   SHALL, MAY.  Shall is mandatory; may is permissive.



   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or quantity of flow exceeds, for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the average
24 hour concentration of flows during normal operations.



   STORM SEWER. A sewer which carries storm and surface water and
drainage, but excludes waste water and industrial waters other than
unpolluted cooling water.



   SUBURBAN SEWER. A sewer that emanates from and serves areas outside the
City of Detroit.



   SUPERINTENDENT. The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works in
the City of Sterling Heights or his or her deputy or his or her designated
representative.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The solids that either float on the surface of or are
in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.



   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water in its original, natural or unused state; if
used, it shall be at least equal chemically, physically and biologically to
its state before use.



   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently.



   WASTE WATER. A combination of waters, liquid and/or liquid or
water-carried wastes coming from or by domestic, commercial or manufacturing
users of the system and discharging into a sanitary sewer.



(1978 Code, § 35-47; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-48.  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED.



   The use of and the requirement to connect to the city public sewers
shall be in accordance with §§ 8-58 through 8-60 of the City Code. No
person, as owner, occupant or tenant of any lot, parcel of land or building
thereon within the city shall discharge any sanitary sewage, industrial waste
and/or other objectionable or deleterious matter into any stream,
watercourse, lake or pond within, leading to or bordering upon the city. Such
sewage or waste shall be discharged into the public sewers having connection
to the sewage works of the City of Sterling Heights, unless such sanitary
sewage or other objectionable or deleterious matter is treated in a manner
approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works for the City
of Sterling Heights and the Health Department so as not to endanger public
health and as required by other governmental agencies and in a manner or
fashion not in conflict with or otherwise consistent with the rules and
regulations of the Detroit Water and Sewage Department and the City of
Detroit.



   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.



(1978 Code, § 35-48; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81) Penalty, see § 1-9



53-49.  PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL.



   The use of any private sewage works shall be governed by §§ 11-58
through 11-60 of the City Code.



(1978 Code, § 35-49; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-50.  BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.



   (A)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for
human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purpose situated within the
city and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now
located or may in the future be located a public sewer of the city is
required at his or her expense to install suitable facilities therein and to
connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this article within 90 days after official notice to
do so; provided that said public sewer passes, joins or abuts upon the
property and is within 200 feet of the building structure in which sanitary
sewage originates.



   (B)   All building sewers and private drains tributary to a city
public sewer and all sewer connections to city public sewers shall comply
with §§ 53-46 et. seq. of the City Code, which regulates industrial and
commercial waste discharge; the Council’s rules and regulations applying to
sewer permit work when the work is in a public right-of way and/or involves a
connection to a public sewer; and §§ 11-58 through 11-60 of the City Code.



   (C)   No person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the city.



      (1)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall
indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be
occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.



   (D)   A separate and independent building shall be provided for
every building as follows:



      (1)   Where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the
whole considered as one building sewer;



      (2)   Where there is more than one building located on a
single lot, a parcel of land or on a group of adjacent parcels used as a
single piece of property, provided that such lots or parcels are held in an
undivided ownership.



         In such case as the servicing of more than one building by
a single sewer, the several buildings so located may be served by one
connection with the main, provided the sewer is of sufficient size to meet
all requirements. Where two or more buildings are on one service and the
ownership is subsequently divided, individual service must then be installed.



         The granting of an exception to the above requirement may
be made by the City Council only upon such terms and conditions as may be
reasonable under the circumstances.



      (3)   Existing building sewers may be used in connection with
new buildings only when they are found upon examination and testing by the
city to meet all requirements of this article.



   (E)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: one for
single family residential service and one for service to commercial and
industrial establishments. In either case, the owner or his or her agent
shall make application to the city on a standardized form. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information for the proposed project.



   (F)   No permit shall be issued for connection to a city public
sewer until the proposed sewer work has been approved by all agencies
regulating sewer use and construction within the city and a construction
permit, if required, has been issued by the Michigan Department of Natural
Resources.



   (G)   All city public sewers and all private sewers constructed in
public rights-of-way in the city shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the city’s engineering department design standards which
shall be in compliance with the Detroit City Code, §§ 56-6-1 et seq. and
this section.



   (H)   New sewer connections will be granted contingent upon the
available capacity in the downstream sewers, lift stations and sewage
treatment plant, including BOD and suspended solid capacity.



   (I)   In any case where the Department of Public Works has, upon
investigation, made a determination of the fact that sewage or industrial
waste inimical to public health and welfare or constituting a public nuisance
is being discharged into any stream, watercourse, lake or pond within,
leading to or bordering upon the city, the Department of Public Works shall
notify the appropriate regulatory agency to take the necessary action to
abate and discontinue said discharge of sewage and industrial waste. The cost
of any remedial action to abate or discontinue said discharge of sewage or
industrial waste shall be the responsibility of and borne by the owner of the
property from which said discharge emanates.



   (J)   A person having any building sewer or private drain from his
or her premises that is connected with any city or private sewer shall pay
all expenses necessary for maintenance for keeping such city or private sewer
in repair.



(1978 Code, § 35-50; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-51.  RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLYING TO SEWER PERMIT WORK.



   The city shall have the authority to establish rules and regulations
applying to sewer permit work and design, detailing and construction
standards for sanitary sewers.



(1978 Code, § 35-51; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-52.  USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS.



   (A)   Unless authorized by the City Manager, or his or her designee,
as hereafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be discharged
any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any
sanitary sewer. The City Manager shall have the authority to permit the
installation of monitoring wells and the discharge of treated ground water
into the city sanitary sewer system in accordance with an agreement executed
by the party discharging the treated ground water and the city, which shall
be in a form satisfactory to the city.  Permit and inspection  fees  for
the installation of monitoring wells and discharge of treated ground water
into the sanitary sewer system and inspection of such equipment and
operations shall be established by the annual appropriations ordinance.



   (B)   Storm water and all other unpolluted waters shall be
discharged to sewers specifically designated as storm sewers or to a natural
outlet approved by the appropriate state agency. Industrial cooling water and
unpolluted processed water may be discharged to a storm sewer upon approval
by the City of Sterling Heights. The discharge of such waters to a natural
outlet must be approved by the appropriate state agency. With the exception
of such storm, industrial cooling and unpolluted waters, no liquid,
semi-liquid or solid waste or material may be spilled, dumped or discarded
into the storm sewer system unless in association with a National Pollution
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit or fire fighting activities
undertaken by the city.



   (C)   No person shall remove or cause to be removed any grate, cover
or barricade from a manhole, catch basin or sewer inlet over which it is
placed or in any way, directly or indirectly, injure any city public sewer or
any part thereof.



   (D)   No person shall make or construct any sink, drain or sewer
leading into any city public sewer without providing a sufficient strainer at
the head of it.



   (E)   No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any city
public sewer or in any private sewer connecting therewith any improperly
shredded garbage, glass, metal, earthenware, stone, sand, gravel, cinders,
cement, concrete, lime or lime waste, rags, lint, dust, grass, hay, straw,
manure, offal, grease, feathers, sticks or bits of wood, gasoline, oil or
oily waste, tar, acids, chemicals, offensive or harmful gaseous waste or
gases, either free or in solution, nor shall any waste or materials or
combinations thereof be deposited that are liable to cause injury to or
stoppage of or unreasonably offensive odors in such sewers.



   (F)   No person shall deposit or allow to be deposited any refuse,
dripping or nauseous liquid or other substance from any distributing pipe or
gas conductor into any sewer, receiving basin, gutter or other place within
the city or force or discharge into any public or private sewer or drain any
steam, vapor or gas.



   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided as
required by §§ 11-58 through 11-60 of the City Code for the proper handling
of liquid wastes containing grease, flammable wastes and sand and other
harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the city and shall be located as to be readily
and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.



      All restaurants and vehicle service garages shall be required to
install grease and oil interceptors. Grease and oil interceptors shall be
constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
watertight and equipped with easily removable covers which when bolted in
place shall be gastight and watertight. Where installed, all grease, oil and
sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in
continuously efficient operation at all times.



   (H)   Unless authorized by the City Manager, or his or her designee,
as hereafter provided, no surface, roof or ground water from any source shall
be allowed to enter the sanitary sewer system of the city. The City Manager
shall have the authority to permit the installation of monitoring wells and
the discharge of treated ground water into the city sanitary sewer system in
accordance with an agreement executed by the party discharging the treated
ground water and the city, which shall be in a form satisfactory to the
city.  Permit and inspection  fees resolution for the installation of
monitoring wells and discharge of treated ground water into the sanitary
sewer system and inspection of such equipment and operations shall be
established by the annual appropriations ordinance.



   (I)   The prohibition of surface, roof or groundwater from entering
the sanitary sewer system may be modified to provide for temporary connection
of an open basement during construction of a building for a time period not
to exceed 90 days. The connection shall be made through a strainer system
which shall be in accordance with standard plans adopted by the city. The
temporary connection shall be removed when backfilling of the basement and
initial roofing is completed.



   (J)   Footing drain tile from buildings existing and connected to a
sanitary sewer system prior to February 20, 1968 shall not be required to
disconnect from the sanitary sewer system.



   (K)   In each basement constructed upon properties located in all
sections of the city, after the effective date of this amendment, no fewer
than two floor drains shall be provided and installed in compliance with the
Plumbing Code adopted by the city.



   (L)   Whenever a new building with footing drains is constructed or
a sump pump in an existing building is installed on property where a storm
sewer or storm drain is available within the abutting street right-of-way or
a public easement, a connection shall be made in accordance with a standard
plan adopted by the city to provide for the discharge of the groundwater and
stormwater collected within the footing drains directly into the storm sewer
or storm drain.



   (M)   Where existing developed properties discharge groundwater and
storm drainage from footing drains and/or basement floor drains directly onto
lawn surfaces and where these waters are transmitted onto public
rights-of-way or easements thereby creating nuisance conditions, such as
sidewalk and street icing or perpetual surface wetting conditions, and where
a storm sewer or storm drain is available or where a storm sewer is extended
for the purpose of connection, then such properties shall cause such
discharge to be connected into the storm sewer or storm drain in accordance
with a standard plan adopted by the city. The connection shall be
accomplished within 90 days after receipt of proper notice.



   (N)   Sump pumps, for which permits are to be obtained, shall be
required to be installed in all new buildings constructed after the effective
date of this article having basement or footing drains. The sump pump shall
be installed in accordance with an approved plan for installation as
developed by the Building Department.



   (O)   A standard fee to cover inspection costs and/or treatment
costs shall be charged; said fees to be established by the annual
appropriations ordinance.



   (P)   The final building grade shall be established and maintained
at an elevation that will provide a minimum 5% slope away from the building
or house for a minimum distance of ten feet and the balance of the building
or house site shall be graded to provide positive surface drainage from that
point to the street, ditch or other drainage course.



   (Q)   Where local setback, side yard or rear yard requirements would
result in the building being located less than ten feet from the property
line, then the surface of the ground shall slope away from the building or
house wall at a uniform minimum slope of five-eighths inch per foot in a
manner approved by the Building Official for the city.



   (R)   All new buildings or houses constructed after the effective
date of this section having footing drains shall be required to provide
eavestroughs, gutters and down spouts. Roof waters from the building or house
shall not discharge into any flower or shrub bed adjacent to the building
wall, but shall be piped five feet away from the foundation walls or
discharged on splashblocks extending a minimum of five feet from the building
or house foundation wall.



      (1)   Where local setback, side yard or rear yard requirements
would result in the building or house being located less than five feet from
the property line, then the downspouts shall be discharged in a manner
approved by the Building Official for the city.



      (2)   Downspout piping shall be permanently affixed to the
building wall and shall be discharged onto a five foot splashblock or other
similar method approved by the Building Official for the city.



      (3)   No approval shall be given by the Building Official
unless the method being used shall provide a positive slope away from the
building foundation wall.



(1978 Code, § 35-52; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 230-A, §§ 1, 2,
1-16-90; Ord. No. 286-A, §§ 2, 3, 10-1-91; Ord. No. 64-C & 266-B, § 2,
6-1-93; Ord. No. 230-B, § 1, 11-3-99; Ord. No. 388, § 32 - 34, 1-3-07)



53-53.  MAINTENANCE OF BUILDING SEWER.



   The owner shall be responsible for the internal maintenance of the
building sewer between the building and the municipal sewer. The owner shall
also be responsible for all external repairs to the building sewer where
excavation is required to the building sewer between the building and the
curb or pavement edge and for the repair of the remainder of the building
sewer to the municipal sewer where failure is attributable to the owner’s
negligence, abuse or misuse. If any excavation is necessary in the public
right-of-way, permission must be obtained from the public authority having
jurisdiction.



(1978 Code, § 35-53; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



Cross reference:



   Excavations, see §§ 17-1-17-19



53-54.  NOTICE TO REPAIR.



   (A)   In all cases where private drains or private sewers or
building drains or building sewers shall be obstructed or injured or shall
cause obstruction or injury to any public sewer so as to produce in the
opinion of the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works a nuisance;
or in the event the repairs are necessitated to any private drains or private
sewers or building drains or building sewers or any city public sewer due to
any of the causes outlined in § 52-52 or for any other causes whatsoever,
such as the collapse of any private drains or private sewers or building
drains or building sewers because of age, deterioration, improper maintenance
or construction, it shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Public Works
to give notice to owners or parties in interest and any occupant of suitable
age and discretion of the properties connected with and serviced by such
drains and sewers to repair the same except where emergency conditions
require immediate remedial action. If such drains and sewers are not
forthwith repaired, the city may cause the necessary repairs to be made. The
city shall make the repairs to the city public sewers and to the public
property damaged incidentally thereto. The city shall be reimbursed for such
repairs in the manner provided. Such expenses incurred for repairs shall be
charged to the owners or parties in interest of the properties connected with
and serviced by such drains and sewers in a ratable proportion and, if not
paid, the same shall be assessed against the premises connected with such
drains and sewers as a special assessment and levied and collected in the
same manner provided for in the Charter of the city in the case of special
assessments.



   (B)   During the construction of buildings, the building sewer
permit applicants shall be held responsible and shall take steps necessary to
prevent sand, mud and water from entering the sanitary sewer. If the public
sewer has to be cleaned due to sand and debris entering the sewer, it will be
cleaned and the cost of cleaning shall be prorated against all buildings and
properties involved.



(1978 Code, § 35-54; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81 )



Cross reference:



   Special assessments, see Ch. 47



53-55.  PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.



   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure or appurtenance or
equipment which is part of the city sewage works.



(1978 Code, § 35-55; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



Cross reference:



   Damage to public property, see § 35-20



53-56.  POWER AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.



   (A)   The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works and other
duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and
identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the
purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



   (B)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall be permitted to
enter upon all properties to inspect for the unauthorized discharge of
non-storm water to the city storm sewer system and to verify and report to
the designated authorities the occurrence of any spill or release of any
contaminate or commercial, construction, industrial or hazardous waste
material or pollutant into the storm sewer system.



(1978 Code, § 35-56; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 64-C § 286-8, §
3, 6-1-93)



53-57.  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this article
shall be served by the city with a written notice stating the nature of the
violation, providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory correction
thereof.



   (B)   Reserved.



   (C)   Any person violating any other provisions of this article
shall become liable to the city for any penalties, fines, expense, loss or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.



(1978 Code, § 35-57; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81; Ord. No. 328, § 7,
11-5-97)



ARTICLE IV.  SEWER SURCHARGES



53-58.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this portion of the chapter is to enable the City of
Sterling Heights to comply with the requirements of the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-500), as amended, State of Michigan
Act 245 of 1929, as amended and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permit No. MI 0022802, Federal District Court Consent Judgment CA No.
77-1100 of 1979, existing or future contracts between the Board of Water
Commissioners of the City of Detroit and local communities or other
governmental entities and the common law usage of the sewage system and,
further, to require users of the public waste water and sewage system to pay
a surcharge which reflects the commercial and industrial user’s equitable
share of the cost of waste water treatment in excess of the strength of
domestic sewage.



(1978 Code, § 35-58; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-59.  ADOPTION OF INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SURCHARGE.



   In order to protect public health and safety and because of the widely
varying quality characteristics of the sewage discharge by different users of
the public sewer and the publicly owned treatment works, sewage charges shall
be imposed which reflect the cost of treating sewage strength factors as well
as sewage volume. The sewage charges to commercial and industrial users shall
be in the form of a payment, called a surcharge, and will reflect
industry’s equitable costs of waste water treatment in excess of the
strength of domestic sewage. The said charges shall be based on a volume rate
and surcharge based on volume of discharge and the strength of BOD, suspended
solids and phosphorus or other pollutants present in the waste water.



(1978 Code, § 35-59; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-60.  ADOPTION OF SCHEDULE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE POLLUTANT STRENGTH
SURCHARGES AND NONRESIDENTIAL WASTE FLOW SURCHARGES.



   The schedule of industrial waste pollutant strength surcharges,
promulgated by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, is adopted and made
effective for the users of the waste water and sewage system of the City of
Sterling Heights. The schedule of nonindustrial waste water flow surcharges,
promulgated by the Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, is adopted and made
effective for the users of the waste water and sewage system of the City of
Sterling Heights.



(1978 Code, § 35-60; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-61.  COMPUTATION OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE POLLUTANT STRENGTH SURCHARGES.



   The industrial waste pollutant strength surcharge shall be computed in
accordance with the following formula:



   (SC  =  0.0624 V (a (BOD - 250) + b (TSS - 300) + c (P-12))



   Where:



   SC      =   Pollutant strength surcharge fee in dollars for
the billing period.



   V      =   Volume of waste discharged in the billing period in
Mcf (1,000 cubic feet).



   BOD      =   Five day biochemical oxygen demand of the waste
expressed in milligrams per liter (ppm)



   TSS      =   Total suspended solids in the waste expressed in
milligrams per liter (ppm).



   P      =   Phosphorus in the waste expressed in milligrams per
liter (ppm).



   a,b,c      =   Surcharge rates, $/pound for treating BOD, TSS
and P, respectively, promulgated by Detroit Water and Sewerage Department.



   0.0624      =   Factor which converts Mcf to MM pounds.



   For purposes of surcharge computation, the values of pollutant
strengths shall not be less than the allowable values. The allowable values
are:



   BOD:      300 ppm



   TSS:      250 ppm



   P:      12 ppm



   The total sewage charge for a particular industry would be the sum of
the base flow charge and the surcharge would be calculated from the following
formula:



   UC       =     V(R)+SC+NRSC.



   UC      =   Total sewage charge for the billing period in
dollars.



   V      =   Volume of waste discharge.



   R      =   Basic flow sewage rate as set forth in the Code of
Ordinances of the City of Sterling Heights.



   SC      =   Surcharge in dollars as computed above.



   NRSC      =   Nonresidential surcharge



(1978 Code, § 35-61; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



ARTICLE V.  SEWER SERVICE CHARGE; METERS



53-62.  DECLARATION OF PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this portion of the chapter is to provide for the
regulation of sewer service charges and to govern the installation of sewage
meters where permitted under the terms of this chapter.



(1978 Code, § 35-62; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-63.  DETERMINATION OF SEWAGE SERVICE RATES.



   The rates for sewage services furnished by the City of Sterling Heights
shall be levied upon each lot or parcel of land, building or premises having
any connection with the City of Sterling Heights sewage system on the basis
of the quantity of water used thereon or therein as the same is measured by
the City of Sterling Heights water meter there in use. The rates shall be
collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for the payment
of water bills; provided that the City of Sterling Heights, acting by and
through City Council, shall be empowered to make such adjustments for sewage
charges as may be equitable.



(1978 Code, § 35-63; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-64.  BILLING FOR CUSTOMERS WITH ALTERNATIVE SOURCE OF WATER SUPPLY.



   Charges against property served and/or users, including manufacturing
and industrial plants, obtaining all or part of their water supply from
sources other than the City of Sterling Heights water system, shall be
determined by gauging, metering or any other equitable method of measuring,
in a manner approved by the city, acting by and through its City Council, the
actual sewage entering the sewage system and the corresponding water use.
Meters or other means for gauging or metering as above provided shall be
installed by the property served where applicable and/or the user of the
sewer system, as required by and under the supervision of the Superintendent
of Public Works for the City of Sterling Heights, as a condition of the use
of the sewage system.



   The rate to such users shall be established in accordance with the City
Charter of the City of Sterling Heights, Code of Ordinances of the City of
Sterling Heights and state law.



   Bills to said users shall be rendered periodically, as set forth in
Chapter 53, Article II of the City Code. All bills shall be due and payable
and penalties for nonpayment assessed as set forth in said provision of the
City Code.



(1978 Code, § 35-64; Ord. No. 230, § 1, 6-22-81)



53-65.  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   Unless authorized by the City Manager or his or her designee, no
person, entity or operator who is or may be required by federal law to obtain
an individual NPDES permit shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the
storm sewer system any non-storm water without such a permit. No individual
or entity shall be permitted to discharge, release, spill or discard any
contaminate, pollutant, hazardous substance, commercial, construction or
industrial or other waste into the storm sewer system of the city. The City
Manager or his or her designee is authorized to make available, at the city
offices, copies of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
requirements. All operators of a storm water discharge associated with
industrial activities are charged with notice of such federal regulations.



(Ord. No. 64-C & 286-B, § 4, 6-1-93)



53-66-53-74.  RESERVED.



ARTICLE VI.  WASTEWATER POLLUTION CONTROL



53-75.  PURPOSE.



   (A)   The purpose of this article is the protection of the
environment and of public health and safety by abating and preventing
pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of
wastes admitted or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment
system under the jurisdiction of the City of Sterling Heights and to enable
the City of Sterling Heights as control authority to comply with all
applicable state and federal laws required by the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act, being 33 USC 1251 et seq., and the General Pretreatment
Regulations, being 40 CFR 403.



   (B)   The objectives of this article are:



      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge or will pose a hazard to the health or welfare of the people
or of employees of the community or the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department;



      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW
which will pass inadequately treated through the system and into the
receiving waters, the atmosphere or the environment or will otherwise be
incompatible with the system;



      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle or reclaim
wastewater or sludge from the system in an economical and advantageous
manner; and



      (4)   To provide for the recovery of costs from the users of
the Detroit POTW sufficient to administer regulatory activities and meet the
costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the system.



   (C)   This article provides for the regulation of contributors to
the Detroit POTW through the issuance of wastewater discharge permits to
certain users and the enforcement of general requirements for all users,
authorizes monitoring and enforcement and authorizes fees and penalties.



(1978 Code, § 35-75; Ord. No. 284, § 1, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-76.  AUTHORITY.



   By virtue of the obligations and authority placed upon the community
and the City of Detroit by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, (being 33 USC 1251 et seq.); the
Constitution of the State of Michigan; Public Act 245 of 1929, as amended;
(being M.C.L. §§ 323.1 et seq; M.S.A. §§ 3.521 et seq.) the Charter of
the City of Sterling Heights; the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit for the City of Detroit (POTW); the consent judgment in
U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit, et al., Federal District Court for the Eastern
District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100, as amended; the Urban Cooperation Act
of 1967, as amended; Public Act 35 of 1951, as amended; and existing or
future contracts between the Board of Water Commissioners and the community,
suburban communities, other governmental or private entities; or by virtue of
common law usage of the system, this article shall apply to every user
contributing, or causing to be contributed, or discharging pollutants or
wastewater into the wastewater collection and treatment system of the City of
Detroit POTW.



(1978 Code, § 35-76; Ord. No. 284, § 2, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-77.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1251 et seq.



   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER. Responsible corporate
officer, where the industrial user submitting the reports required by this
article is a corporation, who is either (a) the President, Vice-President,
Secretary or Treasurer of a corporation in charge of a principal business
function or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making
functions for the corporation; or (b) the Manager of one or more
manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250
persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 in
second-quarter 1980 dollars, when authority to execute documents has been
assigned or delegated to said manager in accordance with corporate
procedures; or (c) a general partner or proprietor where the industrial user
submitting the reports required by this article is a partnership or sole
proprietorship respectively. (See § 53-79(N))



   AVAILABLE CYANIDE.  The quantity of cyanide that consists of cyanide
ion (CÑ); hydrogen cyanide in water (HCNaq); and the cyano-complexes of
zinc, copper, cadmium, mercury, and silver, determined by EPA method
OIA-1677, or other method designated as a Standard Method or approved under
40 CFR Part 136.



   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP).  Programs, practices, procedures, or
other directed efforts, initiated and implemented by a user, which can or do
lead to the reduction, conservation, or minimization of pollutants being
introduced into the ecosystem, including but not limited to the Detroit sewer
system. BMPs include, but are not limited to, equipment or technology
modifications, process or procedure modifications, reformulation or redesign
of products, substitution of raw material, and improvements in housekeeping,
maintenance, training, or inventory control, and may include technical and
economic considerations.



   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of dissolved oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedure five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of mass and
concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)) as measured by Standard Methods.



   BOARD. The Board of Water Commissioners of the City of Detroit.



   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of a wastestreams from any portion of
an industrial user’s treatment facility. (See 40 CFR 403.17)



   CENTRALIZED WASTE TREATMENT (CWT) FACILITY. A user which provides waste
treatment and disposal services to other industrial and commercial users by
collecting, receiving and transporting wastewater for proper storage,
treatment and disposal that is generated by a facility other than the
facility from which the wastewater will be discharged and is designed to
handle specific waste from industries with similar wastestreams.



   CITY.  The City of Sterling Heights or the City Council of the City of
Sterling Heights or their authorized representatives or employees, unless
otherwise specified.



   COMMUNITY. The City of Sterling Heights or the City Council of the City
of Sterling Heights or their authorized representatives or employees, unless
otherwise specified.



   COMPATIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. Wastewater that is produced by an
industrial user which has a pollutant strength or characteristics similar to
those found in domestic wastewater and which can be efficiently and
effectively transported and treated with domestic wastewater.



   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Pollutants which can be effectively removed by
the POTW treatment system to within acceptable levels for the POTW residuals
and the receiving stream.



   COMPOSITE SAMPLE. A collection of individual samples which are obtained
at regular intervals and collected on a time-proportional or
flow-proportional basis over a specified period and which provides a
representative sample of the average stream during the sampling period. A
minimum of four aliquot per 24 hours shall be used where the sample is
manually collected. (See 40 CFR 403, Appendix E)



   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information which would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the industrial user. (See § 53-84)



   CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department (DWSD) or
authorized representatives or employees of the DWSD, which has been
officially designated as such by the State of Michigan under the provisions
of 40 CFR 403.12.



   COOLING WATER. The noncontact water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration and whose only function is the
exchange of heat.



   DAYS. Consecutive calendar days for the purpose of computing a period
of time prescribed or allowed by this article.



   DEPARTMENT.  The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and its
authorized employees.



   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly into the waters of the State of Michigan.



   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Detroit Department of Water and Sewerage
or the Director’s designee.



   DISCHARGER. A person who, directly or indirectly, contributes, causes
or permits wastewater to be discharged into the POTW.



   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Waste and wastewater from humans or household
operations which is discharged to or otherwise enters a treatment works.



   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or ADMINISTRATOR or EPA ADMINISTRATOR.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the
authorized representatives or employees of the EPA.



   FACILITY. A location which contributes, causes or permits wastewater to
be discharged into the POTW, including but not limited to a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable.



   FATS, OIL OR GREASE (FOG). Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats,
waxes, oils and any other nonvolatile material or animal, vegetable or
mineral origin that is extractable by solvent in accordance with Standard
Methods.



   FLOW PROPORTIONAL SAMPLE. A composite sample taken with regard to the
flow rate of the wastestream.



   GRAB SAMPLE. An individual sample collected over a period of time not
exceeding 15 minutes, which reasonably reflects the characteristics of the
stream at the time of sampling.



   INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source, regulated under 33 USC
1317 (b), (c) or (d).



   INDUSTRIAL USER. A person who contributes, causes or permits wastewater
to be discharged into the POTW, including but not limited to a place of
business, endeavor, arts, trade or commerce, whether public or private,
commercial or charitable, but excludes single-family and multi-family
residential dwellings with discharges consistent with domestic waste
characteristics.



   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Any liquid, solid or gaseous waste or form of energy,
or combination thereof, resulting from any processes of industry,
manufacturing, business, trade or research, including the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources.



   INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both (i) inhibits or disrupts the
POTW or its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use
or disposal, and (ii) therefore causes a violation of any requirement of the
POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits
issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations):



   Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, as amended, being 33 USC 1345, the
Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), as amended, (including the Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); and state regulations contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D or the SWDA),
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection
Research and Sanctuaries Act.



   MAY. Permissive.



   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with 33 USC
1317 (b) and (c) which applies to a specific class or category of industrial
users.



   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) PERMIT. A
permit issued pursuant to 33 USC 1342.



   NEW SOURCE. This term shall mean:



      (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
is commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under
33 USC 1317(c) which will be applicable to such source if such standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided, that: (1)
the building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site
where no other source is located; or (2) the building, structure, facility or
installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes
the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or (3) the production of
wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or
installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same
site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors
such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing
plant and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general
type of activity as the existing source should be considered.



      (b)   Construction on a site where an existing source is
located resulting in a modification rather than a new source if the
construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or
installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (a) (2) or (a) (3) of this
subsection but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or
production equipment.



      (c)   Construction of a new source has commenced where the
owner or operator has: (1) begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous
on site construction program; (i) any placement, assembly or installation of
facilities or equipment; or (ii) significant site preparation work, including
clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or
facilities that are necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of
new source facilities or equipment; or (2) entered into a binding contractual
obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to
be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or
contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss and
contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this section.



   PASS-THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction
with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation
of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation.



   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, unit of
government, school district or any other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assigns.



   pH. The intensity of the acid or base condition of a solution
calculated by taking the negative base-ten logarithm of the hydrogen ION
activity. Activity is deemed to be equal to concentration in moles per liter.



   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt or industrial, municipal and agricultural waste which is
discharged into the water.



   POLLUTION. The introduction of any pollutant that, alone or in
combination with any other substance, can or does result in the degradation
or impairment of the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity
of water.



   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants or the
alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less
harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing
such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction, removal or alteration may be
attained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by
other means, except as prohibited by federal, state or local law, rules and
regulations.



   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirements
related to pretreatment other than a national pretreatment standard imposed
on an industrial user. (See 40 CFR 403.3 (r).)



   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. All National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, the general prohibitions specified in 40 CFR 403.5 (a), the
specific prohibitions delineated in 40 CFR 403.5 (b) and the local or
specific limits developed pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5 (c), including the
discharge prohibitions specified in § 53-79 of this code.



   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer of any type controlled by a governmental entity.



   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by
33 USC 1292 (2)(A), which is owned by a state or municipality, as defined in
33 USC 1362, including (a) any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling or reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature, (b) sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they
convey wastewater POTW treatment plant, or (c) the municipality, as defined
in 33 USC 1362, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and
the discharges from such a treatment works. (POTW) TREATMENT PLANT shall mean
that portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to wastewater,
including recycling and reclamation of wastewater.



   QUANTIFICATION LEVEL.  The measurement of the concentration of a
contaminant obtained by using a specified laboratory procedure calculated at
a specified concentration above the detection level.  It is considered the
lowest concentration at which a particular contaminant can be quantitatively
measured using a specified laboratory procedure for monitoring of the
contaminant.



   REPRESENTATIVE SAMPLE. Any sample of wastewater which accurately and
precisely represents the actual quality, character and condition of one or
more pollutants in the wastestream being sampled. Representative samples
shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR 136.



   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The portion of wastewater that is not attributable
to industrial activities and is similar to discharges from domestic sources,
including but not limited to discharges from sanitary facilities and
discharges incident to the preparation of food for on-site noncommercial
consumption.



   SHALL. Mandatory.



   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE. Any violation which meets one or more of the
following criteria:



      (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined as those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken during
a six month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum limit or the
average limit for the same parameter;



      (b)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined as
those in which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the
daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC
(TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease and 1.2 for all other
pollutants except pH);



      (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit
(daily maximum or longer term average) that the control authority determines
has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or
pass-through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the
general public;



      (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health or welfare or to the environment or has resulted
in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority;



      (e)   Failure to meet compliance schedule milestone contained
in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction or attaining final compliance within 90 days after
the scheduled date;



      (f)   Failure to provide required reports such as baseline
monitoring reports, 90 day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring
reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules within 30 days
after the due date;



      (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or



      (h)   Any other violation or group of violations which the
control authority determines will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.



   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USERS. Any user of the POTW who (A) has an
average discharge flow of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater excluding sanitary, boiler blowdown and noncontact cooling water;
or (B) has discharges subject to the National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards; or (C) requires pretreatment to comply with the specific pollutant
limitations of this article; or (D) has, in its discharge, toxic pollutants
as defined pursuant to 33 USC 1317 or other applicable federal and state laws
or regulations that are in concentrations and volumes that are subject to
regulation under this article as determined by the control authority; or (E)
is required to obtain a permit for the treatment, storage or disposal of
hazardous waste pursuant to regulations adopted by this state or adopted
under the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, by the Federal
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, as amended, and may or does
contribute or allow waste or wastewater into the POTW, including but not
limited to leachate or runoff; or (F) is found by the City of Detroit or
community to have a reasonable potential for adverse effect, either singly or
in combination with other contributing industries, on the POTW operation, the
quality of sludge, the POTW’s effluent quality or air emissions generated
by the POTW.



   SLUG. Any discharge of a nonroutine episodic nature, including but not
limited to an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge.



   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as amended.



   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the latest
edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, the American Water Works Association and the Water
Pollution Control federation or methods set forth in 40 CFR 136, "Guidelines
for Establishing Test Procedures for Analysis of Pollutants." Where these two
references are in disagreement on procedures for the analysis of a specific
pollutant, the methods given in 40 CFR 136 shall be followed.



   STATE. The State of Michigan.



   STORMWATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.



   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TOTAL). The total suspended matter which floats on
the surface of or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids and
which is removable by laboratory filtration or as measured by Standard
Methods.



   TOTAL PCB.  The sum of the individual analytical results for each of
the PCB aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254, and 1260 during any
single sampling event with any aroclor result less than the quantification
level being treated as zero.



   TOTAL PHENOLIC COMPOUNDS.  The sum of the individual analytical
results for each of the phenolic compounds of 2-chlorophenol, 4-chlorophenol,
4-chloro-3-methylphenol, 2,4-dichlorophenol, 2,4-dinitrophenol,
4-methylphenol, 4-nitrophenol, and phenol during any single sampling event
expressed in mg/l.



   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants designated
as toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency under the provisions of the Clean Water Act
being (33 USC 1317) or included in the Critical Materials Register
promulgated by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources or by other
federal or state laws, rules or regulations.



   TRADE SECRET. The whole, or any portion or phase, of any proprietary
manufacturing process or method, not patented, which is secret, is useful in
compounding an article of trade having a commercial value and whose secrecy
the owner has taken reasonable measures to prevent from becoming available to
persons other than those selected by the owner to have access for limited
purposes but excludes any information regarding the quantum or character of
waste products or their constituents discharged or sought to be discharged
into the Detroit wastewater treatment plant or into the wastewater system
tributary thereto.



   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards due to
factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user, but excludes
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative
maintenance or careless or improper operation.



   USER. Any person who, who directly or indirectly, contributes, causes
or permits the discharge of wastewater into the POTW as defined herein.



   WASTEWATER or WASTESTREAM. The liquid and water-carried industrial or
domestic wastes of dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to or
permitted to enter the POTW, including infiltration and inflow waters, storm
water and cooling water.



   WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS. Permits issued by the control authority
as set forth in accordance with § 53-81 of this article.



   WATERS OF THE STATE. Groundwater, lakes, rivers, streams, all other
watercourses and waters within the confines of this state as well as
bordering this state in the form of the Great Lakes.



   The following acronyms shall have the designated meanings:



   BMR   -   Baseline Monitoring Report



   BOD   -   Biochemical Oxygen Demand



   CFR   -   Code of Federal Regulations



   EPA   -   Environmental Protection Agency



   FOG   -   Fats, Oil or Grease



   l      Liter



   mg      Milligrams



   mg/l    -   Milligrams per Liter



   NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System



   POTW   -   Publicly Owned Treatment Works



   RCRA   -   Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, being 42 USC
6901 et seq.



   SIC    -   Standard Industrial Classification



   SWDA   -   Solid Waste Disposal Act, being 42 USC 6901 et seq.



   TSS    -   Total Suspended Solids



   USC    -   United States Code



(1978 Code, § 35-77; Ord. No. 284, § 3, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99; Ord. No. 402, § 1,  4-21-09)



53-78.  DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.



   The City of Detroit Water and Sewerage Department, as the
state-approved control authority, is authorized to administer and enforce the
provisions of this article on behalf of the city. The city has previously
entered into a contract with the City of Detroit Water and Sewerage
Department which sets forth the terms and conditions of such delegated
authority that is consistent with this article that allows the City of
Detroit Water and Sewerage Department to perform the specific
responsibilities as control authority, pursuant to state and federal law.



(1978 Code, § 35-78; Ord. No. 284, § 4, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99; Ord. No. 402, § 3,  4-21-09)



53-79.  DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   General pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge or
cause to be discharged into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant
or wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through. These general
discharge prohibitions apply to all such users of the POTW whether or not the
user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or any other
federal, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements. In addition,
it shall be unlawful for a user to discharge into the POTW:



      (1)   Any liquid, solid or gas which, by reason of its nature
or quantity, is sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to create a fire or explosion hazard or to be injurious in any
other way to persons, to the POTW, or to the operation of the POTW.
Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in a POTW, include but are
not limited to wastestreams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140°F
(60°C), using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21;



      (2)   Any solid or viscous substance, in concentrations or
quantities which are sufficient to cause obstruction to the flow in a sewer
or other encumbrance to the operation of the POTW, including but not limited
to: grease, animal guts or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings,
entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime,
stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags,
strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar,
asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating
oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes or tumbling and deburing
stones;



      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or greater than
10.5;



      (4)   Any wastewater containing petroleum oil,
nonbiodegradable cutting oil, products of mineral oil origin or toxic
pollutants in sufficient concentration or quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference or pass-through or
constitute a hazard to humans or animals;



      (5)   Any liquid, gas or solid or form of energy which either
singly or by interaction with other waste is sufficient to create toxic gas,
vapor or fume within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems or may cause a public nuisance or hazard to life
or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair;



      (6)   Any substance which is sufficient to cause the POTW’s
effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge or scum,
to be unsuitable for reclamation processing where the POTW is pursuing a
reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged to the
POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal
criteria guidelines or regulations developed under 33 USC 1345 with any
criteria, guidelines or developed and promulgated regulations affecting
sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Federal Clean Air Act, the Federal Toxic Substances Control Act or with
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;



      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate
either the consent judgment in U.S. EPA v. City of Detroit, et al., Federal
District Court for the Eastern District of Michigan Case No. 77-1100 or the
City of Detroit’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit;



      (8)   Any discharge having a color uncharacteristic of the
wastewater being discharged;



      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit
biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference but
in no case wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into a public
sewer which exceeds 150°F (66°C) or which will cause the influent at the
wastewater treatment plant to rise above 140°F (40°C);



      (10)   Any pollutant discharge which constitutes a slug;



      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or
isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established
in compliance with applicable federal or state regulations;



      (12)   Any floating fats, oil or grease which are sufficient
to cause interference with or pass through the POTW; or



      (13)   Any solid materials having a specific gravity greater
than 1.2 or a cross-section dimension of one-half inch or greater which are
sufficient to cause interference with the POTW.



   (B)   Specific pollutant prohibitions. No user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations:



      (1)   Compatible pollutants. See Appendix C.



      (2)   Noncompatible pollutants. No user shall discharge
wastewater containing in excess of:



         Total arsenic (As):  1.0 mg/l



         Total cadmium (Cd):  See Appendix C



         Total chromium (Cr):  25.0 mg/l



         Total copper (Cu):  2.5 mg/l



         Total cyanide (CN) [available]:  1.0 mg/l



         Total iron (FE):  1000.0 mg/l



         Total lead (Pb):  1.0 mg/l



         Total nickel (Ni):  5.0 mg/l



         Total silver (Ag):  1.0 mg/l



         Total zinc (Zn):  7.3 mg/l



         Total Phenolic compounds :  1.0 mg/l or see Appendix B



         All limitations are based on samples collected over an
operating period representative of an industrial user’s discharge and in
accordance with 40 CFR 136.



         a.   The limitations for Total PCB is Non-detect - Total
PCB shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S., EPA Method
608, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2  gm/l, unless a
higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix
interference.  Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of Total
PCB, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance.  For purposes of
this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data shown that
the Total PCB concentration is below the detection level, or submission of a
BMP in accordance with Section 53-86 (D).



         b.   The limitation for Mercury (Hg) is Non-detect,
Mercury (Hg) shall not be discharged at detectable levels, based upon U.S.
EPA Method 245.1, and the quantification level shall not exceed 0.2  gm/l,
unless a higher level is appropriate because of demonstrated sample matrix
interference.  Where one or more samples indicate detectable levels of
Mercury, the user shall be required to demonstrate compliance.  For purposes
of this section, this demonstration may be made using analytical data showing
that the mercury concentration is below the detection level, or submission of
a BMP in accordance with Section 53-86 (D).



   All limitations are based on samples collected over an operating period
representative of an industrial user's discharge, and in accordance with 40
CFR Part 136.



      (3)   Compliance Period.  Within 30 days of the effective
date of this section, the Department shall notify all existing industrial
users operating under an effective wastewater discharge permit of the
requirement to submit a compliance report within 180 days after the effective
date of this section.  The compliance report shall demonstrate the user's
compliance or non-compliance with these limitations, and in the event of
non-compliance, include the submission of a plan and schedule for achieving
compliance with the stated limitation. In no event shall a compliance
schedule exceed 18 months from the effective date of this section.



   An Industrial User who does not demonstrate compliance may petition the
Department for a second extension as part of an Administrative Consent
Order.  The Department shall include appropriate monitoring, reporting, and
penalties into an Administrative Consent Order that relates to a second
extension, and shall enter into such an agreement only upon a good-faith
showing by the Industrial User of the actions taken to achieve compliance
with this provision.



   (C)   National categorical pretreatment standards. All users shall
comply with the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements promulgated pursuant to the act as set forth in 40 CFR
Subchapter N, Effluent Guidelines and Standards, which are incorporated by
reference and with all other applicable standards and requirements, provided,
however, where a more stringent standard or requirement is applicable
pursuant to state law, or regulation or to this article, then the more
stringent standard or requirement shall be controlling. Affected dischargers
shall comply with the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403 and
as established by the control authority. The national categorical
pretreatment standards which have been promulgated as of the effective date
of this section are delineated in Appendix A.



      (1)   Intake water adjustment. Industrial users seeking
adjustment of national categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the
presence of pollutants in their intake water must comply with the
requirements of 40 CFR 403.15. Upon notification of approval by the control
authority, the adjustment shall be applied by modifying the permit
accordingly. Intake water adjustments are not effective until incorporated
into an industrial users permit.



      (2)   Modification of national categorical pretreatment
standards. When and if removal credit authority is reinstated, the control
authority may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or to the
Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, whichever is appropriate, for
authorization to grant removal credit in accordance with the requirements and
procedures of 40 CFR 403.7. Such authorization may be granted only when the
POTW treatment plant can achieve consistent removal for each pollutant for
which a removal credit is being sought, provided that any limitation on such
pollutant(s) in the NPDES permit neither are being exceeded nor pose the
prospect of being exceeded as a result of the removal credit’s being
granted. Where such authorization is given to the control authority, any
industrial user desiring to obtain such credit shall make an application to
the control authority, consistent with the provisions of 40 CFR 403.7 and of
this article. Any credits which may be granted under this section may be
subject to modification or revocation as specified in 40 CFR 403.7 or as
determined by the control authority. A requisite to the granting of any
removal credit may be that the industrial user pay a surcharge based upon the
amounts of such pollutants removed by the POTW, such surcharge being based
upon fees or rates which the board may establish and, when appropriate,
revise from time to time. Permits shall reflect or be modified to reflect any
credit granted pursuant to this section.



      (3)   New sources. Industrial users who meet the new sources
criteria shall install, maintain in operating condition and “start-up”
all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment
standards before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time
and not to exceed 90 days, new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment
standards.



      (4)   Concentration and mass limits. When limits in a
categorical pretreatment standard are expressed only in terms of mass of
pollutants per unit of production, the control authority may convert the
limits to equivalent limitations expressed either as mass of pollutant
discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of calculating
effluent limitations applicable to individual industrial users. Equivalent
limitations shall be calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6 (c) (3)
and/or 40 CFR 403.6 (c) (4) and shall be deemed pretreatment standards for
the purposes of 33 USC 1317 (d) and of this article. Industrial users will be
required to comply with the equivalent limitations in lieu of the promulgated
categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations were derived.



      (5)   Reporting requirements for industrial users upon
effective date of categorical pretreatment standards-baseline report. Within
180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard or
180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category
determination submission under 40 CFR 403.6 (a) (4), whichever is later,
existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards
and currently discharging into or scheduled to discharge into the Detroit
POTW shall submit to the control authority a report containing the
information listed in 40 CFR 403.12 (b) (1-7). Where reports containing this
information have already been submitted to the Director of Regional
Administrator in compliance with the requirement of 40 CFR 128.140 (b), the
industrial user will not be required to resubmit this information. At least
90 days before commencement of any discharge each new source and any existing
sources that become industrial users after the promulgation of an applicable
categorical pretreatment standard shall submit to the control authority a
report which contains the information listed in 40 CFR 403.12 (b) (1-5). In
such report, new sources shall include information concerning the method of
pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment
standards. New sources shall provide estimates of the information requested
in 40 CFR 403.12 (b) (4) and (5).



   (D)   Dilution prohibited. Except where expressly authorized to do
so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no user shall
increase the use of process water or, in any way, dilute or attempt to dilute
a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national categorical
pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation or
requirement imposed by the Community, the City of Detroit or by the State of
Michigan.



   (E)   Hauled-in wastewater. Any waste material or wastewater which
is hauled into or within the service region for discharge to the POTW is
subject to the requirements of this article, including but not limited to
permits, inspection, monitoring and enforcement. Unloading liquid or solid
waste from hauling vehicles, directly or indirectly, into the POTW, with or
without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless the person
proposing to unload such waste has applied for and received a permit from the
control authority for unloading such waste in accordance with the Board’s
rules pertaining thereto. The discharger shall be subject to applicable terms
and conditions, surcharges, fees or rates as established by the Board. Hauled
in wastewater shall only be discharged at points designated by the POTW after
authorization or approval issued pursuant to the general permit requirements
specified in § 53-81 of this article. The control authority may establish
specific limitations for sludge from municipally owned or operated POTW
treatment plants which are different than the specific limitations in this
article.



   (F)   Centralized waste treatment. It is unlawful for a user to
discharge into the POTW any wastewater generated by, collected at or received
and transported from a facility other than the facility where it will be
discharged without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department unless expressly directed by the control authority. An
industrial user who has submitted an application to the control authority and
received approval to transport, treat and discharge wastewater from a
designated facility is not required to get further authorization from the
control authority before discharging such wastewater. An industrial user
filing an application for the treatment and disposal of such wastewater,
which was received by and transported to a designated facility for treatment
and discharge shall provide the following minimum information:



      (1)   The general nature, source and process(es) generating
the wastewater. Wastewater generated from those processes, which are subject
to national categorical pretreatment standards as delineated in Appendix A,
or requirements, shall be so designated;



      (2)   The identity of the toxic pollutants known or suspected
to be present in the wastewater;



      (3)   At least one sample report showing the results of an
analysis for the EPA priority pollutants for each wastestream or category of
wastestream for which application is made in subsection (F)(1);



      (4)   A statement addressing the treatability and
compatibility of the wastewater received or collected by the facility’s
treatment processes which shall be certified by a professional engineer;



      (5)   The identity of the materials and/or pollutants whose
transport or treatment are regulated by the EPA, by the state or by some
other agency in Michigan. Upon request, a copy of any permits shall be
provided; and



      (6)   Other information requested by the control authority,
including but not limited to that enumerated in § 53-81 of this article or
the rules adopted by the Board.



      A discharge will be deemed approved upon issuance of a permit in
accordance with the procedures in § 53-81 of this article, and the
centralized waste treater shall comply with all provisions applicable to
permits in § 53-81 of this article. In furtherance of its obligations as
control authority, the control authority may include in the permit a
requirement to report the information mandated in paragraphs (1) through (6)
of this subsection (F) at selected intervals.



      All users granted a permit under this section shall maintain
records which, at a minimum, identify the source, volume, character and
constituents of the material. These records may be reviewed by the control
authority at any time.



   (G)   Groundwater discharge. The discharge of any groundwater into
the POTW, with or without the benefit of pretreatment, is prohibited unless
the person proposing to discharge such waste has applied for and received a
permit from the control authority authorizing discharge of the groundwater.
Permits shall be issued in accordance with the procedures in § 53-81 of this
code or with the rules of the Board.



   (H)   Right of revision. The City of Detroit and the community
reserves the right to establish rules or regulations adopted by the Board,
additional or more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the
POTW. These rules and regulations shall be adopted in accordance with the
rule-making procedures in § 2-111 of the 1974 Detroit City Charter. Ninety
days after adoption by the Board, industrial users shall comply with such
rules and regulations.



   (I)   Accidental discharges.



      (1)   Each industrial user which does not currently have an
approved spill prevention plan or slug control plan shall provide protection
from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances
regulated by this article, and all significant industrial users shall submit
to the control authority detailed plans which show facilities and operating
procedures to be implemented to provide protection against such accidental
discharges. Facilities and measures to prevent and abate accidental
discharges shall be implemented, provided and maintained at the owner’s or
industrial user’s cost or expense. Unless the significant industrial user
has an approved spill prevention or slug control plan, all existing
significant industrial users shall complete and submit such a plan within 60
days of the effective date of this article (July 19, 1990). New significant
industrial users shall submit such a plan prior to the time they commence
discharging.



      For purposes of this section, the information provided shall
include the approximate average and maximum, quantities of such prohibited
materials or substances kept on the premises in the form of raw materials,
chemicals and/or wastes therefrom and the containment capacity for each. Only
substances that are in a form which could readily be carried into the POTW
and constitute a concentration of 5% or greater in the raw material chemical
solution or waste material are required to be reported. Volumes of less than
55 gallons, or the equivalent thereof, need not be reported unless lesser
quantities could cause pass-through or cause interference with the POTW.



      The industrial user shall promptly notify the control authority
of any significant changes or modifications to the plan, including but not
limited to a change in the contact person or substance inventory.



      (2)   At least once every two years, the control authority
shall evaluate whether a significant industrial user needs a plan to control
slug discharges, as defined by 40 CFR 403.8 (F)(2)(v). Unless otherwise
provided, all significant users shall complete, implement and submit such a
plan within 30 days of notification by the control authority.



   (J)   Notification requirements. Unless a different notice is
provided by this article or applicable law, within one hour of becoming aware
of a discharge into the POTW which exceeds or does not conform with federal,
state, control authority or community laws, rules, regulations or permit
requirements, which could cause problems to the POTW or which has the
potential to cause the industrial user to implement its plan prepared in
accordance with subsection (I) of this section, the industrial user shall
telephone the control authority at its control center and notify the control
authority of the discharge. The notification shall include the name of the
caller, location and time of discharge, the type of wastewater, the estimated
concentration of excessive or prohibited pollutants and estimated volume and
the measures taken or being taken to abate the discharge into the POTW.
Within five calendar days after the discharge, the industrial user shall
submit a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and
the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences,
and when required by the control authority, the industrial user’s
wastewater discharge permit may be modified to include additional measures to
prevent such future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the
industrial user of any expense, cost of treatment, loss, damages or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills
or any other environmental impairment or any other damage to person or
property.



   (K)   Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on
the industrial user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to contact in the control authority in the event of an actual
or excessive or prohibited discharge.



   (L)   Recovery of costs. Any user discharging in violation of any of
the provisions of this article which produces a deposit or obstruction,
causes damage to or impairs the POTW or causes the City of Detroit to violate
its NPDES permit shall be liable to the control authority for any expense,
loss, damage, penalty or fine incurred by the control authority because of
said violation or discharge. Prior to assessing such costs, the control
authority shall notify the user of its determination that the user’s
discharge was the proximate cause of such damage, obstruction, impairment or
violation of the City of Detroit’s NPDES permit and the intent to assess
such costs to the user. Any such notice shall include written documentation
which substantiates the determination of proximate cause and a breakdown of
cost estimates. Failure to pay the assessed costs shall constitute a
violation of this article. Such charge shall be in addition to, and not in
lieu of, any penalties or remedies provided under this article or this code
or other statutes and regulations or at law or in equity.



   (M)   Hazardous waste notification. All industrial users who
discharge into the Detroit collection system shall notify the control
authority in writing of any discharge of a substance which, if otherwise
disposed of, would be a hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261. Such
notification must comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(P).



   (N)   Authorized representative. The authorized representative, as
defined in § 53-77 of this code, may designate a duly authorized
representative of the individual designated in § 53-77 where:



      (1)   The authorization is made in writing by the individual
defined in § 53-77;



      (2)   The authorization specifies either an individual or a
position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility
where the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant
manager, operator of a well or well field superintendent or a position of
equivalent responsibility or having general responsibility for environmental
matters for the company; and



      (3)   The written authorization is submitted to the control
authority.



   (O)   Pollution prevention. The control authority shall encourage
and support industrial users to develop and implement pollution prevention
programs designed to eliminate or reduce pollutant contributions beyond the
levels required by this article.



   The control authority may require an industrial user to implement
pollution prevention initiatives as part of an enforcement response or a
necessary to comply with its NPDES permit.



(1978 Code, § 35-79; Ord. No. 284, § 5, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99; Ord. No. 402, § 2, 4, 4-21-09)



53-80.  FEES.



   (A)   The purpose of this section is to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the POTW. The applicable charges or fees shall be
sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or
replacement of the system or as provided by law, contractual agreement or
board action.



   (B)   Charges and fees shall include but not be limited to:



      (1)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of establishing,
operating, maintaining or improving the control authority’s industrial
waste control and pretreatment programs;



      (2)   User fees based upon volume of waste and concentration
or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge and treatment costs,
including sludge handling and disposal;



      (3)   Reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs for hearings,
including but not limited to expenses regarding hearing officers, court
reporters and transcriptions; and



      (4)   Other fees deemed necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein or as may be required by law.



(1978 Code, § 35-80; Ord. No. 284, § 6, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-81.  WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMITS.



   (A)   Required. It shall be unlawful for users to discharge into the
POTW any wastewater which will cause interference or pass-through or
otherwise not comply with the discharge prohibitions of § 53-79 of this
article. It shall be unlawful for a significant industrial user to discharge
into the POTW without a wastewater discharge permit from the Detroit Water
and Sewer Department. Unless otherwise expressly authorized by the control
authority through permit, order, rule or regulation, any discharge must be in
accordance with the provisions of this article.



      (1)   All significant industrial users which are in existence
on the effective date of this article shall apply for a wastewater discharge
permit within 30 days of the effective date of this article. Significant
industrial users who are currently operating with a valid wastewater
discharge permit are not subject to this provision. These applications are to
include all information specified in § 53-81 of this code and, where
applicable, any additional information which may be needed to satisfy the
federal baseline monitoring report requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 (b).



      (2)   All new significant users shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit at least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge. The
application must include all information specified in § 53-81 of this code
and, where applicable, any additional information that may be needed to
satisfy the federal BMR requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 (b). Until a permit is
issued and finalized by the control authority, no discharge shall be made
into the POTW.



      (3)   Any user who proposes to discharge any wastewater other
than sanitary or noncontact cooling water into the POTW shall request
approval from the control authority for the discharge(s) at least 30 days
prior to the commencement of the discharge.



   (B)   Permit application or reapplication. The control authority may
require any user to complete a questionnaire and/or a permit application and
to submit the same to the control authority for determining whether the
industrial user is a significant user or to determine changes in the
wastewater discharges from a user’s facility. Within 30 days of being so
notified, a user shall comply with the control authority’s request in the
manner and form prescribed by the control authority. Failure of the control
authority to so notify a user shall not relieve the user of the duty to
obtain a permit as required by this article.



      (1)   A user which becomes subject to a new or revised
national categorical pretreatment standard shall apply for a wastewater
discharge permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable
national categorical pretreatment standard, unless an earlier date is
specified or required by 40 CFR 403.12 (b). The existing user shall provide a
permit application which includes all the information specified in §
53-81(C) of this code.



      (2)   A separate permit application shall be required for each
separate facility.



      (3)   Existing permittees shall apply for permit reissuance a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of existing permits on a form
prescribed by the control authority.



   (C)   Application or reapplication information. In support of an
application or reapplication for a wastewater discharge permit, the
industrial user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation,
the following information:



      (1)   Corporate or individual name, any assumed name(s),
federal employer identification number, address and location of the
discharging facility;



      (2)   Name and title of the authorized representative of the
industrial user who shall have the authority to bind the industrial user
financially and legally;



      (3)   All SIC numbers of all processes at this location
according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987, as
amended;



      (4)   Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and
characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application form.
Such parameters shall include those applicable pollutants having numeric
limitations as enumerated in § 53-79(a) and (b) of this article, those
pollutants limited by national categorical pretreatment standards or
regulations for applicable industries and any toxic pollutants known or
suspected to be present in the discharge regulated in the previous permit or
specifically requested by the Detroit Water and Sewage Department. For each
parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations
during a one year period shall be provided. For industries subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements, the data
requested herein shall be separately shown for each categorical process
wastestream. Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined
wastewater formula shall also be identified. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to 33
USC 1314 (g) and contained in 40 CFR 136, as amended. Where 40 CFR 136 does
not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question,
sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated analytical methods
approved by the Administrator;



      (5)   A listing and description of activities, facilities and
plant processes on the premises. Those processes which are subject to
national categorical pretreatment standards or requirements shall be so
designated. As pertains to subsection (C)(4), identify which pollutants are
associated with each process;



      (6)   Restricted to only those pollutants referred to in
subsection (C)(4), a listing of raw materials and chemicals that are either
used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to
in subsection (C)(4). Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such
information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof
of such immunity;



      (7)   A description of typical daily and weekly operating
cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the
seven days of the week;



      (8)   Denote: (i) the average and maximum 24 hour wastewater
flow rates, including, if any, daily, monthly and seasonal variations, (ii)
each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling
water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each
connection to the POTW; and (iii) each combined wastestream;



      (9)   A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling
manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges
into the POTW; also a flow schematic showing which connections receive each
national categorical process wastestream and which connections receive
stormwater, sanitary water or cooling water; also show which lines handle
each combined wastestream. This schematic shall be cross-referenced to the
information furnished in subsection (C)(8);



      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or
processes and rate of production as pertains to processes subject to
production-based limits under the national categorical pretreatment standards
or requirements only;



      (11)   A statement regarding whether or not the requirements
of this article and the national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional
operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for
the industrial user to meet the applicable standards and requirements. This
statement shall be reviewed and signed by the authorized representative and
as appropriate certified by a qualified professional;



      (12)   Basic information on the program for the prevention of
accidental discharges in accordance with the requirements of § 53-79 of this
code;



      (13)   Proposed or actual hours of operation of each
pretreatment system for each production process;



      (14)   A schematic and description of each pretreatment
facility which identifies whether each pretreatment facility is of the batch
type or continuous process type;



      (15)   If other than Detroit Water and Sewerage Department
potable water, the industrial user’s source of intake water, together with
the types of usage and disposal method of each water source and the estimated
wastewater volumes from each source;



      (16)   If additional construction and/or operation and
maintenance procedures will be required to meet the requirements of this
article and the national categorical pretreatment standards the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional construction and/or
implement the required operation and maintenance procedures;



      (17)   Identify whether the user has conducted a waste
minimization assessment or audit of its operations in order to identify all
feasible source reduction and recycling practices that may be employed to
reduce or eliminate the generation of pollutants and other wastes at the
facility;



      (18)   Any other information as may reasonably be required to
prepare and process a wastewater discharge permit.



   (D)   Permit issuance. Upon receipt of an application, the control
authority shall review the application, determine and so notify the
industrial user of any of the following:



      (1)   The industrial user does not meet the definition of a
significant industrial user and is not required to have a wastewater
discharge permit;



      (2)   The industrial user does meet the definition of a
significant industrial user but is found by the control authority to have no
reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for
violating any pretreatment standard or requirement and is not required to
have a wastewater discharge permit. The control authority shall make such
determination in accordance with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (6);



      (3)   The application is incomplete or the information only
partially satisfies the information and data required by 40 CFR 403.12 or by
the control authority and that additional information and data are required
which shall be promptly furnished. Where appropriate, the industrial user is
notified regarding specific information that is missing or that the
application is unacceptable;



      (4)   The industrial user is required to have a wastewater
discharge permit. The control authority shall notify the industrial user of
its determination and the basis of the determination;



   The control authority may withhold issuance of a permit to a
significant user which has not submitted an adequate or timely report or
permit application to the control authority in accordance with the reporting
requirements of 40 CFR 403.12 or whose discharge is in violation of this
article. If the control authority determines that an industrial user is
required to have a wastewater discharge permit and has evaluated and accepted
the data furnished, the industrial user will be notified accordingly by
certified mail. The notification shall contain a copy of the draft permit, so
marked, for the industrial user’s review. In accordance with the procedures
of § 53-87 of this code, an industrial user has 30 days to file a response
to the draft permit and 20 days to file an appeal of a final permit from the
date of mailing. A permit shall be issued as final upon disposition by the
control authority of any contested terms or conditions. Only one facility
location shall be included in each permit.



   (E)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain
all requirements of 40 CFR 403.8 (f) (1) (iii) and shall be deemed to
incorporate all provisions of this article, other applicable laws, rules,
regulations and user charges and fees established without repetition therein.



      (1)   In addition, permits may also contain the following:



         a.   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents or characteristics which are equivalent, more restrictive than
or supplemental to the numeric limits enumerated in § 53-79 of this article
or the applicable national categorical pretreatment standards;



         b.   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of
discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;



         c.   Requirements for installation, operation and
maintenance of discharge sampling manholes and monitoring facilities by the
industrial user;



         d.   Restrictions on which of the user’s discharge
waste streams are to be allowed to be discharged at each point of connection
to the POTW;



         e.   Specifications for industrial user monitoring
programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and type of
sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule;



         f.   Requirements for the prevention of accidental
discharges and the containment of spills or slug discharges;



         g.   Restrictions based on the information furnished in
the application;



         h.   Additional reporting requirements:



            (i)   All permittees shall submit a report to the
control authority on the prescribed form or on an alternative approved form
approved by the control authority indicating the status of compliance with
all conditions numerated or referred to in the wastewater discharge permit or
made applicable to the permit by this article. Unless required more
frequently, the reports shall be submitted at six month intervals on a
schedule to be established by the control authority. Analytical data
generated by the control authority may not be submitted in lieu of the
facility’s own monitoring data as required by the wastewater discharge
permit. Permittees not subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
or requirements shall submit a report in accordance with the requirements of
subsections (iii) and (iv) of this subsection (E). The report shall show the
concentration of each substance for which there is a specific limitation in
the permit or which may be identified by the control authority in accordance
with § 53-81(E)(1)(i) and (k) of this code.



            (ii)   Permittees subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements shall submit compliance reports at the
times and intervals specified by the federal regulations and by the control
authority. A compliance report shall be submitted to the control authority no
later than 90 days following the final compliance date for a standard or in
the case of a new source no later than 90 days, following commencement of the
introduction of wastewater into the POTW and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12
(d). A report on continued compliance shall be submitted at six month
intervals thereafter on the schedule established by the control authority and
incorporated into the industrial users discharge permit and in accordance
with subsections (iii) and (iv) below. The reports shall be either on a form
prescribed by the control authority or on an alternative form approved by the
control authority and shall indicate the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process which are limited by
national categorical pretreatment standards, which there is a specific
limitation in the permit or which may be identified by the control authority
in accordance with § 53-81 (E)(1)(i) and (k) of this code. The report shall
include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for
the reporting period for the discharges regulated by the permit. The combined
wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial
information has been furnished to the control authority, provided there have
been no changes to the elements composing the combined wastestream.



            (iii)   Reports shall contain the results of
representative sampling performed during the period covered by the report and
of the discharge and analysis of pollutants contained therein and for
significant industrial users subject to production based standards shall be
cross-referenced to the related flow or production and mass as required to
determine compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards. The
frequency of monitoring shall be as prescribed in the applicable general
pretreatment regulations, being 40 CFR 403, or by the control authority, but
no less than is necessary to assess and assure compliance by the industrial
user with the most stringent applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements. All sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
applicable regulations contained in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Where
40 CFR 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutants in questions, sampling and analysis shall be performed using
validated analytical methods approved by the Administrator.



            If an industrial user monitors any pollutant more
frequently than required by the control authority using the procedures of
this section as prescribed above, the results of this monitoring shall be
included in such report.



            The report shall state whether the applicable
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance practices and/or pretreatment system
improvements or changes are necessary to bring the industrial user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards.



            (iv)   This report, and those required under §§
53-79(C)(5) and 53-81(E)(1)h(i) and 53-81(E)(1)h(ii) of this code, shall
include the following certification statement "I certify under penalty of law
that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or
supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my
inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons
directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am
aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information,
including the possibility of a fine and/or imprisonment for knowing
violations." Said certification shall be signed by the facility’s
authorized representative, as defined in § 53-77 of this code. If an
authorization is no longer accurate because a different individual or
position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility or
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new
authorization satisfying the requirements of the authorized representative
definition must be submitted to the control authority prior to or together
with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.



            (v)   If sampling performed by a permittee
indicated a violation, the user shall notify the control authority within 24
hours of the time the user becomes, or should have become, aware of the
violation. In addition the user shall repeat the sampling and analysis and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the control authority within 30
days after the user becomes, or should have become, aware of the violation.



         i.   In the event the Director determines that an
industrial user is discharging substances in quality, quantity or at
locations which may cause problems to the POTW, or the receiving stream, the
control authority has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits
applicable to the user. To the extent the control authority seeks to impose
restrictions in a permit which are more restrictive than established in this
article, the control authority shall provide written documentation to explain
the greater restriction for protection against pass-through, interference or
violation of the NPDES permit.



         j.   Requirement for pollution prevention initiatives.



         k.   Other requirements reasonably necessary to ensure
compliance with this article.



   (F)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period. Except as deemed necessary by the control authority, or as otherwise
provided for under this article, permits shall be issued for a specified
period or not more than five years nor less than one year. The existing
permit for significant industrial users who timely submit an application for
permit reissuance to the control authority shall be automatically extended
until a final permit is issued.



   (G)   Permit modification. The terms and conditions of the permit
may be subject to modification by the control authority during the term of
the permit as limitations or pretreatment standards and requirements as
identified in § 53-79 of this code are amended or other just cause exists.
Just cause for a permit modification includes, but shall not be limited to,
the following:



      (1)   Material or substantial changes to an industrial
user’s facility or operation or changes in the characteristics of the
industrial user’s effluent. It shall be the industrial user’s duty to
request an application form and apply for a modification of the permit within
30 calendar days of the change;



      (2)   Change(s) in the City of Detroit’s NPDES permit;



      (3)   Embodiment of the provisions of a legal settlement or of
a court order;



      (4)   Any changes necessary to allow the City of Detroit to
fulfill its role as control authority;



      (5)   An industrial user’s noncompliance with portions of an
existing permit;



      (6)   A change of conditions within the POTW;



      (7)   A finding of interference or pass-through attributable
to the industrial user;



      (8)   Amendments to or promulgation of national categorical
pretreatment standards or requirements, including 40 CFR 403 and those
delineated in Appendix A of this article. Permittees shall request an
application form and apply to the control authority for a modified permit
within 90 days after the promulgation of a new or revised national
categorical pretreatment standard to which the industrial user shall be
subject. Information submitted pursuant to this subsection shall be confined
to that information related to the newly promulgated or amended national
categorical pretreatment standards or requirement. However, information
previously submitted need not be duplicated insofar as the previously
submitted information continues to be current and applicable. In addition,
the control authority may initiate this action;



      (9)   Changes in the monitoring location; (See § 53-82 of
this code.)



      (10)   Typographical errors or omissions in permits;



      (11)   The control authority may modify the permit on its own
initiative based on its findings or reasonable belief of the above;



      (12)   The user may request a modification of the permit;



      When initiated by the control authority, the industrial user
shall be informed of any proposed change in its permit. The control authority
will issue a draft permit and an industrial user has 30 days to file a
response to the draft modified permit. Thereafter, the control authority will
issue a final permit and, unless appealed in accordance with the procedures
contained in § 53-87 of this code, the permit will become effective 20 days
after issuance.



   (H)   Permit custody and transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are
issued to a specific person as defined herein for a specific discharge. A
wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to
a different person, new owner, new industrial user, different premises or a
new or changed operation without notice to and the written approval of the
control authority and provision of a copy of the existing permit to the new
owner or operator. It shall be the permit holder’s duty to notify the
control authority of any such change at least 30 days before the date of the
change. Wastewater discharge permits which do not receive the written
approval of the control authority prior to the change shall be null and void
regardless of reassignment, transfer or sale. If it determines that an
unreported change has occurred, the control authority may revoke a permit. If
a change takes place, the control authority may require the application for a
new or modified permit. Any succeeding person shall comply with the terms and
conditions of any existing permit which the control authority allows to be
retained.



   (I)   Permit notification requirements. All industrial users shall
promptly notify the control authority in advance of any substantial change in
the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge, including the
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which initial notification
under 40 CFR 403.12(p) has been made, request a permit application form and
apply for a modification of the permit at least 30 calendar days prior to the
change. Failure of the industrial user to so apply shall be considered a
violation of this article.



(1978 Code, § 35-81; Ord. No. 284, § 7, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99) Penalty, see § 1-9



53-82.  MONITORING FACILITIES.



   (A)   Significant industrial users shall provide, operate and
maintain at their own expense a sampling manhole or special structure to
facilitate monitoring, inspection, sampling and flow measurement of their
discharge by the control authority and the industrial user and to enable the
control authority to conduct such other monitoring and sampling as required
for determining compliance with discharge requirements, limits and standards
as provided for in this article. In the event the control authority
determines that the monitoring facility identified in the permit application
is inadequate, a new monitoring facility must be identified or provided which
shall allow for collection of a representative sample of the wastewater
discharged from the facility. Unless otherwise determined at the discretion
of the control authority, the facility shall be provided within 90 days of
receipt of notification by the control authority. The industrial user shall
provide the control authority with 1) a drawing showing all sewer connections
and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places
of discharges into the POTW; 2) a flow schematic showing (i) which
connections receive each national categorical process wastestream, (ii) which
connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water, and (iii)
which lines handle each combines wastestream. This report shall be certified
by a professional engineer. If a significant industrial user fails to install
the monitoring facilities within the prescribed time limits, then the control
authority may install such structure or device and the significant user shall
reimburse the control authority for any costs incurred therein.



   (B)   The sampling manhole should be situated on the industrial
user’s premises in a location readily accessible to the control authority.
It shall be the responsibility of the industrial user to obtain any necessary
approvals from the community or other government entities which may be
required by the location and construction of monitoring facilities in the
public street or sidewalk area. Such construction shall only occur when
another location would be impractical or cause undue hardship upon the
industrial users. In no case shall the location be obstructed by landscaping
or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near such sampling or
monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility and any permanently installed sampling and
measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition at the expense of the industrial users. Whether
constructed upon public or private property, the sampling and monitoring
facilities shall be provided in accordance with the control authority’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. (See § 53-83).



(1978 Code, § 35-82; Ord. No. 284, § 8, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-83.  INSPECTION, SAMPLING AND RECORDKEEPING.



   (A)   For purposes of administering and enforcing this article, the
control authority may inspect the establishment, facility or other premises
of the industrial user. The control authority shall have access to the
industrial user’s premises for purposes of inspection, sampling, compliance
monitoring and/or metering activities.



   (B)   Each such inspection or sampling activity shall be commenced
and completed at reasonable times, within reasonable limits and in a
reasonable manner. Upon arrival at the industrial user’s premises, the
control authority shall inform the industrial user or the industrial user’s
employees that sampling and/or inspection is commencing and that the
facility’s authorized representative has the right to observe the
inspection and/or sampling. The control authority shall neither refrain from,
nor be prevented or delayed from, carrying-out its inspection or sampling
duties due to the unavailability of the authorized representative of the
facility to observe or participate in the inspection or sampling activity.



   (C)   While performing work on private property, employees or
authorized representatives of the control authority and the community shall
observe all reasonable safety, security and other reasonable rules applicable
to the premises as established by the industrial user. Duly authorized
employees of the control authority shall bear proper credentials and
identification and at the industrial user’s option may be accompanied by a
duly authorized representative of the industrial user. Duly authorized
representatives shall not be restricted from viewing any of the facility
site. Control authority employees or representatives may take photographs of
facilities subject to this article which shall be maintained by the control
authority as confidential in accordance with § 53-84 of this code.



   (D)   Where an industrial user has security measures in force, the
industrial user shall make prompt and necessary arrangements with the
security personnel so that upon presentation of appropriate credentials,
personnel from the control authority will be permitted to enter for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.



   (E)   Significant industrial users shall sample and analyze their
discharges in accordance with the provisions of their permits. The control
authority may require such samples to be split for the control authority’s
independent analysis.



   (F)   Industrial users shall maintain records of all information
from monitoring activities required by this article or by 40 CFR 403.12 (n).
Industrial users shall maintain the records for no less than three years.
This period of records retention shall be extended during the course of any
unresolved litigation regarding the discharge of pollutants by the industrial
user or the operation of the City of Detroit’s Industrial Waste Program or
when requested by the control authority, EPA or the state.



   (G)   Upon the request of the control authority, industrial users
shall furnish information and records relating to discharges into the POTW.
Industrial users shall make such records readily accessible to the control
authority at all reasonable times and allow the control authority to copy
such records.



   (H)   In the event the control authority obtains samples and
analyses are made of such samples, a copy of the results of such analysis
shall be promptly furnished to the owner, operator or agent in charge of the
premises upon written request by the industrial user’s authorized
representative. When requested by the industrial user, the control authority
employee or representative shall leave with the user, a portion of any sample
of the user’s discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the
premises for the user’s independent analysis. In cases of disputes arising
over shared samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the control authority
shall be controlling unless proven invalid.



   (I)   In addition to any other violation caused by the discharge
described herein, in the event a single grab sample of the industrial
user’s discharge is obtained by the control authority and then analyzed in
accordance with 40 CFR 136 and found to contain concentrations of pollutants
which are two or more times greater than the numeric limitations as listed in
§ 53-79 (B) of this article or as contained in the facility wastewater
discharge permit, the industrial user shall implement its slug control plan
and shall provide a written report to the control authority within 14 days,
which describes the cause of greater concentration and provides a description
of the means by which future discharge concentrations will be held to values
of less than two times the limitation in the future.



(1978 Code, § 35-83; Ord. No. 284, § 9, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-84.  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Information and data on an industrial user obtained from
written reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other
governmental agencies without restriction unless the industrial user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
control authority that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods or production entitled to protection as
trade secrets of the industrial user. When submitted to the control
authority, all information claimed to be confidential must be clearly marked
"Confidential." When requested by the person furnishing the report, the
portions of a report determined by the control authority to disclose trade
secrets or trade secret processes and which are clearly labeled as
confidential, shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but
shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for
uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit and to the state disposal system permit and/or the
pretreatment programs; provided, however that the information shall be
treated as confidential by the governmental agency, until such time as the
information has been determined to be non-confidential by the governmental
agency. Confidential information on industrial users, which the control
authority releases pursuant to request of another government agency, should
be handled by the other government agency pursuant to its own confidential
procedures. The control authority cannot control how another government
agency handles such confidential information and assumes no responsibility
for the disposition of the information released to the government agency. The
control authority will use sufficient care to inform the other agency of the
existence of the industrial user’s confidentiality claim. The control
authority shall determine whether the information requested to be treated as
confidential, in fact, satisfies the requirements of confidential information
as defined herein. The decision of the control authority shall be made in
writing.



      Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.



   (B)   Except as otherwise determined by the control authority or
provided for by applicable law, all information with respect to an industrial
user on file with the control authority shall be made available upon request
by such user or the user’s authorized representative during normal business
hours.



(1978 Code, § 35-84; Ord. No. 284, § 10, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-85.  STATUTES, LAWS AND REGULATIONS.



   The national categorical pretreatment standards defined in 40 CFR
Chapter I, subchapter n, Parts 405-471, shall be and are incorporated by
reference herein and made a part hereof. Unless otherwise provided, any
reference in this article to a code, standard, rule, regulation or law
enacted, adopted, established or promulgated by any private organization or
any element or organization of government other than the community shall be
construed to apply to such code, standard, rule, regulation or law in effect
or as amended or promulgated from the date of enactment of this article (May
15, 1990).



(1978 Code, § 35-85; Ord. No. 284, § 11, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



53-86.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Violations. It shall be a violation of this article for any
user to:



      (1)   Fail to completely and/or accurately report the
wastewater constituents and/or characteristic of the industrial user’s
discharge;



      (2)   Fail to report significant changes in the industrial
user’s operations or wastewater constituents and/or characteristics within
the time frames provided in § 53-81 of this article;



      (3)   Refuse reasonable access to the industrial user’s
premises, waste discharge or sample location for the purpose of inspection or
monitoring;



      (4)   Restrict, lockout or prevent, directly or indirectly,
access to any monitoring facilities constructed on public or private
property. The locking or securing of the monitoring facility shall constitute
a violation pursuant to this subsection, provided, that upon request
reasonable access to the facility is promptly provided to the control
authority;



      (5)   Restrict, interfere, tamper with or render inaccurate
any of the control authority’s monitoring devices, including but not
limited to samplers;



      (6)   Fail to comply with any condition or requirement of the
industrial user’s wastewater discharge permit;



      (7)   Fail to comply with any limitation, prohibition or
requirement of this article, including any rule, regulation or order issued
hereunder. Industrial users acting in full compliance with wastewater
discharge permits issued prior to the effective date of this article (July
19, 1990) shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of this
article and such permits shall remain in effect and be enforceable under this
article until a superseding permit is effective. Industrial users shall
comply with applicable national categorical pretreatment standards and
requirements on the date specified in the federal regulations, regardless of
compliance schedules.



   (B)   Upsets. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an
action brought for noncompliance with national categorical pretreatment
standards where the requirements of subsection (1) are met.



      (1)   An industrial user who wishes to establish the
affirmation defense shall demonstrate, through properly signed,
contemporaneous operating logs or other relevant evidence that:



         a.   An upset occurred and the industrial user can
identify the specific cause(s) of the upset;



         b.   At the time, the facility was being operated in a
prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures;



         c.   The industrial user has submitted the following
information to the department, orally or in writing, within 24 hours of
becoming aware of the upset (and where this information is provided orally, a
written submission must be provided within five days):



            (i)   A description of the discharge and cause of
noncompliance;



            (ii)   The period of noncompliance, including
exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the
noncompliance is expected to continue;



            (iii)   Steps being taken and/or planned to
reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.



      (2)   In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user
seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of
proof.



      (3)   The industrial user shall control production of all
discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with this article
upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility
is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This
requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary
source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.



   (C)   Bypass. Bypasses are prohibited unless the bypass does not
cause a violation of pretreatment standards or requirements but only if it is
for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment
system. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of subsections (1)
and (2) of this section.



      (1)   Notice of anticipated bypass. Industrial users
anticipating a bypass shall submit notice to the control authority at least
ten days in advance.



      (2)   Notice of unanticipated bypass. An industrial user shall
submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable
pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the industrial user
becomes or should have become aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
be provided within five days of the time the industrial user becomes or
should have become aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain
a description of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and if the
bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
recurrence of the bypass.



      (3)   Prohibition of bypass and enforcement. Bypass is
prohibited and the control authority may take enforcement action against a
user for a bypass, unless:



         a.   The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life,
personal injury or severe property damage;



         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass,
such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated
wastes or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This
condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been
installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a
bypass which occurred during normal period of equipment downtime or
preventative maintenance.



         c.   The industrial user properly notified the control
authority as described in subsection (C)(2).



      (4)   Bypass approval. Where it meets all conditions in
subsection (C)(3) of this section, the control authority may approve an
anticipated bypass.



   (D)   Pollution prevention initiatives. Where one or more of the
measurements taken for any pollutant defined in Section 53-79(B) of this code
during a six month period exceed by any magnitude the daily maximum
non-detect ordinance limit for the same parameter, the industrial user may
develop and implement pollution prevention initiatives, or a BMP as part of
its response.  The Department may, as part of an Administrative Order, also
require development of a BMP as part of an enforcement response.  Upon
approval of the Department, these pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP,
shall be made an enforceable part of the Wastewater Discharge Permit.



   The industrial user shall provide, at six month intervals, analytical
results and certifications in support of its implementation of approved
pollution prevention initiatives, or BMP.  Upon demonstration of compliance,
the industrial user may request to be relieved of this implementation
requirement.



   (E)   Emergency suspensions and orders. The control authority may
order suspension of the sewer or wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater discharge permit where, in the opinion of the control authority,
such suspension is necessary to stop any actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or significant hazard to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, interferes or may interfere with
the POTW or causes or may cause the City of Detroit to violate any condition
of its NPDES permit. Any person notified of a suspension of the sewer or
wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event the control
authority provides informal notification under this section, written
confirmation and an order shall be provided within 24 hours. In the event of
a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with any suspension or
revocation order, the control authority shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection or services
to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or danger to any individual
or the environment. In the event such steps are taken, the Director shall
notify the industrial user within 24 hours in writing of such action and
order and the specific recourse available. In any event, the control
authority shall provide the industrial user with an opportunity for a hearing
before the Director or his or her designated representative within ten days
of such action. The control authority shall notify the community of this
action within ten days of such action. The industrial user shall submit a
detailed written statement to the control authority within 15 days of the
occurrence describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures
taken to prevent any future occurrence. Upon proof of elimination of the
noncomplying discharge the control authority shall reinstate the wastewater
discharge permit and/or the sewer or wastewater treatment service.



   (F)   Notice of violation. Except in the case of an actual or
threatened discharge as specified in subparagraph (D) of this section,
whenever the control authority has reason to believe that any industrial user
has violated or is violating this article, the control authority shall serve
a written notice stating the nature of the violation upon such industrial
user. Where applicable, the control authority shall pursue appropriate
escalating enforcement action as defined within its approved enforcement
response plan. The failure of the control authority to issue a notice of
violation shall not preclude the control authority from escalating its
enforcement response.



   (G)   Notice of control authority action. The community or
designated department thereof shall be notified by the control authority of
any enforcement activity taken within its boundaries.



   (H)   Administrative actions. Whenever the control authority has
reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a
provision of its wastewater discharge permit or a pretreatment standard or
requirement of any prohibition of this article, the control authority, except
in the case of emergency or flagrant violation, may initiate appropriate
administrative enforcement action in order to compel the industrial user to
eliminate or to remedy such violation as soon as possible.



      (1)   a.   Conferences. The control authority may order any
person who violates this article to attend a conference wherein the control
authority may endeavor to cause the user to eliminate or remedy the violation
by establishing an enforceable compliance schedule. The notice of violation
shall be served at least ten days before the scheduled conference and shall
set forth the date, time and place thereof. The conference shall be conducted
by a representative of the control authority. The industrial user shall
present a plan and schedule for achieving compliance with this article.
Nothing contained herein shall require the control authority to accept or
agree to any proposed plan or schedule or prevent the control authority from
proceeding with a show-cause hearing as set forth in subsection (G)(2) of
this section. If the attendees agree upon a compliance schedule, the user and
the control authority’s duly authorized representative may enter, by
consent, into a compliance agreement or an administrative order setting forth
the terms of such agreement. An industrial user must exhibit good faith and
expeditious efforts to comply with this article and any procedures,
requirements and agreements hereunder.



         b.   Compliance schedules. The user and the control
authority may agree upon a schedule which sets forth the terms and conditions
and time periods or schedules for completion of actions to remedy or to
eliminate the causes of violation. These schedules may be developed as part
of a compliance agreement or an administrative consent order. Schedules
developed under this subsection shall adhere to the following conditions:



            (i)   The schedule shall contain increments of
progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major
events leading to the construction and operation of upgraded or additional
pretreatment facilities or to the implementation of additional operation and
maintenance procedures required for the industrial user to meet the
applicable pretreatment requirements and standards, including but not limited
to hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing construction and
completing construction.



            (ii)   No single increment referred to in
subsection (G)(1)b(i) shall exceed nine months.



            (iii)   Not later than 14 days following each date
in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall
submit a progress report to the control authority, including, at a minimum,
whether it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date
and, if not, the date which it expects to comply with this increment of
progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the industrial
user to return to the established schedule.



            (iv)   Any deviation from the compliance schedule
may result in the industrial user being found in violation of this section.



         c.   Administrative orders. The control authority may
order any industrial user who violates or continues to violate this article
or a duly issued permit to install and to properly operate devices, treatment
facilities or other related appurtenances. In addition, orders may contain
such other requirements as might reasonably be necessary and appropriate to
address the violations, including the installation of pretreatment
technology, additional self-monitoring and management practices,
implementation of a waste minimization assessment to identify and implement
feasible source reduction and recycling practices to reduce the generation or
release of pollutants at the facility. An order may be either an
administrative consent order which is the result of an agreement or a
unilateral administrative order.



      (2)   Show-cause hearing.



         a.   Authorized. The control authority may order any
industrial user who violates this article or allows such violation to occur
to show cause before the control authority why a proposed enforcement action
should not be taken. A notice shall be served upon the industrial user
specifying the time and place of a hearing before the control authority
regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken and the
proposed enforcement action and directing the industrial user to show cause
before the control authority why any proposed enforcement action should not
be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by
registered or certified mail with return receipt requested at least ten days
before the hearing. Service may be made upon any agent or officer of a
corporation or its authorized representative.



         b.   Hearing proceeding. The hearing shall be conducted
in accordance with the procedures adopted by the Board. A hearing officer
shall conduct the showcause hearing and take the evidence and may:



            (i)   In the name of the Board, issue notices of
hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of the witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;



            (ii)   Transmit a report of the evidence and
hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the Director for action thereon;



            (iii)   Transcript. At any showcause hearing held
pursuant to this article, testimony shall be recorded by a court reporter.



      (3)   Actions. After a show-cause hearing has been conducted,
the hearing officer shall issue an order to the industrial user by the
control authority directing any of the following actions:



         a.   Immediate compliance with the industrial user’s
wastewater discharge permit or with any applicable limitation, condition,
restriction or requirement of this article or applicable local, state or
federal law or regulation;



         b.   Pretreatment of waste by installation of adequate
treatment equipment or proper operation and maintenance of existing treatment
equipment be accomplished within a specified time period;



         c.   Submission of compliance reports on effluent
quality and quantity as determined by self-monitoring and analysis during a
specified time period;



         d.   Submission of periodic reports on effluent quality
and quantity determined by self-monitoring analysis throughout the final
period set by a compliance date;



         e.   Control of discharge quantities;



         f.   Payment of costs for reasonable and necessary
inspection, monitoring and administration of the industrial user’s
activities by the control authority during compliance efforts;



         g.   Any such other orders as are appropriate, including
but not limited to immediate termination of sewer or wastewater treatment
services or revocation of a wastewater discharge permit or orders directing
that following a specified time period, sewer or wastewater treatment service
will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or
operation and maintenance practices have been employed;



         h.   A finding that the user has demonstrated by clear
and convincing evidence that it did not violate this article or a duly issued
permit.



      (4)   Public notification of significant noncompliance. The
control authority shall publish in the largest daily newspaper published in
the City of Detroit a list of all industrial users which were in significant
noncompliance with applicable pretreatment requirements at any time during
the previous 12 months, All industrial users identified in a proposed
publication shall be provided with a copy of the proposed notice at least 30
days before publication and allowed an opportunity to comment as to its
accuracy.



   (I)   Legal actions.



      (1)   Criminal action. Any user who violates any provision of
this article, including the failure to pay any fees, fines, charges or
surcharges imposed or any condition or limitation of a permit issued pursuant
thereto or who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article or wastewater
discharge permit or who tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device required under this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 per day for
each violation or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both. The
control authority is authorized through its counsel to seek prosecution of
criminal charges against any person violating any provision of this article.



      (2)   Civil action. Whenever the control authority has
reasonable grounds to believe that a user is violating, or has violated, a
provision of its wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment standard or
requirement or any requirement of this article, the Director may commence a
civil action to compel compliance in a court of competent jurisdiction to
enjoin the user from discharging and/or to obtain appropriate relief to
remedy the violations. The control authority or the community may also seek
additional legal and/or equitable relief. The commencement of suit does not
constitute an exclusive election of remedies and does not prohibit the
control authority or the community from commencing action in federal court
for discharges believed to be in violation of this article, state and federal
requirements contained in the Clean Water Act, the City of Detroit’s NPDES
permit or other applicable laws or requirements. In addition, the control
authority may recover reasonable attorney fees, court costs, court
reporters’ fees and other unusual expenses related to enforcement
activities or litigation against the person found to have violated this
article or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder.



(1978 Code, § 35-86; Ord. No. 284, § 12, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99; Ord. No. 402, § 5, 4-21-09)



53-87.  RECONSIDERATION AND APPEAL.



   Reconsideration and appeal are the methods which a user may contest
decisions, actions or determinations by the control authority resulting from
the application and enforcement of this article. The following procedures
govern the reconsideration and appeal process before the control authority
with respect to construction, application and enforcement of this article.



   (A)   Selection of reconsideration or appeal process.



      (1)   Except for those actions, decisions or determinations
which are expressly identified as subject only to the appeal process,
reconsideration may be requested by any permit applicant, permittee,
authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharger who is
adversely affected by any decision, action or determination that is made by
or on behalf of the control authority by the Director or any authorized
representative and that interprets, implements or enforces the provisions of
this article.



      (2)   Appeal may be requested by any permit applicant,
permittee, authorized industrial wastewater discharger or other discharges,
who is adversely affected by a final permit issued by the control authority
or administrative order entered after a show cause order and hearing or after
a reconsideration hearing.



      (3)   Unless otherwise expressly provided for by this article,
request for reconsideration or appeal must be signed by an authorized
representative and received at the control authority’s general offices
within 20 days of the date of the occurrence of the action, decision or
determination in dispute. All requests shall contain the requester’s name,
address and a brief statement of the reasons and the factual basis underlying
the request. Requests shall be filed in triplicate by hand delivery or
certified mail to the general offices of the control authority. If a request
is not made within the time period provided in this section, the action,
determination or decision of the Director or the control authority’s
authorized representative is final and any rights to appeal or
reconsideration may be deemed waived.



   (B)   Reconsideration. Within 15 days of receipt of any request for
reconsideration, the control authority shall notify the applicant of the time
and place for hearing.



      (1)   An aggrieved party may request a hearing on
reconsideration. Reconsideration hearings shall be conducted by the Director,
or the Director’s designee who may be an employee of the control authority.
The decision of the hearing officer shall be in a form of a recommendation to
the Director and embodied in an administrative order. Except for an
administrative consent order that was negotiated and agreed to by both
parties, the administrative order is appealable under subsection (C) of this
section.



      (2)   If it is improperly or untimely submitted the control
authority may reject a request for reconsideration. The control authority
shall notify the requester in writing that the request has been rejected.



      (3)   Unless the date is mutually extended by both parties,
the hearing shall be conducted by the Director, or the control authority’s
authorized representative, neither less than ten days nor more than 30 days
after mailing of the notice. At the discretion of the hearing officer, the
hearing may be continued for a reasonable time for cause. The hearing shall
be an informal consultation and conference where the requester in person, or
by counsel, shall present their argument, evidence, data and proof in
connection with the issue being reconsidered. The parties shall not be bound
by the Michigan Rules of Evidence. The hearing shall be transcribed and, upon
request and payment for the cost of the transcript, a requestor shall be
provided a transcript of the hearing. A final decision shall be issued to the
requestor by certified mail within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing.



      (4)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or harm to the POTW, the public or the waters of this state, the
filing of request for reconsideration, which is consistent with this article,
shall stay the action that is the subject of the recommended hearing by the
control authority.



   (C)   Appeal. The control authority shall notify the applicant
within 30 days after receipt of any request for appeal of the time and place
for a hearing. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with procedures
set by the control authority. The following conditions shall apply:



      (1)   Any request for an appeal hearing must be made within 20
days of the decision, determination or action of the control authority on the
request for reconsideration or any permit issued pursuant to this article. If
a request is not made within 20 days, the action, determination or decision
of the control authority is final and any right of appeal may be deemed
waived.



      (2)   If it is improperly or untimely submitted, the control
authority may reject a request for appeal. The control authority shall notify
the requestor in writing that the appeal has been rejected.



      (3)   The control authority shall appoint a hearing officer,
who shall have training and experience appropriate to the subject hearing,
may be an employee of the control authority but is not an employee involved
in the determination, decision or action being challenged. Upon request of an
industrial user, an independent hearing officer may be used in the appeal
process. Where a request has been made to retain an independent hearing
officer, the control authority shall assess costs against the industrial user
for the services of an independent hearing officer. In the event that such a
request is made and accepted by the control authority, the requester shall be
liable for the costs of the hearing, including but not limited to a court
reporter and transcription costs.



      (4)   The hearing officer shall review the evidence and within
15 days after the close of the hearing issue a written recommendation to
either uphold, modify or reverse the action, determination or decision of the
control authority. The recommendation shall be submitted to the Board which
shall render a final decision within 30 days. The industrial user or the
control authority then has 30 days to appeal the Board’s decision to a
court of competent jurisdiction.



      (5)   Unless such action is necessary to prevent pass-through,
interference or other harm to the POTW, the public or waters of this state,
the filing of a request for appeal or appearance before the Board, consistent
with this article, shall stay the action by the control authority which is
the subject of the appeal.



(1978 Code, § 35-87; Ord. No. 284, § 13, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 284-A, § 1,
5-18-99)



APPENDIX A



ARTICLE VI.  WASTEWATER POLLUTION CONTROL



 



Aluminum forming
 
40 CFR 467


Asbestos manufacturing
 
40 CFR 427


Battery manufacturing
 
40 CFR 461


Builder’s paper and board mills
 
40 CFR 431


Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables
 
40 CFR 407


Canned and preserved seafood processing
 
40 CFR 408


Carbon black manufacturing
 
40 CFR 458


Cement manufacturing
 
40 CFR 411


Coal mining
 
40 CFR 434


Coil coating
 
40 CFR 465


Copper forming
 
40 CFR 468


Dairy products processing
 
40 CFR 405


Electrical and electronic components I & II
 
40 CFR 469


Electroplating
 
40 CFR 413


Explosives manufacturing
 
40 CFR 457


Feed lots
 
40 CFR 412


Ferroalloy manufacturing
 
40 CFR 424


Fertilizer manufacturing
 
40 CFR 418


Glass manufacturing
 
40 CFR 426


Grain mills
 
40 CFR 406


Gum and wood chemicals manufacturing
 
40 CFR 454


Hospital
 
40 CFR 460


Ink formulating
 
40 CFR 447


Inorganic chemicals manufacture (I & II)
 
40 CFR 415


Iron and steel
 
40 CFR 420


Leather tanning & finishing
 
40 CFR 425


Meat products
 
40 CFR 432


Metal finishing
 
40 CFR 433


Metal molding and casting
 
40 CFR 464


Mineral mining and processing
 
40 CFR 436


Nonferrous metals forming
 
40 CFR 471


Nonferrous metal manufacturing I
 
40 CFR 421


Nonferrous metals manufacturing II
 
40 CFR 421


Ore mining and dressing
 
40 CFR 440


Organic chemicals, plastics and synthetic fibers
 
40 CFR 414


Paint formulating
 
40 CFR 446


Paving and roofing materials
 
40 CFR 443


Pesticide chemicals
 
40 CFR 455


Petroleum refining
 
40 CFR 419


Pharmaceutical
 
40 CFR 439


Phosphate manufacturing
 
40 CFR 422


Photographic
 
40 CFR 459


Plastics molding and forming
 
40 CFR 463


Porcelain enameling
 
40 CFR 466


Pulp, paper and paperboard
 
40 CFR 430 and 431


Rubber manufacturing
 
40 CFR 428


Soap and detergent manufacturing
 
40 CFR 417


Steam electric
 
40 CFR 423


Sugar processing
 
40 CFR 409


Textile mills
 
40 CFR 410


Timber products
 
40 CFR 429




 



APPENDIX B



   An industrial user may elect, in lieu of the Total Phenols Limitation
specified in Section 53-79(B)(2), to substitute specific limitations for each
of the eight individual phenolic compounds identified under the Total Phenols
Limitation.  The following specific limitations, expressed in mg/l, shall be
applied in lieu of the Total Phenols limitation, upon election;



 



 
 
mg/l


2-Chlorophenol
 
2.0


4-Chlorophenol
 
2.0


4-Chloro-3-Methylphenol
 
1.0


2,4-Dichlorophenol
 
5.5


2,4-Dinitrophenol
 
2.0


4-Methylphenol
 
5.0


4-Nitrophenol
 
15.0


Phenol
 
14.0




 



   Following election, the Wastewater Discharge Permit shall be modified
to incorporate these substituted parameters and an Industrial User shall be
responsible for monitoring and reporting compliance with these parameters.



(Ord. No. 402 § 6(part), 4-21-09)



APPENDIX C
INTERIM DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS



   a.   Any Fats, Oil or Grease (FOG) in concentrations greater than
1,500 mg/l based on the average of all samples collected within a 24 hour
period;



   b.   Any Total Suspended Solids (TSS) in concentrations greater than
7,500 mg/l;



   c.   Any Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in concentrations greater
than 7,500 mg/l;



   d.   Any Phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250 mg/l.



   Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples
collected over an operating period representative of a user's discharge and
in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136.



   No user shall discharge wastewater containing any of the following
pollutants in excess of the following interim pollutant discharge limitations:



   (1)   Compatible Pollutants:



      a.   Any Fats, Oil or Grease (FOG) in concentrations greater
than 1,500 mg/l based on an average of all samples collected within a
twenty-four hour period.



      b.   Any Total Suspended Solids (TSS) in concentrations
greater than 7,500 mg/l.



      c.   Any Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) in concentrations
greater than 7,500 mg/l.



      d.   Any Phosphorus (P) in concentrations greater than 250
mg/l.



   Unless otherwise stated, all limitations are based upon samples
collected over an operating period representative of a User's discharge, and
in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136.



   (2)   Non-Compatible Pollutants:



      Cadmium (Cd)   1.0 mg/l



(Ord. No. 402 § 6 (part), 4-21-09)



ARTICLE VII.  WATER SYSTEM MANAGEMENT



53-101. PURPOSE AND INTENT.



   The city, through its water service contract with the Detroit Water and
Sewerage Department, benefits through the implementation of a municipal water
system customer demand management strategy.  A primary objective for this
strategy is to insure that whenever possible, the use of the municipal water
system for purposes of lawn and landscaping irrigation shall be during
non-peak hours.  Achieving this primary objective furthers the public
interests in providing affordable water service to all residents and
maximizing the efficiency of the water system by decreasing peak period usage
throughout the city.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-102.  DEFINITIONS.



   As used in this article, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of Public Works, or in his or her absence, his
or her duly authorized representative.



   DWSD.  The Detroit Water and Sewerage Department and its officials,
Director, or assigns.



   NON-PEAK HOURS. The hours between 12:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. from
Memorial Day through Labor Day each year.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-103.  ADMINISTRATIVE ORDER.



   The City Manager shall create and implement an administrative order
that shall be designed to further the City's objective of limiting use of the
municipal water system for purposes of lawn and landscaping irrigation to
non-peak hours.  Such order shall have the full force and effect of a duly
promulgated City ordinance and shall be enforceable under this section as if
fully incorporated herein and adopted by reference.  The terms and
conditions of the order shall be guided by the following considerations:



   (A)   Weather conditions.  Extended periods of hot and dry
conditions may require more strict enforcement of non-peak hours requirements
than periods of less extreme conditions.



   (B)   Seasons.  The administrative order shall recognize that
certain seasons require more strict enforcement of non-peak hours
requirements than others.



   (C)   Necessity.  The administrative order may exempt new sod or
landscaping from some or all of its water restrictions upon a finding of
necessity by public works officials.



   (D)   DWSD requirements.  The administrative order shall allow for
additional water use restrictions upon a reasonable request by DWSD, whether
due to weather conditions, seasonal conditions, the condition of the water
system, or otherwise.



   (E)   Emergencies.  Water main breaks and other unforeseeable
and/or uncontrollable occurrences may require stricter enforcement of
non-peak hours requirements, and may in fact justify short-term watering
moratoriums if the same are in the best interests of the water system.



   (F)   Miscellaneous.  Any other considerations or circumstances
that might impact the enforcement, flexibility, or necessity of water use
prohibitions or restrictions.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-104.  NOTICE.



   (A)   The Director, upon receiving the effective administrative
order from the City Manager, shall cause public announcement of any water use
prohibitions and/or restrictions and the affected areas by means of
broadcasts and/or telecasts from various commercial television and radio
stations serving the city, and on the city's cable television channel and
website, and through the use of the emergency alert notice system of any
cable television franchisee servicing the city.  The water use prohibitions
and/or restrictions triggered by weather conditions, season, or any other
reason under the administrative order shall become effective twelve (12)
hours after the restrictions have been announced in accordance with this
section.



   (B)   The Director shall also be authorized to publish in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city, and by posting in conspicuous
places upon city properties, notice that a water use prohibition or
restriction is in effect.  Such notices may be published or posted prior to
or during the occurrence of a triggering event.  However, any notice under
this subsection shall contain the date of its issuance, shall make reference
to this article or any other applicable ordinance, and shall only be
effective for a period of one year from the date of the posting or
publication.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-105.  ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   Members of the Police Department and code enforcement officers
are hereby authorized to turn off any outdoor water use that is in violation
of the administrative order, so long as the source of the water use is
located outside of a structure and can be accessed without removing or
opening any doors, gates, fences, or the like.  For water sources that are
located indoors or otherwise cannot be accessed because they are not located
in areas to which members of the public are invited or have access, police
and code enforcement officers are authorized to make contact with the
property owner and/or the water user in an effort to terminate the improper
use.  In the event that contact cannot be made on-site, police and code
enforcement officers are authorized to seek an administrative warrant in
order to terminate the water use, and/or they may issue and serve a municipal
civil infraction citation upon the owner of the property, as determined by
assessing records, and/or upon the user of the water.  Such citation shall
be in the form prescribed by state law, and may be mailed to the offender via
first class mail, or conspicuously affixed to the offending property, or
personally provided to the offender.  A separate municipal civil infraction
citation may be issued for each 24-hour period during which water is
improperly used.



   (B)   The owner of real property where improper water use is
occurring or has occurred is presumed, for purposes of this article, to be
responsible for the improper water use.  In any prosecution with regard to
improper water use, proof that the water use originated upon a particular
parcel of real property in violation of a provision of this article, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time the
owner listed in assessing records, shall constitute prima facie evidence that
the defendant is responsible for violating this article.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-106.  TERMINATION.



   Once in effect, a restriction and/or prohibition under this article
shall remain in effect until terminated by announcement of the Director in
accordance with this article.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-107.  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity that violates any term
or provision of the administrative order implemented pursuant to this article
is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and shall pay a civil fine as
prescribed by Chapter 1.  It shall not be a defense that a person was not
personally or otherwise advised in advance of the issuance of the violation
that the applicable water use restriction was in effect, so long as the
public notice procedures of this article were followed by the city.  Any
person, firm, corporation, or other entity that violates or allows this
chapter to be violated a second time within 24 hours after receiving a
municipal civil infraction citation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, for
which the police shall have arrest authority in order to ensure compliance
with the directives of this article.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



53-108.  APPEALS.



   If any of the prohibitions or restrictions in the administrative order
implemented pursuant to this article creates a practical hardship for a
municipal water user, the water user may petition the Director with a request
for relief from the pertinent restriction.  The petition must set forth the
requested relief and must detail the extraordinary circumstance that would
justify the requested relief, as well as the proposed duration for the
requested relief.  The Director may grant or deny or modify the petition,
taking into consideration the contractual obligations of the city, balanced
against the articulated circumstances of the petitioner.  The decision of
the Director shall be final.



(Ord. No. 397, § 1, 6-3-08)



 



ZONING ORDINANCE



Title



Enacting Clause



   Art. 1.   Short Title and Interpretation, §§ 1.00-1.04



   Art. 2.   Zoning Districts and Map, §§ 2.00-2.02



   Art. 3.   R-60, R-70, R-80, R-90 and R-100 One Family Residential
Districts, §§ 3.00-3.04



   Art. 4.   R-2 Two Family Residential District, §§ 4.00-4.04



   Art. 5.   MHP Mobile Home Park District, §§ 5.00-5.04



   Art. 6.   RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple Family Low Rise Districts, §§
6.00-6.05



   Art. 7.   RM-3 Multiple Family Mid and High Rise Districts, §§
7.00-7.05



   Art. 8.   O-1 Business and Professional Office District, §§
8.00-8.05



   Art. 9.   O-2 Planned Office District, §§ 9.00-9.05



   Art. 10.   O-3 High Rise Office Commercial Service District, §§
10.00-10.06



   Art. 11.   C-1 Local Convenience Business District, §§ 11.00-11.05



   Art. 12.   C-2 Planned Comparison District, §§ 12.00-12.05



   Art. 12A.   Lakeside Overlay District, §§ 12.01A-12.04A



   Art. 13.   C-3 General Business District, §§ 13.00-13.05



   Art. 14.   C-4 Multi Use District, §§ 14.00-14.07



   Art. 15.   P-1 Vehicular Parking District, §§ 15.00-15.05



   Art. 16.   Floodplain Area, §§ 16.00-16.08



   Art. 17.   O-R Office Research District, §§ 17.00-17.06



   Art. 18.   TRO Technical Research Office District, §§ 18.00-18.05



   Art. 19.   M-1 Light Industrial District, §§ 19.00-19.06



   Art. 20.   M-2 Heavy Industrial District, §§ 20.00-20.06



   Art. 21.   PCD Planned Center District, §§ 21.00-21.07



   Art. 22.   Special Development Options, §§ 22.00-22.04



   Art. 23.   Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements, §§
23.00-23.05



   Art. 24.   Environmental Provisions, §§ 24.00-24.06



   Art. 25.   Special Land Use And Other Discretionary Land Use
Approvals, §§ 25.00-25.04



   Art. 26.   Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures, §§
26.00-26.04



   Art. 27.   Nonconforming Uses, Buildings and Structures, §§
27.00-27.09



   Art. 28.   General Provisions, §§ 28.00-28.19



   Art. 29.   Administration and Enforcement, §§ 29.00-29.04



   Art. 30.   Zoning Board of Appeals, §§ 30.00-30.04



   Art. 31.   Definitions, §§ 31.00-31.01



   Art. 32.   Zoning Changes and Amendments, §§ 32.00-32.06



   Art. 33.   Penalties, Public Nuisances, Severability and Repeal,
§§ 33.00-33.04



ORDINANCE NO. 278



TITLE



An Ordinance, in accordance with and under the authority of Public Act 110 of
2006, as amended, to provide for the establishment of zoning districts in
such sizes, shapes and areas as are deemed best suited to carry out the
provisions of this Ordinance; within which districts the proper use of land
and natural resources is encouraged and regulated and the improper use of
same prohibited; to designate in said districts the use of land for
recreation, residence, industries, trade, soil conservation, natural
resources and the uses for which buildings and structures shall or shall not
be erected, altered or moved and designate the trades and industries that
shall be permitted or excluded or subjected to special regulations and in
each of such districts; to provide for amendments and supplements to this
ordinance; to provide for the administration and enforcement of this
ordinance; to provide for a zoning board of appeals and its powers and
duties; to provide penalties for the violation of its provisions; and to
repeal all ordinances and parts of ordinances which may be in conflict with
this Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 1, 1-6-09)



ENACTING CLAUSE



THE CITY OF STERLING HEIGHTS ORDAINS:



ARTICLE 1. SHORT TITLE AND INTERPRETATION



SECTION 1.00.  SHORT TITLE.



   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights Zoning Ordinance and may be referred to herein as "this ordinance."



SECTION 1.01.  INTENT.



   The purpose of this ordinance is to promote the public health, safety
and general welfare; to encourage the use of lands in accordance with their
character and adaptability; to limit the improper use of land; to conserve
natural resources and energy, to meet the needs of the state’s residents
for food, fiber, and other natural resources and energy, places of residence,
recreation, industry, trade, service, and other uses of land; to insure that
uses of the land shall be situated in appropriate locations and
relationships; to limit the inappropriate overcrowding and congestion of
population; to provide adequate light and air; to lessen congestion on the
public roads and streets; to reduce hazards to life and property; to
facilitate adequate provision for a system of transportation, sewage
disposal, safe and adequate water supply, education, recreation, and other
public requirements; and to conserve the expenditure of funds for public
improvements and services to conform with the most advantageous uses of land,
resources, and properties, with reasonable consideration among other things,
to the character of each district, its peculiar suitability for particular
uses, the general and appropriate trend and character of land, building and
population development, as studied and recommended within the Master Land Use
Plan adopted by the Sterling Heights Planning Commission.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 2, 1-6-09)



SECTION 1.02.  INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT.



   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, these
regulations shall be held to be the minimum requirements necessary for the
promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comforts, prosperity and
general welfare. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or
abrogate or annual any ordinances, rules, regulations or permits previously
adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this
ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to
the use of buildings and premises and, likewise, not in conflict with this
ordinance. Nor is it intended to interfere with or abrogate or annul any
easements, covenants or other agreements between parties; provided, however,
that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of
buildings or premises or upon heights of buildings or required larger open
spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such other
ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control.



    The provisions of this ordinance shall be considered as minimum
standards and requirements within each respective zoning district and shall
not preclude the establishment of higher or more restrictive standards or
requirements for the authorization of any special approval land use permit by
the Sterling Heights Planning Commission or City Council where such higher or
more restrictive conditions meet the following state requirements and are
found necessary after review by the Council or Planning Commission to attain
the intent of this ordinance. For the purpose of this ordinance, all
conditional uses or uses permitted after special approval shall be special
approval land uses as authorized in Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended.



   Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a special
approval land use, planned unit development or other land uses or permitted
activities necessary to insure that  public services and facilities affected
by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased
service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to protect the
natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to insure
compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and to promote the use of land in a
socially and economically desirable manner. Conditions imposed shall meet all
of the following requirements:



   A.   Be designed to protect natural resources, the health, safety
and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those who will
use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and landowners
immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity and the community
as a whole;



   B.   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity;



   C.   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance;
be related to the standards established in this ordinance for the land use or
activity under consideration; and be necessary to insure compliance with such
standards.



   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or
activity shall be recorded in the minutes of the approval action. The City
Clerk shall maintain a record of conditions and any amendments thereto.



(Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 278-NN, §§ 3-4, 1-6-09)



SECTION 1.03.  VESTED RIGHT.



   It is hereby expressly declared that nothing in this ordinance be held
or construed to give or grant to any person, firm or corporation any vested
right, license, privilege or permit.



SECTION 1.04.  CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.



   Whenever any provisions of this ordinance impose more stringent
requirements, regulations, restrictions or limitations than are imposed or
required by the provisions of any other law or ordinance, then the provisions
of this ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other law or
ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by
this ordinance, then the provisions of such law or ordinance shall apply.



ARTICLE 2.  ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP



SECTION 2.00.  ZONING DISTRICTS AND BOUNDARIES.



   A.    For the purposes of this ordinance, the City of Sterling
Heights is hereby divided into zoning districts within which the use of land
and structures, the height, the area, the density of population and the size
and location of buildings are regulated. To the extent possible, these zoning
districts are established in accordance with the city’s Master Land Use
Plan.



   B.   The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as
shown on the Zoning Districts Map, City of Sterling Heights, which
accompanies this ordinance, and which map, with all notations, references and
other information shown thereon, shall be as much a part of this ordinance as
if fully described herein.



   In accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, if changes are
made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning
Districts Map, such changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Districts
Map after the amendment has been approved by the City Council, together with
an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: amended       date     
, Ordinance No. (                ).



   C.   Two copies of the Official Zoning Ordinance and Map are to be
maintained and kept up-to-date. One copy shall be filed in the City Planning
Department and the other shall be filed with the City Clerk, whose copy shall
be the final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings
and other structures in the city.



SECTION 2.01.  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES INTERPRETED.



   Where, due to the scale, lack of details or illegibility of the Zoning
Map, there is any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended
location of any zoning district boundaries shown thereon, interpretation
concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined
by the  Zoning Board of Appeals upon written application. The Board, in
arriving at a decision on such matters, shall apply the following standards:



   A.   The boundaries of zoning districts are intended to follow
centerlines of alleys, streets or other rights-of-way, watercourses or lot
lines or be parallel or perpendicular thereto, unless such district boundary
lines are otherwise clearly indicated on the Zoning Districts Map;



   B.   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they
approximately follow lot of record lines, such lines shall be construed to be
boundaries;



   C.   In unsubdivided property, or where a district boundary divides
a lot of record, the location of such boundary, unless shown by dimensions on
the Zoning Districts Map, shall be determined by use of the map scale shown
thereon.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 2.02.  CONFORMITY TO ORDINANCE REGULATIONS.



   A.   No structure or land shall be used, occupied, erected,
constructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations
specified for that zoning district. Unless a use is permitted in a particular
zoning district, it shall be prohibited in that zoning district.



   B.   Except as otherwise provided, regulations governing land and
building use, minimum lot size, lot area per dwelling unit, building height,
building placement, required yards and other pertinent factors are hereby
established as stated in the detailed provisions for each of the zoning
districts. In each zoning district a "permitted use" shall be a use of land
or buildings subject to the minimum requirements specified for such use in
the zoning district in which such use is located, plus applicable
requirements found elsewhere in this ordinance. A special approval land use
shall be a use of land or buildings which may be permitted in that district
only after following special procedures designed to ensure site and use
compatibility with existing or proposed surrounding land uses. In evaluating
and deciding each application for such permission, the Planning Commission
shall apply the standards contained in section 25.02 of this ordinance and
any special conditions imposed for that use.



ARTICLE 3.  R-60, R-70, R 80, R-9O AND R-100 ONE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS



SECTION 3.00.  INTENT.



   The one family districts are established to provide an environment
suitable for families who typically have children. The districts are
principally for one family dwellings at varying densities. The specific
intent of these districts is to encourage the construction and continued use
of one family dwellings and to prohibit the use of the land which would
substantially interfere with the development of one family dwellings. The
city also discourages any land use which, because of its character and size,
would create requirements and costs for public services substantially in
excess of those needed for the one family densities of that zoning district.
The city also discourages any land use which would be incompatible or
generate excessive traffic on local streets.



SECTION 3.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of
this ordinance:



   A.   One family detached dwellings (subject to section 28.08);



   B.   Agriculture, provided that on parcels of less than eight acres,
there shall be no raising of livestock, fowl or other animals;



   C.   City-owned and/or operated libraries, museums, administrative
offices, Police and Fire Department facilities, parks and recreational
facilities, subject to the screening and setback requirements of section
3.02F;



   D.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   E.   Site condominiums as defined herein and subject to section
22.00;



   F.   Model homes for the sale of residences within subdivisions in
the City of Sterling Heights.



   G.   State licensed residential facilities providing residential
services for six or fewer individuals, provided such facility is not an adult
foster care facility licensed by a state agency for care and treatment of
persons released from or assigned to adult correctional institutions.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 5, 1-6-09)



SECTION 3.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Churches, synagogues, mosques and places of group worship,
subject to the following:



      1.   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in
this district may be permitted, provided front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of
building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Parking lot screening meeting the requirements for
moderate intensity impacts shall be provided as required in section 24.01;



      4.   Such facilities may include related community centers,
provided that such centers are limited to activities sponsored by church
members only. Said facilities shall not be used as banquet facilities to the
general public;



      5.   All principal and accessory buildings, except for
accessory storage buildings, such as a shed or detached garage, shall
maintain minimum rear and side yard setbacks of at least 50 feet.



   B.   Colleges, universities and other such institutions of higher
learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or
religious education, all subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites
of at least 15 acres in area;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way width of
at least 120 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan. Landscaped berms
shall be provided along the frontage of the site as per the requirements of
section 24.01;



      3.   No building shall be closer than 100 feet to any property
line when said property line abuts, or is adjacent to, land zoned for
residential purposes;



      4.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided for all parking lots
and service, maintenance or activity centers, when visible from adjoining
residentially zoned land;



      5.   The site shall consist of a minimum area of 400 square
feet per pupil.



   C.   Golf courses (but not including golf driving ranges, miniature
golf courses, banquet or catering facilities or freestanding commercial
uses), related clubhouses, accessory seasonal restaurants and recreation
areas, all subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Any use permitted herein shall be developed only on sites
of at least 50 acres in area;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   No clubhouse, swimming pool, tennis court, maintenance or
equipment storage building or similar use shall be located closer than 100
feet to any property line;



      4.   Whenever a swimming pool is constructed, said pool area
shall be surrounded with a protective fence six feet in height and entry
shall be provided by means of a controlled gate;



      5.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided for all outside
storage, service and maintenance areas and parking lots when visible from
adjoining residentially zoned land.



   D.   Cemeteries, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The cemetery shall be located on a site of at least ten
acres;



      2.   All access shall be provided from a major or secondary
thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of 86 feet or more as indicated on
the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Crematoriums and chapels shall be centrally located on
the site so as not to create traffic flow or compatibility problems for
adjoining property;



      4.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided along those sides of a
cemetery adjoining residentially zoned property;



      5.   Adequate off-street waiting space shall be provided for
funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a dedicated
right-of-way.



   E.   Public, parochial and other private elementary, intermediate
and/or high schools offering courses in general education, subject to the
following conditions:



      1.   No building shall be closer than 100 feet to any property
line when said property line abuts or is adjacent to land zoned for
residential purposes. If the abutting property is developed with a
nonresidential use, all buildings shall be setback a minimum of 50 feet from
the property line abutting that nonresidential use;



      2.   All such facilities shall be located so as to provide
convenient access to the city's major thoroughfare system;



      3.   A six foot cyclone fence shall be constructed and
maintained to separate any school playground or recreational area from any
adjacent properties.



   F.   Public (non-city) owned and/or operated libraries, museums,
administrative offices, Police and Fire Department facilities, parks and
recreational facilities, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided whenever the site abuts
a residentially zoned district;



      2.   All buildings shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from the property line when abutting residentially zoned districts. If the
abutting property is developed with a nonresidential use, all buildings shall
be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the property line.



   G.   Recreational facilities furnished by private contractors for a
period exceeding seven continuous days at city owned or operated parks and
other publicly owned and/or operated parks, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   All buildings and structures 15 feet or less in height
and/or active recreation areas shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet from
any property line abutting a residentially zoned district. Building and/or
structures exceeding 15 feet in height may be permitted, provided the setback
is increased one foot for each foot of building or structure height exceeding
15 feet. If the abutting property is developed with a nonresidential use, the
setback shall be a minimum of 50 feet;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary throughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Devices for the transmission of broadcasting of voices or
music shall be so directed or muffled in order to prevent said sound or music
from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site;



      4.   All lighting shall be directed away from public streets
and abutting uses;



      5.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided whenever the site abuts
a residentially zoned district;



      6.   Approval of the City Council shall be required for any
such facility or use at a public park not owned or operated by the city;



      7.   Improved off-street parking may be required by the
Planning Commission;



      8.   The use shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local statutes, rules, regulations and licensing requirements;



      9.   The city may require a written agreement satisfactory to
the City Attorney.



   H.   Public riding and boarding stables, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   The site shall contain not less than 20 acres, with a
minimum of one acre of land for each five horses;



      2.   All areas of the site where horses or other equine are
permitted to roam, exercise or feed shall be enclosed by a fence of not less
than four feet and not more than six feet constructed of materials determined
to be structurally sound by the Building Official;



      3.   All structures which house, board or show horses, ponies
or other equine or store food, hay, straw or manure shall be set back at
least 100 feet from all property lines;



      4.   Direct ingress and egress from a public right-of-way to
stable area shall be provided;



      5.   All stockpiled manure shall be kept in a central area at
least 200 feet from any property line and shall be regularly treated so as to
properly control flies and [other] insects.



   I.   Public utilities, gas and oil pipelines and storage fields
serving a wider geographic area than the City of Sterling Heights, subject to
the following conditions:



      1.   Utility lines and pipelines shall follow section lines or
mile roads wherever possible. Bisecting or diagonal cuts through parcels of
land shall be permitted only when it is shown to benefit the environment
and/or the residents of the city or where there is no other reasonable route;



      2.   Buildings and related uses must be screened and/or
landscaped so that they do not adversely affect the surrounding properties or
neighborhood;



      3.   It shall be shown in the review that every reasonable
precaution has been taken to provide maximum safety and minimum interference
to the normal daily living patterns of residents within the vicinity;



      4.   Utility, radio, television and similarly designed
freestanding towers, antennas and related structures shall be located and
designed to be harmonious with the surrounding area, provided the structure
shall be set back (a) from any residential use or proposed or existing
right-of-way a distance not less than the height of the tower and (b) from
any nonresidential use or district a distance not less than that required to
meet the minimum yard requirements for a principal building located on the
site as provided in the area, height and bulk requirements of that zoning
district. Wireless communication towers, antennas and related facilities
shall be further subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



   J.   Private clubs, fraternal organizations and cultural centers,
subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All such uses shall have ingress and egress directly onto
a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way
width of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      2.   All activities, other than parking of motor vehicles and
loading and unloading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building, except for outdoor activity specifically approved and/or licensed
by the City Council;



      3.   No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any property
line;



      4.   Maximum lot coverage of all buildings shall not exceed
30%;



      5.   Screening meeting the requirements for moderate intensity
impacts (section 24.01) shall be provided where the site abuts property zoned
or developed for single family purposes.



   K.   One family cluster option, subject to the provisions of section
22.01.



   L.   Planned open space subdivisions, subject to the provisions of
section 22.02.



   M.   Child or adult foster care facilities, subject to the following
requirements:



      1.   These regulations shall not apply to a "state licensed
residential facility" providing supervision or care to six or less adults or
children for 24 hours a day;



      2.   The site shall have ingress and egress directly onto a
major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way
width of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts, (section 24.01) shall be provided where off-street parking
areas abut property zoned or developed for single family purposes;



      4.   Foster care facilities shall be licensed by the State of
Michigan;



      5.   Adequate ingress and egress, parking and circulation
shall be provided on the site;



      6.   The facility shall provide adequate outdoor open space
and recreational area. As a minimum, these areas shall be at least 1,500
square feet, 300 square feet of which shall be landscaping;



      7.   There shall be a minimum of 150 square feet of usable
floor area per occupant of the premises;



      8.   There shall be at least one parking space on site for
every two employees and for every two residents capable of driving a car.



   N.   Child or adult day care facilities, subject to the following
requirements:



      1.   These regulations shall not apply to a "state licensed
residential facility" permitted under Public Act 116 of 1973, as amended,
which serves six or less adults or children;



      2.   The site shall have ingress and egress directly onto a
major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way
width of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   For child care facilities, the site shall contain a
minimum of 150 square feet of outdoor play area for each child and shall not
have less than 5,000 square feet in total area dedicated to outdoor play
area. There shall also be a minimum of 35 square feet of indoor play space
per child;



      4.   The Planning Commission shall consider the impact on
abutting properties from the proposed facility, including but not limited to
outdoor lighting, noise and traffic generated by the use, location of outdoor
play areas, loading and unloading and pedestrian circulation;



      5.   Such use shall not abut a one family residential zoning
district on more than two sides. Screening meeting the requirements for major
intensity impacts, as specified in section 24.01, shall be provided along any
side of the site zoned for one family residential purposes, unless the
Planning Commission determines as part of its review under section 3.02,
subparagraph N4 that alternative screening is more appropriate and harmonious
with the adjoining land uses.



   O.   Full and limited assistance housing in the R-60 and R-70
Districts only, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Any use permitted herein shall be developed on a site
with a net developable area of not less than five acres. The net developable
area shall include perimeter yards but shall exclude flood plain or wetland
areas;



      2.   Such facilities shall be located upon parcels of property
which the Planning Commission determines to have characteristics which make
them difficult to develop, such as flood plain areas, wetlands, prior
contamination or other unusual land characteristics;



      3.   The location of the site shall be upon a street with a
right-of-way of at least 86 feet or greater as shown on the Master Road Plan;



      4.   There shall be provided at least 2,500 square feet of lot
area for each bed in the primary assisted living facility, or for each person
cared for, whichever is greater. Density shall be calculated on the basis of
the net developable area;



      5.   No delivery area or employee parking shall be allowed
within 100 feet of any land which is zoned or used for single family
residential purposes;



      6.   The primary facility may include multi-purpose recreation
rooms, kitchens and meeting rooms, libraries, limited medical examination
rooms and limited space for ancillary services for the residents of the
facility, such as beauty and barber facilities, snack shops and gift stores;



      7.   Front, side and rear yards for the development shall not
be less than 50 feet where the yard abuts a street with a right-of-way of 86
feet or greater as shown on the Master Road Plan or where any such yard abuts
property zoned or used for single family residential purposes. Where the
development abuts a street with a right-of-way of less than 86 feet shown on
the Master Road Plan, the minimum yard requirement of section 3.04 shall
apply;



      8.   The development may include, in addition to the primary
assisted living facility building, free standing single family dwelling units
owned by the operator of the facility at a ratio of one such dwelling unit
for each four residents that reside in the primary assisted living facility;



      9.   The minimum size of any permitted single family dwelling
unit shall be not less than 700 square feet. Two single family dwelling units
may be attached to one another, provided they are attached by an approved
exterior architectural wall detail or a common interior wall;



      10.   All such single family dwelling units shall be
aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences
located within 1,000 feet of the proposed dwelling unit. Each unit
constructed shall have as a minimum two bedrooms, one full bathroom, a one
car attached garage and an adjoining open space for patio or deck;



      11.   The minimum distance between the two free-standing
single family dwelling units shall be 15 feet;



      12.   The minimum distance between any single family
residential facility and the primary assisted living facility shall be 30
feet;



      13.   Screening meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impact as set forth in section 24.01 shall be provided between the
development and any abutting property zoned or used for single family
residential purposes;



      14.   The facility shall be licensed and operated in
accordance with the applicable laws of the State of Michigan and any other
authority having jurisdiction over such use.



(Ord. No. 278-E, §§ 1, 2, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 278-N, §§ 1, 2, 8-1-95; Ord.
No. 278-R, § 1, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-S, § 1, 2-18-97; Ord. No. 278-T, §
1, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-U, §§ 1, 2, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-X, § 1, 4-6-99;
Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 1, 2, 5-16-00)



SECTION 3.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses may be permitted:



   A.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental
to the permitted or special approval land uses of this article and subject to
the provisions of section 28.00;



   B.   Private stables on lots or parcels containing at least two
acres of land per horse;



   C.   Accessory agricultural sales on parcels of one and one half
acres or more, provided that such parcels are located along a major
thoroughfare;



   D.   Home occupations, as defined in section 31.01, provided:



      1.   That such use is conducted only by permanent residents of
the dwelling;



      2.   That such use is wholly confined within the dwelling
(does not include attached or detached garages or other outbuildings);



      3.   That such occupation shall not require internal or
external alterations or construction features or equipment or machinery not
customary in residential areas;



      4.   That such occupation is incidental to the residential use
to the extent that not more than 20% of the floor area of the principal
building shall be occupied by such occupation;



      5.   That no sign of any nature is displayed;



      6.   That such use does not generate traffic or a need for
parking beyond that required for the dwelling unit, nor shall such use create
any external effect not normally associated with a single family use;



   E.   Amusement devices as specified in section 28.01;



   F.   Minor automobile repair, but excluding major automotive
repairs, including bumping and/or painting and any repairs on vehicles not
owned by persons living in the residence;



   G.   Swimming pools, provided that they do not exceed more than 60%
of the width of the lot and do not exceed a maximum of 42 feet in length,
including all attached raised decks.



   H.    Accessory banquet or event uses, provided that such uses are
conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the City Code. The
City Planner may require the installation of additional landscaping,
screening, or other devices or materials designed to contain noise, light,
and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend beyond the property line
of the site and/or to provide separation from abutting parking and
maneuvering areas.



(Ord. No. 278-U, § 3, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-QQ, § 1, 2-16-10; Ord. No.
278-BBB, § 1, 7-18-17)



SECTION 3.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   In the one family residential districts, the following area,
height, bulk, density and placement shall apply:



 






 
R-100
 
R-90
 
R-80
 
R-70
 
R-60


      1.   Minimum interior lot dimensions (in feet)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


         a.   Width
 
100
 
90
 
80
 
70
 
60


         b.   Depth
 
140
 
130
 
125
 
120
 
120


      2.   Minimum corner lot dimensions (in feet)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


         a.   Width
 
120
 
110
 
100
 
90
 
80


         b.   Width (where one side abuts a major road)
 
130
 
120
 
110
 
100
 
90


         c.   Depth
 
140
 
130
 
125
 
120
 
120




 



   With the approval of the Planning Department, where the size and the
shape of the parcel or the proposed curvilinear road pattern requires greater
flexibility in subdivision design, a platted subdivision (except a
subdivision developed under the Planned Subdivision Option) may be permitted
to contain not more than 15% of all lots with less than the minimum required
lot depth. Where such permission is granted, the minimum lot width of such
lot shall be increased by two feet in all residential districts for each one
foot reduction in lot depth; however, in no case shall the lot depth of the
R-60, R-70, R-80, R-90 and R-100 districts be decreased by more than ten feet
from the standard noted in section 3.04 above.



 




 
R-100
 
R-90
 
R-80
 
R-70
 
R-60


      3.   Minimum lot size (in square feet)
 
14,000
 
11,700
 
10,000
 
8,400
 
7,200


      4.   Minimum corner lot area per dwelling unit in square (feet)
 
16,800
 
14,300
 
12,500
 
10,800
 
9,600


      5.   Maximum height of building:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


         a.   In stories
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2
 
2


         b.   In feet
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30
 
30



 



      6.   Minimum yard setback (in feet):



         a.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured
from the centerline of each road right-of way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the
city's Master Road Plan, as follows:



 






 
R-100
 
R-90
 
R-80
 
R-70
 
R-60


            (1)   Regional (204' R.O.W.)
 
142
 
142
 
142
 
142
 
142


            (2)   Regional (150' R.O.W.)
 
115
 
115
 
115
 
115
 
115


            (3)   Major
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100
 
100


            (4)   Secondary
 
73
 
73
 
73
 
73
 
73


            (5)   Collector
 
65
 
65
 
65
 
65
 
65


            (6)   Local
 
60
 
60
 
60
 
60
 
60


            (7)   60' Cul-de-sac radius
 
90
 
90
 
90
 
90
 
90


               55' Cul-de-sac radius
 
85
 
85
 
85
 
85
 
85


               50' Cul-de-sac radius
 
80
 
80
 
80
 
80
 
80


            (8)   Freeway
 
40*
 
40*
 
40*
 
40*
 
40*


            (9)   Private road
 
30**
 
30**
 
30**
 
30**
 
30**


         b.   Side:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


            (1)   Least one (no side entry garage)
 
10
 
8
 
5
 
5
 
5


            (2)   Least one (with side entry garage)
 
8
 
8
 
5
 
5
 
5


            (3)   Total of two (all instances)
 
25
 
20
 
15
 
15
 
15


Where a side entry garage is to be constructed, the distance between the side
lot line and the front entrance of the side entry garage shall not be less
than 22 feet.


         c.   Rear:
 
40
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35


      7.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (in square feet)
 
2,000
 
2,000
 
1,800
 
1,400
 
1,000


      8.   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%




 



      9.   Parking for uses other than one family dwellings shall be
located at least 35 feet from any property line.



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 40 feet for major and regional roads and
one-half of the actual right-of-way plus 30 feet for all other roads.



      10.   The City Planner may modify the parking setbacks
requirements where uses of a nonresidential type (churches, schools, public
facilities, etc.) abut one another, provided that in no instance shall the
Planner reduce the parking setback to less than ten feet.



      11.   The required rear yard may be reduced by five feet in
R-100 and R-90 districts where the rear lot abuts a private open space area
of not less than 20 feet in depth which is part of the development. This
provision shall also apply to the planned plat subdivisions for which
tentative preliminary plan approval was granted by the City Council prior to
the effective date of this amendment.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 1-3, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-F, § 3, 7-3-90; Ord. No.
278-N, §§ 3-6; Ord. No. 278-R, § 2, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-CC, § 1,
6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-JJ, §§ 1, 2, 3-4-08)



ARTICLE 4.  R-2 TWO FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT



SECTION 4.00.  INTENT.



   The two family district is established to provide an environment
suitable for families who typically have children, but will be of smaller
size than those families living in the R1 One Family Residential Districts.
To achieve this goal, uses are primarily limited to moderately low density
two family dwelling units, plus certain residentially related uses designated
to provide an acceptable neighborhood environment. The district may also
provide a transition between higher density residential districts or
nonresidential districts and low density one family residential districts.
The two family district also permits the construction of residences at a
slightly higher density than one family.



SECTION 4.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of
this ordinance:



   A.   One family detached dwellings as regulated in the abutting one
family district, excluding cluster housing or planned open space subdivisions
or site condominiums;



   B.   Two family dwellings;



   C.   City-owned and/or operated libraries, museums, administrative
offices, Police and Fire Department facilities, parks, parkways and
recreational facilities;



   D.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   E.   Model homes for the sale or rental of residences within
subdivisions in the City of Sterling Heights.



SECTION 4.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   All special approval land uses included in section 3.02 may be
permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the specific requirements
established for each use.



   Uses similar to those cited in this article may be permitted by the
Planning Commission subject to the general standards of section 25.02 and the
specific standards imposed for each use.



SECTION 4.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses may be permitted:



      A.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily
incidental to the permitted or special approval land uses of this article and
subject to the provisions of section 28.00;



      B.   Private stables on lots or parcels containing at least
two acres of land per horse;



      C.   Accessory agricultural sales on parcels of two or more
acres, provided that such parcels are located along a major thoroughfare;



      D.   Home occupations, as regulated by section 3.03(D);



      E.   Amusement devices as specified in section 28.01.



   Major automotive repairs, including bumping and/or painting and any
repairs on vehicles not owned by persons living in the residence are
prohibited. Construction trailers are specifically prohibited.



SECTION 4.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   In the two family residential district, the following area,
height, bulk, density and placement regulations shall apply:



      1.   Minimum lot size in square feet:  12,000.



      2.   Minimum lot dimensions in feet:



         a.   Width:  100.



         b.   Depth:  120.



      3.   Maximum height of building:



         a.   In stories:  2.



         b.   In feet:  25.



      4.   Minimum yard setback in feet:



         a.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured
from the centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the
city's Master Road Plan, as follows:



            (1)   Regional (204' R.O.W):  142.



            (2)   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  115.



            (3)   Major:  100.



            (4)   Secondary:  73.



            (5)   Collector:  65.



            (6)   Local:  60.



            (7)   Cul-de-sac radius:  90.



            (8)   Freeway:  40*.



            (9)   Private road:  30**.



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 40 feet for major and regional roads and
one-half of the actual right-of-way plus (30) feet for all other roads.



         b.   Side (in feet):



            (1)   Least one:  10.



            (2)   Total of two:  20.



         c.   Rear (in feet):  35.



      5.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (in square feet): 
800.



      6.   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings:  30%.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 4, 4-17-90)



ARTICLE 5.  MHP MOBILE HOME PARK DISTRICT



SECTION 5.00.  INTENT.



   This district is designed to create a residential zoning district which
will permit and encourage single family development in mobile homes. Unlike
the typical one family subdivision in which the individual lot provides the
open space and amenities for family living, the overall development pattern
would be similar to that of multifamily development. The mobile home park
will be managed, organized and regulated by the developer. Streets,
utilities, open space, recreation and amenities will be provided and
regulated by the developer. As a result, the City of Sterling Heights has
recognized the need to locate such zoning districts along major
transportation routes and in areas of adequate utilities and public services.
Similar to multiple family developments, the mobile home parks shall be
designed to provide adequate space and land use separation consistent with
the city’s other zoning districts. The rules and regulations, as
promulgated by the State of Michigan Mobile Home Commission, shall be
applicable, except as modified by the following [provisions].



SECTION 5.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   A.   Mobile home parks, subject to the requirements as established
and regulated by the Mobile Home Commission pursuant to Public Act 96 of
1987, as amended, as well as all other applicable city codes and ordinances
referenced herein.



   B.   Clubhouse, swimming pool and recreation facilities for the use
of the park residents.



   C.   Accessory uses and structures, such as manager’s offices,
laundry facilities, home occupations, tool or storage sheds and other
services for the residents of the park shall be permitted. Adequate parking
for such services shall be provided, as required by the Michigan Mobile Home
Commission Rules, as amended from time to time. The park proprietor or
management may display for sale mobile homes and accessories (provided the
accessories are contained within a mobile home or an approved permanent
structure for such purpose). Such sales are allowed to permit the development
of the park and are not intended to be a retail operation. Such sales should
cease with the total development of the park.



   D.   One sign, not larger than 25 square feet in area, for
identification of the premises and use (without additional advertising) may
be placed at the main entrance of the mobile home park. One sign, not larger
than ten square feet, limited to the same identification contained on the
entrance sign, may be erected on any secondary entrance to the mobile home
park adjoining a public road. The identification sign shall be a part of a
permanent decorative entranceway and shall be compatible with the surrounding
area. All signs shall observe the setback and height limitations cited in
section 28.13 of this ordinance.



SECTION 5.02.  AREA, HEIGHT AND PLACEMENT REGULATIONS.



   A.   Lot size. The mobile home park shall be developed with sites
averaging 5,500 square feet per mobile home unit. This 5,500 square feet for
any one site may be reduced by 20%, provided that the individual site shall
be equal to at least 4,400 square feet. For each square foot of land gained
through a reduction of a site below 5,500 square feet, at least an equal
amount of land shall be dedicated as open space; but in no case shall the
open space and distance requirements be less than that required under R
125.1946, rule 946 and R 125.1941, rules 941 and 944 of the Michigan
Administrative Code.



   B.   Perimeter yard setbacks. No mobile home shall be located closer
than 110 feet from the centerline of any abutting public road. Minimum yard
setbacks of 25 feet shall be observed for all other perimeter property lines.



   C.   Floor space. There shall be not less than 720 square feet of
floor area within each mobile home. The floor area of any porch, sundeck or
other structure shall not be used to meet the 720 foot requirement.



   D.   Internal yard setbacks. The placement of mobile homes within a
mobile home park shall observe the following setback requirements:



      1.   Twenty feet from any part or attached structure of
another mobile home which is used for living purposes;



      2.   Ten feet from an on-site parking space of an adjacent
mobile home site;



      3.   Ten feet from an attached or detached structure or
accessory building which is not used for living purposes;



      4.   Fifty feet from a permanent building;



      5.   Ten feet from the edge of an internal road;



      6.   Seven and one-half feet from a parking bay;



      7.   Seven feet from a common pedestrian walkway.



   E.   Maximum heights. The maximum height of any clubhouse building
shall not exceed 25 feet or two stories in height. Storage or service
buildings shall not exceed 15 feet or one story in height. No such service
buildings shall be located adjacent to an adjoining parcel that is either
zoned or developed for single family purposes.



SECTION 5.03.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   A.   Minimum site size. Each mobile home park must have a site of
not less than 15 acres of land.



   B.   Access to public roads. All mobile home parks shall have at
least one property line abutting an existing or planned thoroughfare with a
paved surface and a right-of-way width of at least 120 feet. All access to
the park shall be from such thoroughfares. Two access points shall be
provided to the major thoroughfare to allow a secondary access for emergency
vehicles. A boulevard entrance extending to the first intersection of
interior park roads shall be interpreted as satisfying this requirement.



   C.   Paving. All internal roads and parking facilities shall be
provided with a paved surface in compliance with the standards of the AASHTO
specifications referenced in rule 922 of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission
Rules. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of all
surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to prevent the
drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings. No portion of
any off-street parking area may be allowed to encroach into sidewalk areas.



   D.   Parking. A minimum of two parking spaces shall be provided for
each mobile home unit. A minimum of one parking space for every three mobile
home sites shall be provided for visitor parking. Such parking shall be
located convenient to the area served.



   E.   Sidewalks. Concrete sidewalks, which meet the standards
established in rule 928 of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission Rules, shall
be installed along one side of all internal roads to the public right-of-way
and to all service facilities, including but not limited to central laundry,
central parking and central recreation/park areas. Sidewalks shall also be
required along that portion of a site fronting along major thoroughfares.



   F.   Plumbing, electrical and TV. All electrical and telephone
wiring shall be underground. Where a master antenna is provided, service
shall be constructed and maintained with underground leads servicing each
mobile home site. All mobile home units shall be provided with an opportunity
for access to a cable TV service with emergency alert override system
capabilities.



   G.   Skirting. Skirting shall be installed around all mobile homes.
Such skirting shall be compatible aesthetically with the appearance and
construction of the mobile home. All skirting shall be installed prior to the
issuance of a certificate of occupancy. In the event that such installation
is delayed due to weather, or for other similar reasons, a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not to exceed 90 days.
All skirting shall meet the specifications established by the Michigan Mobile
Home Commission Rules.



   H.   Storage. There shall be no storage of any kind permitted under
a mobile home; nor shall any outside storage be permitted. The developer
shall provide a central storage facility or shall permit or provide
individual utility cabinets for each mobile home site. Any utility cabinets
placed on individual mobile home sites shall be maintained in good condition
and kept painted. Utility cabinets shall be placed in side or rear yard areas.



   I.   Fuel tanks. Individual fuel oil, liquid petroleum or other fuel
tanks shall not be permitted to be stored in or under any mobile home unit in
a mobile home park.



   J.   Storage/parking. If boats, boat trailers and utility trailers
are permitted to be parked within a mobile home park, adequate parking spaces
for such vehicles shall be provided in a central or collective parking area.
This area shall be in addition to the automobile parking requirements of this
ordinance and shall be adequately fenced, locked or secured and visually
buffered.



   K.   Lighting. Service roadway and parking lights shall be installed
so as to permit the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. All
lighting shall be so located and shielded as to direct the light away from
adjacent properties. All site lighting shall meet the requirements of the
Michigan Mobile Home Commission Rules.



   L.   Site plan. In accordance with section 11, 12 and 13 of the
Mobile Home Commission Act, Public Act 96 of 1987, as amended, a person
desiring to develop a mobile home park shall submit a preliminary plan to the
Planning Department and Engineering Department for review and approval. The
preliminary plan shall include the location, layout, general design and a
general description of the project. The preliminary plan does not need to
include detailed construction plans.



SECTION 5.04.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this section,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards for each use:



   A.   All special approval land uses included in section 3.02,
subject to the specific requirements established for each use. Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 3, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04)



ARTICLE 6.  RM-1 AND RM-2 MULTIPLE FAMILY LOW RISE DISTRICTS



SECTION 6.00.  INTENT.



   The RM-1 and RM-2 multiple family residential districts (low rise) are
intended to provide a proper environment for families who live in low rise
multiple family dwellings. Such families typically are smaller in size than
those living in single family dwellings. The districts are designed to
furnish sites for various types of multiple family dwelling structures and
generally serve as a transition between nonresidential districts and lower
density one and two family residential districts. Both RM districts are
intended to encourage development which, though multiple in nature, is
complementary in character to one family development through the utilization
of lower density, some attached garages and limited dwelling units per
structure.



SECTION 6.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of
this ordinance:



   A.   Multiple family dwellings of a low rise type, including but not
limited to multiplexes, townhouses and apartments and duplexes;



   B.   Independent and limited assistance housing for the elderly,
subject to the following:



      1.   Only ranch type and/or apartment type dwellings or
rooming units shall be permitted;



      2.   The total area devoted to common areas shall equal not
less than 35 square feet for each dwelling unit. If a common dining area is
provided, the total area devoted to a dining room shall equal not less than
18 square feet for each seat.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 5, 6, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-N, § 7, 8-1-95; Ord. No.
278-R, § 3, 8-20-96)



SECTION 6.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses and others similar to those cited in this article
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Multiple family dwellings of a low rise type in excess of two
stories but not to exceed three stories and a maximum of 34 feet in height
may be permitted in the RM-2 district only, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   No residential structure in excess of two stories in the
proposed development shall be located closer than 150 feet to any one family
residential or R-2 zoning district;



      2.   The multiple family structure shall be screened from the
view of adjoining one family residential or R-2 zoning districts as provided
in section 24.01;



      3.   Independent and limited assisted housing for the elderly
in excess of two stories but not to exceed three stories and a maximum of 34
feet in height may be permitted subject to the following conditions:



         a.   Only apartment-type dwelling or rooming units shall
be permitted;



         b.   The total area devoted to common areas shall equal
not less than 35 square feet for each dwelling unit. The total area devoted
to a dining room shall equal not less than 18 square feet for each seat.



   B.   Churches, synagogues, mosques and places of worship, subject to
the following:



      1.   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in
this district may be permitted, provided front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of
building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Parking lot screening meeting the requirements for
moderate intensity impacts shall be provided as required in section 24.01;



      4.   Such facilities may include related community centers,
provided that such centers are limited to activities sponsored by church
members only. Said facilities shall not be used as catering halls;



      5.   All principal and accessory buildings, except for
accessory storage buildings such as a shed or detached garage, shall maintain
minimum rear and side yard setbacks of at least 50 feet.



   C.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings.



   D.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(1). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



   E.   Rehabilitation centers for the treatment and rehabilitation of
criminal offenders, chemical offenders or substance abuse, subject to the
following conditions:



      1.   All such facilities must be licensed and inspected by the
State of Michigan;



      2.   All centers shall be residential facilities providing 24
hour supervision, care and security on site;



      3.   The site shall have ingress and egress directly onto a
major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way width of at
least 120 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      4.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts (section 24.01), shall be provided adjacent to any areas
that abut property zoned or developed for residential purposes;



      5.   There shall be at least one parking space on site for
every two employees;



      6.   Adequate ingress and egress, parking and circulation
shall be provided on the site;



      7.   The facility shall provide adequate outdoor open space
and recreational area;



      8.   The site shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any single
family residential zone.



   F.   Full assisted housing for the elderly, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   All such facilities shall have ingress and egress from a
site directly onto a major or secondary throughfare having an existing or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      2.   There shall be provided at least 2,000 square feet of lot
area for each bed in the facility or for each person cared for in the
facility, whichever is greater;



      3.    No delivery areas or employee parking areas shall be
permitted within 100 feet of a single family residential zoning district;



      4.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate
intensity impacts of section 24.01, shall be provided adjacent to any areas
that abut property zoned or developed for single family residential purposes;



      5.   Such facilities may include multi-purpose recreational
rooms, kitchens  and meeting rooms. Such facilities may also include medical
examination rooms and limited space for ancillary services for the residents
of the facility, such as barber and beauty facilities;



      6.   Licensing shall be in accordance with the State of
Michigan and/or appropriate authority or jurisdiction.



   G.   Boarding houses.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 7, 8, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-N, §§ 8, 9, 8-1-95; Ord.
No. 278-U, § 4, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 4, 5, 5-16-00)



SECTION 6.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses shall be permitted:



   A.   Accessory building structures and uses, including community
garages, utility sheds and maintenance buildings, community buildings and
swimming pools not in excess of 60 feet in length which are part of the
multiple family project as regulated by section 28.00;



   B.   Amusement devices as regulated by section 28.01.



SECTION 6.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The following minimum gross site land area shall be provided
for each dwelling unit in each respective multiple family district:



 


 

Apartments

 

Multiplex and Townhouses




 

Elderly

 

Non Elderly



RM-1 District
 

Square Feet

 

Square Feet

 

Square Feet



1-bedroom
 
2,900
 
5,450
 
4,850


2-bedroom
 
3,100
 
5,800
 
5,100


3-bedroom
 
3,350
 
6,400
 
5,600



 



   In the RM-1 District, not more than eight dwelling units shall be
permitted per building. This density standard shall not apply to elderly
housing developments.



 


 

Apartments

 

Multiplex and Townhouses




 

Elderly

 

Non Elderly



RM-2 District
 

Square Feet

 

Square Feet

 

Square Feet



1-bedroom
 
2,175
 
4,100
 
3,800


2-bedroom
 
2,290
 
4,600
 
4,100


3-bedroom
 
2,420
 
5,100
 
4,600



 



   B.   The area used for computing dwelling unit density shall be the
total site exclusive of any existing public right-of-way of perimeter
bounding roads at the time of initial approval.



   C.   The following area, height and setbacks shall apply in each
respective district:



 

 
 
RM-1
 
RM-2


      1.   Maximum height of building:
 
 
 
 


         a.   In stories
 
2
 
2


         b.   In feet
 
30
 
30



 



      2.   Minimum yard setback in feet:



         a.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured
from the centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the
city's Master Road Plan, as follows:



 



               Distance from centerline
 
(in feet)


            (1)   Regional (204' R.O.W.)
 
152.


            (2)   Regional (150' R.O.W.)
 
125.


            (3)   Major
 
110.


            (4)   Secondary
 
93.


            (5)   Collector
 
70.


            (6)   Local
 
65.


            (7)   Cul-de-sac radius
 
95.


            (8)   Freeway
 
35.*


            (9)   Private roads
 
35.**




 



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement of common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 50 feet for secondary, major and regional
roads and one-half of the actual right-of-way plus 35 feet for all other
roads.



 

 
 
RM-1
 
RM-2


         b.   Side
 
35
 
35


         c.   Rear
 
35
 
35



 



   Also see paragraphs D and G below.



 

 
 
Efficiency
 
1-BR
 
2-BR
 
3-BR
 
4-BR


      3.   Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (in sq. ft.)
 
600
 
600
 
750
 
950
 
1,100


         Elderly (Independent)
 
525
 
580
 
700
 
- 
 
- 


         Elderly (Limited Assisted)
 
425
 
490
 
-
 
-
 
-


      4.   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%


            All elderly housing
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%



 



      5.   Plans presented which include a den, library or extra
room shall be counted as a bedroom for the purposes of this ordinance.



      6.   To encourage innovative, aesthetically pleasing building
arrangement, the minimum perimeter and interior yard spacing requirements may
be reduced by up to ten feet upon approval of the Planning Department,
provided where the yard space on one side of the building is reduced, the
yard space on the opposite side of the building is increased by the same
amount. (For example, if a front yard is reduced by ten feet, then the rear
yard shall be increased by ten feet.) This reduction shall not apply to those
perimeter yards abutting single family zoning districts or public roadways.



   D.   Except for two family dwellings, the minimum distance between
any two buildings shall be governed by the formula noted below, and in no
instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. The minimum distance
between two family dwelling structures shall be 20 feet.



S equals LA plus LB plus 2 (HA plus HB), divided by 6



or



S=LA+LB+2(HA+HB)



6



where:



   S   equals required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of
building "A" and any wall of building "B" or the vertical prolongation of
either.



   LA   equals total length of building "A." The total length of
building "A" is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of
building "A" from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building "A" will intersect any wall of building “B.”



   LB   equals total length of building "B." The total length of
building "B" is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of
building "B" from which, when viewed directly from the above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building "B" will intersect any wall of building "A."



   HA   equals height of building "A." The height of building "A" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "A." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



   HB   equals height of building "B." The height of building "B" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "B." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



   E.   The City Planner may modify the parking setback requirements
where uses of a nonresidential type (churches, schools, public facilities,
etc.) abut one another provided that in no instance shall the planner reduce
the parking setback to less than ten feet.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 9-11, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-F, §§ 1, 2, 8-8-90; Ord.
No. 278-G, § 1, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-N, §§ 10, 11, 8-1-95; Ord. No.
278-R, §§ 4, 5, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-X, § 2, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-JJ, §
3, 3-4-08)



SECTION 6.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to
sufficiently meet the anticipated needs of the residents of the development.
The minimum land area for recreation areas and developed facilities shall be
provided at the following rates exclusive of all required front yard
setbacks. Side and rear yard setback areas may be included if they serve as a
functional extension of a designated recreation area. These standards shall
not apply to elderly housing developments.



      Apartment:  500 square feet/dwelling unit.



      Multiplex:  400 square feet/dwelling unit.



      Townhouse  300 square feet/dwelling unit.



   In determining the adequacy of any proposed recreation areas and
facilities, the City Planner may consider the type of unit, the demographic
characteristics of anticipated residents and their recreation needs and the
proximity of nearby recreation facilities.



   Provision of separate adult and youth recreation is encouraged.
Recreation facilities generally shall be provided in a central location and
should be convenient to the community center. A location adjacent to the
community center is preferable for efficient construction, use and
maintenance of all facilities. In larger developments, however, recreation
facilities may be decentralized or part of an approved open space area plan.



   Natural features occurring on the site may be counted towards meeting
the open space requirement, provided that improvements are provided which
allow for the passive recreation usage of any such areas.



All recreation areas shall be clearly delineated on a site plan with said
land irrevocably reserved for this use. In phased development, a land
reservation and a cash deposit or letter of credit shall be required to
guarantee the completion of said improvements, if not completed in phase I.



   B.   Driveway approaches, but not driveways, shall be permitted in
the required front yards.



   C.   Front, side or rear yards for the project of not less than 50
feet shall be provided whenever such yard abuts on major or secondary
thoroughfares having a right-of-way width of 86 feet or more as indicated on
the Master Road Plan or abuts on a single family residential district,
subject to the provisions of section 6.04C6.



   D.   The maximum length of continuous and/or contiguous building
frontage shall not exceed 180 feet for non-elderly housing developments and
300 feet for elderly housing developments.



   E.   Parking shall not be permitted in the project front yard,
within 25 feet of any living area, or in tandem except parking may be allowed
in driveway approaches leading to individual garages where provided.



   F.   In the RM-1 District, at least one of the required parking
spaces per unit shall be provided in an attached enclosed garage. This
standard shall not apply to elderly housing developments.



   G.   In addition to the parking required under section 23.02, an
area of hard-surfaced parking with stalls of minimum size 10 feet by 25 feet
shall be provided for the storage of boats, trailers and recreational
vehicles. There shall be at least one parking space provided for every ten
dwelling units which shall be adequately fenced, locked or secured and
visually buffered, meeting the requirements for moderate intensity impacts as
specified in section 24.01. Such parking shall be collective and in a central
location. In no case, however, shall a recreation vehicle be parked or stored
closer than 30 feet to any building or 100 feet to site boundary line.
Parking for recreational vehicles shall not be required in those instances
where said parking/storage is prohibited within the development. Such
prohibition shall be incorporated into a legally recordable document that
runs with the land.



   H.   No roadway within a multiple family development shall extend
more than 400 feet without a curve, turn or stopped intersection.



   I.   Parking areas and active use recreational areas shall be
effectively screened from abutting one family development as provided in
section 24.01.



   J.   All units shall be provided with an opportunity for access to
cable television with emergency alert or override system capabilities.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 3, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-N, § 12, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 278-T,
§ 2, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-CC, § 2, 6-3-03)



ARTICLE 7.  RM-3 MULTIPLE FAMILY MID AND HIGH RISE DISTRICTS



SECTION 7.00.  INTENT.



   The RM-3 Multiple Family Residential District is intended to serve the
residential needs of families and single persons desiring greater density,
apartment-type of accommodation with central services, as opposed to the
residential pattern found in one and two family and low rise multiple family
districts. The RM-3 District will provide sites for multiple dwelling
structures adjacent to high traffic generators usually found in areas of
large nonresidential development and sectors abutting major thoroughfares.
The district is further designed to provide a zone of transition between high
traffic generators and other residential districts.



SECTION 7.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of
this ordinance:



   A.   Multiple family dwellings of a low rise type, including but not
limited to multiplexes, townhouses and apartments as regulated in the RM-2
district;



   B.   Multiple family dwellings at greater density, subject to the
following:



      1.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare, having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      2.   The site shall be developed so as to service only the
residents of the multiple family development and any accessory buildings,
uses or services shall be solely for the use of residents. Uses considered
herein as accessory uses include: parking structures, swimming pools,
recreation areas, pavilions, cabanas and other similar uses;



   C.   Independent and limited assisted housing for the elderly,
subject to the following:



      1.   Only ranch-type and/or apartment-type dwelling or rooming
units shall be permitted;



      2.   The total area devoted to common areas shall equal not
less than 35 square feet for each dwelling unit. The total area devoted to a
dining room shall equal not less than 18 square feet for each seat.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 12, 13, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-N, § 13, 8-1-95; Ord.
No. 278-R, § 6, 8-20-96)



SECTION 7.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses and others similar to those cited in this article
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use.



   A.   Churches, synagogues, mosques and places of worship, subject to
the following:



      1.   Buildings of greater than the maximum height allowed in
this district may be permitted, provided front, side and rear yards are
increased above the minimum required yards by one foot for each foot of
building height that exceeds the maximum height allowed;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way width of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Parking lot screening meeting the requirements for
moderate intensity impacts shall be provided as required in section 24.01;



      4.   Such facilities may include related community centers,
provided that such centers are limited to activities sponsored by church
members only. Such facilities shall not be used as catering halls;



      5.   All buildings shall maintain minimum rear and side yard
setbacks of at least 50 feet.



   B.   Business and service uses located within a high or mid rise
apartment building for the convenience of its occupants, including news,
tobacco or candy stands, personal service shops, restaurants, delicatessens
and similar shops as may be appropriate from those permitted in the C-1 Local
Convenience Business District, subject to the following:



      1.   At least 100 dwelling units shall be contained within the
high or mid rise building or group of buildings on the site;



      2.   All such incidental business and service uses shall be
located within the interior of the building, totally obscured from any
exterior view, with no part thereof accessible to the general public or to
tenants from any public or private street, sidewalk or walkway;



      3.   No sign or window display for such business or service
uses shall be visible from a sidewalk, street or public or private way;



      4.   Such business or service uses shall cover an area not in
excess of 50% of the total area of the first story; not in excess of 25% of
the story immediately above the first story; and shall be prohibited on all
other floors. Such uses shall not be permitted on the same story or floor as
residential uses unless separated by a firewall.



   C.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings.



   D.   Public utilities as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 6, 5-16-00)



SECTION 7.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses shall be permitted:



   A.   Accessory building structures and uses, including community
garages, utility sheds and maintenance buildings, community buildings and
swimming pools not in excess of 60 feet in length which are part of the
multiple family project as regulated by section 28.00;



   B.   Amusement devices as regulated by section 28.01.



SECTION 7.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The following minimum site area in square feet shall be
required per dwelling unit for each multiple family unit type:



 


 

Apartment or Other
(in square feet)



Efficiency
 

900



1 Bedroom
 

1,200



2 Bedroom
 

1,800



3 Bedroom
 

2,400




 



   B.   The area used for computing density shall be the total site
exclusive of any public right-of-way of perimeter bounding roads.



   C.   The following area and height shall apply:



      1.   Maximum height of building:



         a.   In stories:  None.



         b.   In feet:  None.



      2.   Minimum yard setback in feet:



         a.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured
from the centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the
city's Master Road Plan, as specified in the following schedule, plus the
height of the building:



            Distance from centerline:



 



            (1)   Regional (204' R.O.W.)
 
102 feet + height of building.


            (2)   Regional (150' R.O.W.)
 
75 feet + height of building.


            (3)   Major
 
60 feet + height of building.


            (4)   Secondary
 
43 feet + height of building.


            (5)   Collector
 
35 feet + height of building.


            (6)   Local
 
30 feet + height of building.


            (7)   Cul-de-sac radius
 
60 foot radius + height of building.


            (8)   Freeway
 
Height of building.*


            (9)   Private roads
 
Height of building.**




 



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement of common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus the height of the building for all classes of
roads. Parking may be permitted to occupy a portion of the required front
yard setback, provided it does not encroach into the first 50 feet of the
project front yard.



         b.   Side:



            (1)   Least one:  See paragraph (D).



            (2)   Total of two:  See paragraph (D).



         c.   Rear:  See paragraph (D).



 

 
 
Efficiency
 
1-BR
 
2-BR
 
3-BR
 
4-BR


      3.   Minimum square feet floor area per dwelling unit
 
600
 
600
 
700
 
900
 
1,100


            Elderly (independent)
 
525
 
580
 
700
 
-
 
-


            Elderly (limited assisted)
 
425
 
490
 
-
 
-
 
-


      4.   Maximum lot coverage by all buildings
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%
 
30%



 



      5.   Plans presented which include a den, library or extra
room shall be counted as a bedroom for the purpose of this ordinance.



   D.   The minimum project yards shall be equal to the height of the
building, but in no instance shall any project yard setback be less than 50
feet. The minimum distance between any two buildings shall be regulated
according to the length and height of such buildings and in no instance shall
this distance be less than 30 feet. The formula regulating the required
minimum distance between two buildings is as follows:



S equals LA plus LB plus 2 (HA plus HB), divided by 6



or



S=LA+LB+2(HA+HB)



6



where:



   S   equals required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of
building "A" and any wall of building “B” or the vertical prolongation of
either.



   LA   equals total length of building "A." The total length of
building "A” is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls
of building "A" from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building "A" will intersect any wall of building “B.”



   LB   equals total length of building "B." The total length of
building "B" is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of
building "B" from which, when viewed directly from the above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building "B" will intersect any wall of building "A."



   HA   equals height of building "A." The height of building "A" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "A." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



   HB   equals height of building "B.” The height of building "B" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "B." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



   E.   The City Planner may modify the parking setback requirements
where uses of a nonresidential type (churches, schools, public facilities,
etc.) abut one another, provided that in no instance shall the planner reduce
the parking setback to less than ten feet.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 14, 15, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-F, § 4, 8-8-90; Ord. No.
278-G, § 2, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-R, § 7, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-X, § 3,
4-6-99)



SECTION 7.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Recreation areas and facilities shall be provided to
sufficiently meet the anticipated needs of the residents of the development.
The minimum land area for recreation areas and developed facilities shall be
provided at the following rates exclusive of all required front yard
setbacks. Side and rear yard setback areas may be included if they serve a
functional extension of a designated recreation area.



      Apartment:  500 square feet/dwelling unit.



      Multiplex:  400 square feet/dwelling unit.



      Townhouse:  300 square feet/dwelling unit.



   In determining the adequacy of any proposed recreation areas and
facilities, the City Planner may consider the type of unit, the demographic
characteristics of anticipated residents and their recreation needs and the
proximity of nearby recreation facilities.



   Provision of separate adult and youth recreation areas is encouraged.
Recreation facilities generally shall be provided in a central location and
should be convenient to the community center. A location adjacent to the
community center is preferable for efficient construction, use and
maintenance of all facilities. In larger developments, however, recreation
facilities may be decentralized or part of an approved open space area plan.



   Natural features occurring on the site may be counted towards meeting
the open space requirement, provided that improvements are provided which
allow for the passive recreation usage of any such areas.



All recreation areas shall be clearly delineated on a site plan with said
land irrevocably reserved for this use. In phased development, a land
reservation and a cash deposit or letter of credit shall be required to
guarantee the completion of said improvements, if not completed in phase I.



   B.   Driveway approaches, but not driveways, shall be permitted in
the required front yards.



   C.   Parking shall not be permitted in the first 50 feet of the
project front yard or within 25 feet of any building. Parking shall be
permitted in 50% of the required project side and rear yards but not closer
than 25 feet to the building unless enclosed in a garage. Parking in tandem
is prohibited, except parking may be allowed in driveway approaches leading
to individual garages where provided.



   D.   In addition to the parking required under section 23.02, an
area of hard-surfaced parking with stalls of minimum size ten feet by 25 feet
shall be provided for the storage of boats, trailers and recreational
vehicles. There shall be at least one parking space provided for every ten
dwelling units which shall be adequately fenced, locked or secured and
visually buffered. Such parking shall be collective and in a central
location. In no case, however, shall a recreation vehicle be parked or stored
closer than 30 feet to any building or 100 feet to site boundary line.



   Parking for recreational vehicles shall not be required in those
instances where said parking/storage is prohibited within the development.
Such prohibition shall be incorporated into a legally recordable document
that runs with the land.



   E.   No roadway within the multiple family development shall extend
more than 400 feet without a curve, turn or stopped intersection.



   F.   Parking areas and active use recreational areas shall be
effectively screened from abutting one family development as provided in
section 24.01.



   G.   All units shall be provided with an opportunity for access to
cable television with emergency alert or override system capabilities.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 5, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-R, § 8, 8-20-96)



ARTICLE 8.  O-1 BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE DISTRICT



SECTION 8.00.  INTENT.



   The O-1 Business and Professional Office District is designed to
provide a suitable environment for various types of office uses performing
administrative, professional and related service occupations. This district
is also intended to provide a transition or buffer between more intense uses
and/or major thoroughfares and abutting single family residential
neighborhoods.



SECTION 8.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business shall
be conducted within a completely enclosed building and shall not include
drive-through facilities:



   A.   Executive and administrative offices;



   B.   Medical and dental offices and clinics, but excluding
veterinary offices, clinics and kennels;



   C.   Professional occupations, including attorneys, accountants,
architects, professional engineers, community planners, landscape architects,
land surveyors and similar professional occupations;



   D.   Business offices for advertising, insurance and real estate
agencies and public utilities;



   E.   Financial institutions, including banks, savings and loan
associations and credit unions;



   F.   Offices of organizations offering stenographic, mailing, tax
services, credit reporting and other business services;



   G.   Offices of nonprofit groups, including professional
organizations, labor unions, civic, fraternal, political and religious
organizations, but not including rooms for social, assembly or worship
activities, rental halls or churches;



   H.   Office uses similar to the above and demonstrated to be of a
business or professional nature, as determined by the Zoning Official;



   I.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   J.   Uses similar to those above and demonstrated to be of a
business or professional nature as determined by the Zoning Official.



SECTION 8.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use.



   A.   Uses customarily related to medical and dental offices,
including pharmacies, laboratories and stores offering supportive or
corrective garments and prosthetic appliances, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   The use shall be located within the same building as the
principal medical facility that it is intended to serve;



      2.   All customer entrances shall be restricted to the inside
of the building;



      3.   No advertising or public displays shall be visible from a
public thoroughfare;



      4.   Outdoor storage of goods and the warehousing or indoor
storage of goods beyond that normally incidental to the above use is
prohibited.



   B.   Child and adult day care centers and nursery schools, subject
to the following conditions:



      1.   Adequate and safe drop-off and pick-up areas shall be
provided on site;



      2.   The parcel upon which the facility is located shall
contain at least 300 square feet of land area per person attending the
facility, with a minimum parcel size of 15,000 square feet;



      3.   For child care centers and nursery schools, a minimum
area of 5,000 square feet of outdoor play space for children shall be
provided in a safe, convenient and accessible location fenced by a six foot
high fence, with screening with plantings from any adjoining nonresidential
district;



      4.   Maximum lot coverage of all structures shall not exceed
30%;



      5.   Such use shall not abut a one family residential zoning
district on more than two sides.



   C.   Drive-through facilities compatible with any of the permitted
uses listed in section 8.01, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   No drive-through lanes shall be located closer than 20
feet to any residential lot line;



      2.   Adequate stacking shall be provided for each
drive-through lane as required in section 23.01. No stacking lane shall tend
to obstruct parking or vehicular circulation areas;



      3.   Devices for electronically amplifying voices shall be
directed or muffled to prevent any noise from being audible at the lot line;



      4.   Canopies over drive-through lanes shall be a minimum of
14 feet in height or shall be located in such a manner that a driveway of no
less than 20 feet in width, unobstructed by the canopy, shall be provided to
assure emergency vehicle access.



   D.   Full assisted housing, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All such facilities shall have ingress and egress from a
site directly onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or
planned right-of-way of at least 86 feet, as indicated on the Master Road
Plan;



      2.   There shall be provided at least 1,000 square feet of lot
area per bed;



      3.   Licensing shall be in accordance with the State of
Michigan and/or appropriate authority or jurisdiction.



   E.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18



(Ord. No. 278-T, §§ 3, 4, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-U, §§ 5, 6, 1-6-98; Ord.
No. 278-Y, §§ 7, 8, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-BB, § 1, 12-18-01)



SECTION 8.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 8.01 and 8.02 are permitted. Amusement
devices shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of section 28.01.



SECTION 8.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Area:  12,000 square feet.



      2.   Width:  80 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  1.



      2.   In feet:  25.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  800 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline (in feet):



            a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137.



            b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110.



            c.   Major:  95.



            d.   Secondary:  78.



            e.   Collector:  70.



            f.   Local:  65.



            g.   Cul-de-sac:  95.



            h.   Freeway:  35.*



            i.   Private roads:  35.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard setback.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Side: 5 feet.  Where the wall of a structure faces
interior side lot lines and contains windows or other openings, a side yard
of not less than 20 feet shall be provided. No building shall be located
closer than 35 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district
when the property line abuts any residential district. A suitable 20-foot
wide access drive shall be provided to the rear yard.



      3.   Rear: 20 feet. No building shall be located closer than
35 feet to the outer perimeter property line of such district when the
property line abuts any residential zoning district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening
and off-street parking and loading.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 16, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 9, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-CC, § 3, 6-3-03)



SECTION 8.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (section 24.02)
approved by the Planning Department and so maintained in an attractive
condition.



   C.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side line abutting a side street) without first obtaining approval
of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the building
and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established building to
determine whether the building or use is of such location, size and character
to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the balance
of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent uses, does not
create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is aesthetically compatible
with the buildings and uses located upon the site. Landscaping plans, site
plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters) and elevations of all
sides of any building to be constructed shall be submitted to enable the
Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed additional building
and/or use conforms with the requirements of this section. All dumpsters
shall be screened from visibility from any area visible to the public by use
of a wall constructed of the same material as the building walls to ensure
aesthetic compatibility. In reviewing this request, the Planning Commission
shall apply the standards contained herein and in section 25.02 and may
impose reasonable conditions as authorized by section 25.03(D) to ensure that
the standards are satisfied.



   D.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04).



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 17, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 1, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 9.  O-2 PLANNED OFFICE DISTRICT



SECTION 9.00.  INTENT.



   The purpose of the O-2 district is to accommodate the development of
larger scale office buildings or office building complexes or other
institutional or public service uses of an intensity that is normally greater
than what is permitted in the O-1 district. The O-2 district is intended to
be applied to larger parcels that have direct access to major thoroughfares.
Offices within this district are intended to be developed as a planned or
integrated cluster of establishments served by consolidated driveways and
parking areas as well as unified architecture and landscaping features.



SECTION 9.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all businesses
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building:



   A.   Any one or more of the permitted uses in section 8.01 of the
O-1 district, except as otherwise provided herein;



   B.   Any one or more of the special approval land uses specified in
section 8.02 of the O-1 District, as regulated in the O-1 District, but not
requiring Planning Commission approval;



   C.   Office uses which, by their nature, are more intense and of a
scale larger than that permitted in the O-1 District;



   D.   Retail businesses normally associated with, and complementary
to, office districts, i.e., stationery shops, office supplies and office
equipment;



   E.   Uses similar to those above, as determined by the Zoning
Official.



SECTION 9.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses and others similar to those cited in this article
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards of imposed for each.



   A.   General hospitals, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites
consisting of at least ten acres in area and providing a minimum of 1,500
square feet of lot area per bed;



      2.   All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way width of
at least 120 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   Ambulance delivery and service areas, when visible from
adjacent land zoned for residential purposes, shall be obscured from view by
a wall at least six feet in height;



      4.   The minimum distance between any structure and a property
line shall be 75 feet;



      5.   Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%.



   B.   Colleges, universities and other similar institutions of higher
learning, public and private, offering courses in general, technical or
religious education, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Any use permitted herein shall be developed on sites of
at least 15 acres in area;



      2.   All ingress to and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way width of
at least 120 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      3.   No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any property
line when said property line abuts or is adjacent to land zoned for
residential purposes;



      4.   The site shall consist of a minimum area of 400 square
feet per pupil.



   C.   Private, noncommercial recreation areas, nonprofit swimming
pool clubs, institutional or community recreation centers, subject to the
following conditions:



      1.   Any use permitted herein shall not be permitted on a lot
or group of lots of record, except in those instances wherein 100% of the
owners of property immediately abutting and 65% of the owners of property
within 300 feet of any property line of the site herein proposed for
development shall sign a petition indicating concurrence with said site;



      2.   Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 50 feet in
width and shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs and grass;



      3.   Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%;



      4.   Whenever a swimming pool is constructed, said pool area
shall be surrounded with a protective fence six feet in height, and entry
shall be provided by means of a controlled gate.



   D.   Private clubs, fraternal organizations, lodge halls, cultural
centers and union halls, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All such uses shall have ingress and egress directly onto
a major thoroughfare having an existing or planned right-of-way width of at
least 120 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan;



      2.   All activities, other than parking of motor vehicles and
loading and unloading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed
building, except for outdoor activity specifically approved and/or licensed
by the City Council;



      3.   No building shall be closer than 50 feet to any property
line;



      4.   Maximum lot coverage shall not exceed 30%;



      5.   No such uses shall abut an existing residential district
on more than one side.



   E.   Restaurants, when incidental in size to the principal office
uses included on the site, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Adequate ventilation shall be provided to ensure that any
odors associated with any food preparation will be confined to the site so as
not to create a nuisance for any adjoining parcels. Evidence of the type and
adequacy of any such ventilation system shall be provided and approved by the
City of Sterling Heights Building Department and the Macomb County Health
Department;



      2.   All restaurants shall be located in an existing office
building and shall not be permitted as a freestanding building;



      3.   The site shall be located on a major thoroughfare with at
least 120 feet of right-of-way, existing or proposed.



   F.   Establishments relating to the trade, investment, sale or
appraisal of precious metals, precious stones, jewelry, coins, stamps, rare
books and paintings, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The use shall be located in the office building with
access from a common corridor within the building;



      2.   The use shall be located entirely within a building
containing other business and/or professional offices. The total floor area
devoted to such uses shall not exceed 40% of the total usable floor area of
the entire building;



      3.   No more than 2,000 square feet of the total usable floor
area of the office building shall be devoted to such uses;



      4.   No advertising or display for such business or use shall
be visible from a public thoroughfare or sidewalk;



      5.   No sign shall be visible from a public thoroughfare or
sidewalk, except one wall sign for identification purposes;



      6.   Temporary use of the premises by transient dealers or
traders shall be prohibited.



   G.   Mortuaries, not including crematories, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   Sufficient off-street automobile parking and assembly
area is provided for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession. The
assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street
parking area;



      2.   The site shall be located so as to have one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-of-way, existing
or proposed;



      3.   Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided to said
major thoroughfare;



      4.   Loading and unloading area used by ambulances, hearses or
other such service vehicles shall be obscured from all residential view by a
wall six feet in height.



   H.   Fully assisted housing, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All such facilities shall ingress and egress from a site
directly onto a major or secondary thoroughfare having an existing or planned
right-of-way of at least 86 feet as indicated on the Master Road Plan or a
private road of at least four lanes which serves as a secondary thoroughfare;



      2.   All such facilities shall be developed only on sites
consisting of at least five acres in area;



      3.   There shall be provided at least 1,000 square feet of lot
area per bed;



      4.   Licensing shall be in accordance with the State of
Michigan and/or appropriate authority or jurisdiction.



   I.   Office developments in excess of two stories in height, but not
exceeding three stories and a maximum of 40 feet in height, may be permitted
in the O-2 district only, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   No office structure in excess of two stories in the
proposed development shall be located closer than 100 feet to any residential
zone district.



      2.   The use shall have ingress and egress directly onto a
major thoroughfare having an existing or proposed right-of-way of at least
120 feet as indicated on the master road plan.



   J.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-T, § 5, 6-3-97; Ord No. 278-Y, §§ 10, 11, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-BB, § 2, 12-18-01)



SECTION 9.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 9.01 and 9.02 are permitted. Amusement
devices shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of section 28.01.



SECTION 9.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot:



      1.   Area:  1 acre.



      2.   Width:  100 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  2.



      2.   In feet:  30.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  5,000 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline (in feet):



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  131.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110.



         c.   Major:  95.



         d.   Secondary:  78.



         e.   Collector:  70.



         f.   Local:  65.



         g.   Cul-de-sac radius:  95.



         h.   Freeway:  35.*



         i.   Private roads:  35.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   Where the majority of lots are located in a commercially platted
subdivision, the lots abut private roads and/or public roads with a
right-of-way equal to or less than 86 feet as shown on the Master Road Plan
and adequate access to the building for fire fighting and emergency equipment
is available, parking shall be permitted to encroach not more than 20 feet
into the required front yard setback measured from the required front
building setback line. The required front yard shall be landscaped and
maintained thereafter in a neat and orderly fashion.



   If existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master Road
Plan, the front yard setback (or street side setback) as measured from the
centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Side:  25 feet. Where a lot line abuts a side street,
that street yard setback shall be the same as the front yard required for the
use fronting on the street adjacent to said property. No building shall be
located closer than 50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such
district when such property line abuts any residential zoning district.



      3.   Rear:  40 feet. No building shall be located closer than
75 feet to the outer perimeter property line when such property line abuts
any residential zoning district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening
and off-street parking and loading.



(Ord. No. 278-E, § 4, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 278-G, § 3, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-P,
§ 1, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-U, § 7, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 12, 5-16-00)



SECTION 9.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (section 24.02)
approved by the Planning Department and so maintained in an attractive
condition.



   C.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. All dumpsters shall be screened from visibility from any area
visible to the public by use of a wall constructed of the same material as
the building walls to ensure aesthetic compatibility. In reviewing this
request, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards contained herein
and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable conditions as authorized by
section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are satisfied.



   D.   Roof mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site. (Section 24.04)



   E.   The distance of the closest point between any two buildings
shall not be less than 30 feet.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 18, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 2, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 10.  O-3 HIGH-RISE OFFICE COMMERCIAL SERVICE



SECTION 10.00.  INTENT.



   The High Rise Office Commercial Service (O-3) District is designed and
intended to provide and accommodate various types of office uses performing
administrative, professional, personal and technical services. This intense
land use, with typically large office buildings of greater height than
normally found in other areas of the city, is intended to provide compatible
and similar scale development, ancillary to commercial development. This
district is specifically intended to discourage commercial establishments of
a retail nature or other activities which require constant short-term parking
and traffic from the general public, but is intended to permit those
businesses which are required to serve the normal daily needs of the
occupants of the permitted primary uses. The High Rise Office Service
District is designed to provide a site for high density office structures
adjacent to major thoroughfares and in planned relationship to other large
scale development.



SECTION 10.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all businesses
shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building:



   A.   Any one or more of the permitted uses in section 9.01 of the
O-2 district, excluding mortuaries and funeral homes;



   B.   Photographic studios, artist studios and interior decorating
studios;



   C.   Studios for professional work or teaching of interior
decorating, photography, music, drama or dancing;



   D.   Data processing and computer centers, but not including service
and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment;



   E.   Office uses similar to the above and demonstrated to be of a
business or professional nature, as determined by the Zoning Official;



   F.   Hotels and motels (more than three stories).



SECTION 10.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use.



   A.   Restaurants and lounges serving food, beverages or both,
subject to the following:



      1.   The use shall not have drive-in, drive-through or in-car
service. Take-out service may be permitted, provided it is a minor part of
the restaurant service (40% or less of total sales);



      2.   The use shall be located within a high rise building or a
freestanding, one or two story building meeting the following requirements:



         a.   The building shall be designed to be an integral
part of, or as a compatible accessory use to, an existing or proposed high
rise office-commercial service development. The exterior appearance shall be
compatible and in harmony with the surrounding development;



         b.   The layout of the proposed use shall be designed to
encourage pedestrian traffic from the O-3 development and nearby commercial
uses;



         c.   No independent structure of less than 5,000 square
feet shall be permitted;



         d.   No freestanding restaurant shall be located within
500 feet of an existing freestanding restaurant, except if such uses are
separated by a street or public thoroughfare of not less than 120 feet of
right-of-way.



   B.   Essential services needed to service the immediate vicinity,
subject to the following condition:



      1.   All such facilities shall be located in an enclosed
building constructed of masonry or other fire-resistant materials. The
exterior finish of any such building shall be complementary in style to the
principal buildings and shall be of uniform finish on all sides of its
exterior.



   C.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 13, 5-16-00)



SECTION 10.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted
uses, such as service for employees and other persons normally associated
with the permitted uses, such as coffee shops, pharmacy, barber or beauty
shops, tobacco shops, newsstands, parking structures and post offices are
permitted within the high rise structures.



   Amusement devices shall be permitted, subject to the requirements of
section 28.01.



SECTION 10.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:  None.



   B.   Minimum building height (except restaurants and



      utility buildings):



      1.   Stories:  3.



      2.   Feet:  35.



   C.   Maximum building height:  None.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan as specified in the following schedule, plus the height of
the building:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  177 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  150 feet.



         c.   Major:  135 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  118 feet.



         e.   Collector:  110 feet.



         f.   Local:  105 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  135 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  76 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  75 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   Parking may be permitted to occupy a portion of the front yard setback,
provided it does not exceed a distance of 40 feet measured from the front
building setback as specified in D.1. above.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 75 feet for all classes of roads.



   E.   Side:  20 feet, plus the height of each level of the building
which exceeds 35 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level
to the property line. Side yards abutting any residential district shall
provide a setback of 50 feet, plus the height of the building which exceeds
35 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level to the
property line.



   F.   Rear:  30 feet, plus the height of each level of the building
which exceeds 35 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level
to the property line. Rear yards abutting any residential district shall
provide a setback of 50 feet, plus the height of the building which exceeds
35 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level to the
property line.



   G.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage including
accessory buildings shall not exceed 35%.



   H.   Distance between buildings: the minimum distance between
buildings shall be equal to one-half the total height of each building.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 19, 4-17-90)



SECTION 10.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveways and
building shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (section 24.02)
approved by the Planning Commission.



   B.   Screening, meeting the requirements for moderate intensity
impacts (section 24.01), shall be provided on those sides of the property
used for parking or service drives, loading or unloading or servicing and
abutting land zoned for residential use.



   C.   Landscaped areas shall not be less than 10% of the total site
(section 24.02).



   D.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the building and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. All dumpsters shall be screened from visibility from any area
visible to the public by use of a wall constructed of the same material as
the building walls to ensure aesthetic compatibility. In reviewing this
request, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards contained herein
and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable conditions as authorized by
section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are satisfied.



   E.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04).



   F.   Limited display of goods for sale and visible from the interior
only is permitted.



   G.   The required side and rear yards may be used for off-street
parking and loading, provided adequate access to the rear of the building for
firefighting and emergency equipment is provided.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 20, 4-17-90)



SECTION 10.06.  SPECIFIC PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Since the intent of this district is to encourage high rise office
development and to permit selected ancillary commercial enterprise which will
serve the daily needs of the office workers, there will be less parking
demand than if each use were estimated separately. Also, to encourage the
high rise development and to limit the parking requirements of those
necessary to serve these uses, specific parking requirements are established
for the O-3 district. These standards are included in section 23.01.



ARTICLE 11.  C-1 LOCAL CONVENIENCE BUSINESS DISTRICT



SECTION 11.00.  INTENT.



   The C-1 Local Convenience Business District is designated to meet the
day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in
adjacent residential areas. Protection of nearby residential districts is
considered of importance; thus, businesses which tend to be a nuisance to
immediately surrounding residential areas are excluded, even though the goods
sold or services offered might fall within the convenience classification.



   It is further the intent of this district to provide these goods and
services in a physical setting that is compatible with surrounding
residential neighborhoods and which are of a neighborhood size and character.
Whenever possible, local convenience business districts should be developed
with consolidated site features to provide for a continuity of appearance and
function and to minimize any negative impacts on nearby residential
neighborhoods or the city’s thoroughfare system. A more intense use, such
as a supermarket, shall be permitted in this district only if: (1) the goods
and services offered from within the use are limited to those which are
permissible under the permitted uses of that district; and (2) the proposed
use primarily serves the convenience needs of the immediately surrounding
residential areas rather than satisfying the convenience and comparison
shopping needs of a broader market area.



(Ord. No. 278-0, § 1, 9-5-95)



SECTION 11.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following retail and service uses shall be permitted, provided that
all business, servicing or processing (except for off-street parking or
loading) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building, and all
goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on the same premises:



   A.   Any one or more of the permitted uses in section 8.01 of the
O-1 District, except as otherwise provided herein;



   B.   Hardware store;



   C.   Paint, wallpaper and window treatment stores;



   D.   Grocery stores;



   E.   Meat and fish markets;



   F.   Fruit and vegetable markets;



   G.   Candy, nut and confectionery store;



   H.   Retail bakery;



   I.   Drugstore and proprietary store;



   J.   Beauty shop;



   K.   Barber shop;



   L.   Shoe repair shop;



   M.   Miscellaneous repair services only limited to:



      1.   Radio, television and VCR repair;



      2.   Stereophonic repair;



      3.   Small appliance repair;



      4.   Watch, clock and jewelry repair;



      5.   Locksmith;



      6.   Tailors;



   N.   Video tape rental;



   O.   Dry cleaning pick-up services only;



   P.   Miscellaneous personal services:



      1.   Toning and tanning salons;



      2.   Diet workshops;



      3.   Quilting for individuals;



   Q.   The following miscellaneous retail stores:



      1.   Liquor store;



      2.   Bookstore, excluding adult bookstores;



      3.   Stationery store;



      4.   Jewelry store;



      5.   Hobby, toy and games shop;



      6.   Camera and photographic supplies;



      7.   Gift, novelty and souvenir shop;



      8.   Florist;



      9.   Tobacco store;



      10.   Sewing, needlework and piece goods store;



      11.   Pet supplies store (excluding the sale of pets);



      12.   Home decorating and accessory stores;



      13.   Cellular telephone and pager stores (no on-premises
installation);



   R.   Dance studios, martial arts schools and similar forms of
activities, provided that the total useable floor area shall not exceed 5,000
square feet;



   S.   Apparel and accessory stores (excluding re-sale and second hand
stores);



   T.   Supermarkets subject to the following:



      1.   The site’s gross floor area shall not be in excess of
60,000 square feet;



      2.   The site shall be located on a major thoroughfare having
a right-of-way equal to or greater than 120 feet, as specified on the Master
Road Plan;



      3.   The site shall have a minimum depth of 550 feet and shall
contain at least four acres;



   U.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   V.   Other convenience commercial uses of a similar character as
determined by the Zoning Official.



   Outdoor storage and display of merchandise is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 278-E, §§ 5, 6, 7, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 278-0, § 2, 9-5-95; Ord. No.
278-DD, § 1, 7-6-04)



SECTION 11.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses and others similar to those cited in this article
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use.



   A.   Veterinary offices or clinics providing medical, surgical and
grooming facilities for small nonfarm animals, subject to the following:



      1.   The incidental boarding of animals for the limited time
period immediately before and after the furnishing of medical, surgical or
grooming services allowed under this section 11.02A. shall be permitted as an
accessory use;



      2.   All facilities shall be completely enclosed within a
freestanding building or corner tenant space in such a manner as to produce
no offensive odor or audible sound at the lot line;



      3.   An adequate, enclosed method of refuse storage and
disposal shall be maintained so that no public nuisance shall be created at
any time;



      4.   The site shall be located so as to have one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-of-way, existing
or proposed.



   B.   Child and adult day care centers and nursery schools, subject
to the following conditions:



      1.   Such use shall not abut a one family residential zoning
district on more than one side;



      2.   The parcel upon which the facility is located shall
contain at least 300 square feet of land area per person attending the
facility, with a minimum parcel size of 15,000 square feet;



      3.   For child care centers and nursery schools, a minimum
area of 5,000 square feet of play space for children shall be provided in an
accessible, convenient and safe location which is fenced by a six foot high
fence, with screening with plantings from any adjoining nonresidential
district;



      4.   Maximum lot coverage of all structures shall not exceed
30%.



   C.   Gasoline self-service stations (only on sites where a gasoline
service station has existed as a lawful nonconforming use), subject to the
following:



      1.   The site for the gasoline self-service station shall have
150 feet of frontage on the principal street serving the station;



      2.   The site shall contain an area of not less than 21,000
square feet;



      3.   All buildings shall observe front or street-side setbacks
as specified in section 11.04, area, height and bulk requirements, plus 15
feet;



      4.   In order to facilitate safe pedestrian circulation and
safety, no parking or standing of customer vehicles shall be permitted in the
area immediately adjacent to any customer entrance or payment window;



      5.   Curbs, curb cuts, driveway widths and acceleration or
deceleration lanes shall meet the requirements of the City of Sterling
Heights or other agencies having jurisdiction thereof;



      6.   Pump islands used for the sale or distribution of
petroleum products and service lanes shall observe the front or street-side
setback requirements as specified in section 11.04, area, height and bulk
requirements. Service lanes in which automobiles are temporarily parked shall
be no less than 12 feet in width;



      7.   Canopies used to shelter pump islands and adjacent
service lanes shall be required, provided such canopies do not encroach into
the required front yard, and provided further that such canopies shall have a
minimum height of 14 feet and be located to ensure clearance for and access
to the site by firefighting equipment.



   D.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, subject to the
following conditions:



      1.   Such use shall be limited to serving customers of the
specific establishment only and shall not be used to service other pick-up
stations;



      2.   The total usable floor area of the use shall not exceed
1,800 square feet;



      3.   The operation and all materials and processes used in the
dry cleaning business shall be nonflammable and shall be conducted in
accordance with all applicable statutes, rules, regulations and standards
established by any federal, state or local government or authority;



      4.   Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided from a
major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-of-way, as indicated in the
Master Road Plan.



   E.   Carry-out restaurants (excluding drive-through facilities),
subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Adequate ventilation shall be provided to ensure that any
odors associated with any food preparation will be confined to the site so as
not to create a nuisance for any adjoining residential parcels. All such
ventilation systems shall be maintained in good working order at all times;



      2.   Evidence of the type and adequacy of any such ventilation
system shall be provided and approved by the Sterling Heights Building
Department and the Macomb County Health Department;



      3.   Side and rear yard setbacks for restaurants may be
increased when adjacent to residential zoning districts.



   F.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



   G.   Restaurants (excluding fast food restaurants and drive-through
facilities), subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The total usable floor area of the restaurant shall not
exceed 5,000 square feet;



      2.   Adequate ventilation shall be provided to ensure that any
odors associated with any food preparation will be confined to the site so as
not to create a nuisance for any adjoining residential uses. All such
ventilation systems shall be maintained in good working order at all times;



      3.   Evidence of the type and adequacy of the ventilation
system shall be provided and approved by the Sterling Heights Building
Department and the Macomb County Health Department;



      4.   Side and rear yard setbacks for restaurants may be
increased when adjacent to residential zoning districts.



   H.   Home furnishings, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The total usable floor area shall not exceed 5,000 square
feet;



      2.   The use shall be devoted primarily to product display.
Only incidental warehousing and storage shall be permitted. Deliveries shall
be made from off-site warehouses or distribution centers.



   I.   Auto supply stores, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The floor area of the building shall not exceed 12,500
square feet;



      2.   The site shall be located on a major thoroughfare having
a right-of-way equal to or greater than 120 feet, as specified on the Master
Road Plan;



      3.   No repair, service or parts installation shall be
conducted on the premises without the approval of the Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission shall not approve such an activity without
determining specifically that the proposed activity meets the requirements of
section 25.02 of this ordinance and that it will be conducted solely within
the building. The Planning Commission shall have the right to revoke such
approval if the activity, in practice, is determined by the Planning
Commission to have an adverse effect on the premises or nearby properties
after the activity is undertaken;



      4.   No storage or other activities relating to the auto
supply business shall be permitted outside of the building;



      5.   The sale of auto parts shall be limited to new parts and
remanufactured or reconditioned parts which are remanufactured or
reconditioned off of the premises.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 6, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-G, § 4, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-O,
§ 3, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 278-V, § 1, 1-20-98; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 14, 5-16-00;
Ord. No. 278-BB, § 3, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 278-DD, § 1, 7-6-04)



SECTION 11.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 11.01 and 11.02 are permitted.
Amusement devices shall be permitted, as provided in section 28.01.



SECTION 11.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Area:  12,000 square feet.



      2.   Width:  80 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  1.



      2.   In feet:  25.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  700 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



         c.   Major:  95 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



         e.   Collector:  70 feet.



         f.   Local:  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  95-foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   The required front yard shall be landscaped and maintained thereafter
in a neat and orderly condition. Driveway approaches, but not driveways,
shall be permitted in the required front yard.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than shown on the Master Road
Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from the
centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Side:  5 feet.  If walls of structures facing such
interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards of not
less than 15 feet shall be provided. No building shall be located closer than
50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such
property line abuts any residential district.



      3.   Rear:  30 feet. No building shall be located closer than
50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such
property line abuts any residential district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening,
off-street parking and loading.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 21, 22, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 1, 3-20-01; Ord.
No. 278-CC, § 4, 6-3-03)



SECTION 11.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (see section 24.02,
environmental provisions) approved by the Planning Department and so
maintained in an attractive condition.



   C.   Loading shall be provided only in rear yards. Side yard loading
may be permitted by the Planning Department when such space and loading
facilities do not interfere with parking and circulation, either vehicular or
pedestrian.



   D.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established line and the front lot line (or
side lot abutting a side street) without first obtaining approval of the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the building and/or
use proposed to be located in front of the established building to determine
whether the building or use is of such location, size and character to be in
harmony with the appropriate and orderly development of the balance of the
site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent uses, does not create
any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is aesthetically compatible with the
buildings and uses located upon the site. Landscaping plans, site plans
(including signs and the location of dumpsters) and elevations of all sides
of any building to be constructed shall be submitted to enable the Planning
Commission to determine whether the proposed additional building and/or use
conforms with the requirements of this section. All dumpsters shall be
screened from visibility from any area visible to the public by use of a wall
constructed of the same material as the building walls to ensure aesthetic
compatibility. In reviewing this request, the Planning Commission shall apply
the standards contained herein and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable
conditions as authorized by section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are
satisfied.



   E.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04).



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 23, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 3, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 12.  C-2 PLANNED COMPARISON DISTRICT



SECTION 12.00.  INTENT.



   This district is intended to provide a combination of convenience and
comparison retail goods and services serving the needs of a broader market
area than several neighborhood areas, as is the case with the C-1 district.
These commercial centers may include an anchor tenant, such as a supermarket
or an intermediate department store. Uses within this district are intended
to be developed as a planned or integrated cluster of common wall
establishments served by consolidated driveways and parking areas as well as
unified architecture and landscaping features.



SECTION 12.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business,
servicing or processing (except for off-street parking or loading) shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise provided
herein; that all businesses shall be of a retail and service nature dealing
directly with consumers; and that all goods produced on the premises shall be
sold at retail on the same premises:



   A.   Any one or more of the permitted uses in section 11.01 of the
C-1 District, except as otherwise provided herein. The size limitations of
the C-1 District shall not apply in the C-2 District;



   B.   Retail nursery, lawn and garden supply store;



   C.   Department store;



   D.   General merchandise store;



   E.   Supermarket;



   F.   Physical fitness facilities;



   G.   Pet shops, retail;



   H.   Bulk food stores;



   I.   Apparel and accessory store;



   J.   Home and office furniture, furnishings and appliance stores;



   K.   Eating and drinking establishments, (including outdoor eating
areas and catering if accessory to a principally permitted use), but
excluding fast-food restaurants, stands, cabarets and discotheques;



   L.   Photographic studio;



   M.   Motion picture theater (except adult motion and mini-motion
picture theaters);



   N.   Museum and art gallery;



   O.   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments;



   P.   Children recreation services (when part of a planned
development) featuring exercising and game playing activities, subject to the
following:



      1.   All activities shall be restricted to the inside of the
building or part of the building in which the use is a part of;



      2.   The building or part of the building devoted to this use
shall be designed and constructed such that no audible sound may be heard by
adjoining tenants or at the lot line;



      3.   This use shall be limited to short term or infrequent
users and shall not be used as a child day-care facility;



   Q.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening as determined by the Planning Department
shall be provided when abutting single family dwellings;



   R.   Other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 24, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-E, § 7, 7-3-90; Ord. No.
278-0, § 4, 9-5-95)



SECTION 12.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USE.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Veterinary offices and clinics, subject to the conditions
enumerated in section 11.02(A);



   B.   The following open air uses, subject to the conditions
enumerated:



      1.   Retail sales of plant materials not grown on the site and
sale of lawn furniture, playground equipment and home garden supplies, when
located in excess of 300 feet beyond the intersection of major thoroughfares;



      2.   Children’s recreation facilities, including a
children’s amusement park, shuffleboard and similar recreation, when part
of a planned development, but not located at the intersection of two major
thoroughfares. All such recreation space shall be enclosed on all sides with
a six foot fence. Such uses shall not abut any residential zoning district;



   C.   Automobile service centers, when developed as part of a large
planned shopping center, designed so as to integrate the automobile service
center within the site plan and architecture of the total shopping center,
subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All repair activities shall be confined to the building;



      2.   No outdoor storage is permitted;



      3.   An adequate means of waste disposal shall be provided;



      4.   Adequate measure shall be taken to ensure that any noise,
dust, smoke, odor, fumes or other negative environmental impacts are confined
to the site;



   D.   Fast-food restaurants, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The site and use shall be located on a major thoroughfare
having a right-of-way equal to, or greater than, 120 feet as specified by the
Master Road Plan;



      2.   Adequate ingress and egress to handle the traffic
anticipated to be generated by the use shall be provided;



      3.   No freestanding fast-food restaurant shall be located
within 500 feet of an existing fast-food restaurant, except if fast-food
restaurants are separated by a street or public thoroughfare of not less than
120 feet of right-of-way;



      4.   No freestanding fast-food restaurant or drive-through
lane shall be located within 300 feet of any residentially zoned property,
unless the fast-food restaurant is separated from the residentially zoned
property by a street or public thoroughfare of not less than 120 feet of
right-of-way;



      5.   Any freestanding fast-food restaurant located in a
shopping center shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance
with the other buildings and uses located in the shopping center. In making
this determination, the Planning Commission shall consider the architectural
design of the building, the signage and the landscaping to ensure that the
design and appearance of the developed fast-food restaurant site is
compatible with the design and appearance of the remainder of the shopping
center;



      6.   Drive-through service shall be permitted only if a
satisfactory traffic pattern for the drive-through lane can be established to
prevent traffic congestion and the impairment of vehicular circulation for
the remainder of the development. Vehicle stacking lanes shall not cross any
maneuvering lanes, drives or sidewalks;



      7.   Devices and controls adequate to ensure that no smoke,
odor or gases are emitted so as to constitute a nuisance to adjoining tenants
or to the public shall be provided;



      8.   A drive-through speaker system shall emit no more than 50
decibels db(A) four feet between the vehicle and the speaker and in no case
shall the transmission of voices or music from such speaker system be audible
at any lot line;



      9.   The use shall comply with all other applicable Code
provisions and ordinances of the city.



   E.   The use shall comply with all other applicable Code provisions
and ordinances of the city;



   F.   Amusement device centers located in enclosed mall area of a
shopping center containing a gross floor area of not less than 400,000 square
feet, subject to the following:



      1.   All such uses shall have public access only from the
interior mall pedestrian areas;



      2.   Adequate on-site security for the shopping center mall
shall be provided;



      3.   Noise associated with the use shall be confined within
the tenant space so as to not constitute a nuisance to adjoining or nearby
tenants;



      4.   Such use shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code;



   G.   Amusement device centers located in an unenclosed shopping
center or planned center development with a gross floor area in excess of
20,000 square feet, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The days and hours of operation of an amusement device
center may be limited by the Planning Commission based on the size and nature
of the operation, proximity to surrounding residential properties, and the
standards of Section 25.02;



      2.   All patron entrances shall be at least 500 feet from the
nearest applicable property line of any school, playground, or public park;



      3.   All patron entrances shall be located at least 200 feet
from any residential district measured by the shortest walking distance
between the patron door and the zoning district line;



      4.   No amusement device center shall be located within 1,000
feet of any existing amusement device center measured from the nearest
applicable walls or leasable space of each center;



      5.   There shall be adequate provision for the parking of
bicycles, in accordance with the bicycle rack requirements set forth
elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, for the center or development in which
the amusement device center is proposed to be located;



      6.   The building or part of the building devoted to the use
shall be designed and constructed such that no audible sound may be heard by
adjoining tenants or at the lot line;



      7.   Such use shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code;



   H.   Regional shopping centers with a gross floor area exceeding
1,000,000 square feet, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   Building may exceed the height requirements of the
district, provided that side and rear yard setbacks equal to the height of
the building are provided. In no instance shall the building be located
closer to the property line than the setbacks specified in section 12.04(C);



      2.   Access to all parking areas shall be provided by an
internal road system;



   I.   Adult entertainment uses.



      The City of Sterling Heights is characterized by a strong real
estate market and high property values. One intent of the zoning ordinance is
to preserve these values and avoid the concentration of uses which would have
a detrimental effect on either property values or the overall character of
the city.



      The purpose of this ordinance as it relates to adult
entertainment uses is, therefore, to control blight and to maintain or
increase economic vitality and not to restrict the freedom of speech or to
restrict access to alternative forms of entertainment.



      It is a well-established fact that a concentration of adult
entertainment uses, including adult bookstores, adult video stores, adult
motion picture theaters and similar uses, can lead to urban blight. It is,
therefore, the intent of the provisions relating to adult entertainment uses
to minimize this impact by avoiding the concentration of such uses in close
proximity to one another or to residential zoning districts.



      It is recognized that adult entertainment uses are not dependent
upon the surrounding neighborhood for their market. In fact, they can be
classified as comparison shopping facilities whose market extends far beyond
the adjacent neighborhood. Restricting the uses to the C-2 Planned Comparison
District recognizes this market impact.



      It is further noted that the impact of adult entertainment uses
on nearby residential areas is increased by the location of such uses in
freestanding commercial structures. Restricting the location of adult
entertainment uses to planned shopping centers helps minimize this impact by
de-emphasizing their visibility and their impact on the nearby residential
neighborhood. Furthermore, any negative impacts associated with such a use
would be restricted primarily to surrounding commercial tenants. The overall
community impact of such a use would, therefore, be reduced by this
requirement.



      For the reasons stated above, adult bookstores or video stores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult
establishments, cabarets or massage parlors, adult novelty businesses or
adult personal service businesses shall be allowed as a special approval land
use in the C-2 district, subject to the following requirements:



         1.   An adult entertainment use shall not be located
closer than 1,000 feet from any other adult entertainment use;



         2.   All patron entrances for the adult entertainment
use shall be located at least 1,000 feet from any church, school, playground
or public park and 500 feet from any residential zoning district, measured by
the shortest walking distance between the patron door and the property line
of the church, school, playground or public park or the nearest residential
zoning district line;



         3.   Adult bookstores or video stores, adult motion
picture theaters, adult mini- motion picture theaters, cabarets and massage
parlors, adult novelty businesses or adult personal service businesses shall
be located in a consolidated shopping center with a gross floor area
exceeding 100,000 square feet. Such uses shall be an integral part of such
center and shall not be included as a use in a freestanding building;



         4.   All signs advertising adult bookstores or video
stores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters,
cabarets, massage parlors, adult novelty businesses or adult personal service
businesses shall comply to all applicable provisions of section 28.13.
Further, no such sign shall include language or graphics referring to either
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;



         5.   There shall be no display of adult merchandise or
adult materials visible by the public from the exterior of the building;



         6.   The adult entertainment use shall not permit entry
by any person under the age of 18 either as an employee or a customer;



         7.   All access to adult merchandise or adult materials
in the adult entertainment use shall be restricted to persons 18 years of age
or older;



         8.   The adult entertainment use shall not be occupied
by any person or any residential purpose.



   J.   Body art facilities, subject to the following:



      1.   All body art facilities shall be located in a
consolidated shopping center with a gross floor area exceeding 100,000 square
feet.  Such uses shall be an integral part of the center and shall not be
located within a freestanding building.



      2.   A body art facility shall not be located closer than
1,000 feet to an adult entertainment use, pawnbroker, resale shop, or other
body art facility measured by the shortest walking distance between the
customer entrance of each use.



      3.   All customer entrances to a body art facility (or
retail/customer service area if there is no distinct customer entrance) shall
be located at least 1,000 feet from any church, school, playground, or public
park and at least 500 feet from any residential zoning district, measured by
the shortest walking distance between the customer entrance (or
retail/customer service area if there is no distinct customer entrance) and
the property line of the church, school, playground or public park or the
nearest residential zoning district line.



      4.   The body art facility shall obtain and maintain any
licenses required by local or state law, and shall operate the facility in
full compliance with any local, state or federal regulatory ordinances or
statutes, rules, or regulations.



   K.   Pawnbrokers, subject to the following:



      1.   All pawnbrokers shall be located in a consolidated
shopping center with a gross floor area exceeding 100,000 square feet.  Such
uses shall be an integral part of the center and shall not be located within
a freestanding building.



      2.   A pawnbroker shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet
to an adult entertainment use, body art facility, resale shop, or other
pawnbroker measured by the shortest walking distance between the customer
entrance of each use.



      3.   All customer entrances to a pawnbroker facility (or
retail/customer service area if there is no distinct customer entrance) shall
be located at least 1,000 feet from any church, school, playground, or public
park and at least 500 feet from any residential zoning district, measured by
the shortest walking distance between the customer entrance (or
retail/customer service area if there is no distinct customer entrance) and
the property line of the church, school, playground or public park or the
nearest residential zoning district line.



      4.   Pawnbrokers shall obtain and maintain any licenses
required by local or State law and shall operate the facility or business in
full compliance with any local, State, or federal regulatory ordinances or
statutes, rules, or regulations.



   L.   Banquet and event facilities, subject to the following:



      1.   The use shall be located in a freestanding building.



      2.   The site shall be located upon a major thoroughfare
having an existing or proposed right-of-way of at least 86 feet, as indicated
on the Master Road Plan.



      3.   Any open air area where patrons of the banquet facility
may congregate shall not face any property used for or zoned for residential
use.



      4.   The banquet and event facility shall be operated in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code.



      5.   The City Planner may require the installation of
additional landscaping, screening, or other devices or materials designed to
contain noise, light, and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend
beyond the property line of the site and/or to provide separation from
abutting parking and maneuvering areas.



   M.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-U, § 8, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-X, § 4, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y,
§ 15, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 278-MM, §§ 1-3,
10-8-08; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 4, 8-5-09; Ord. No. 278-AAA, § 3, 5-3-16; Ord.
No. 278-BBB, § 2, 7-18-17)



SECTION 12.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



The following accessory uses may be permitted:



   A.   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 12.01 and 12.02 are permitted.



   B.   Amusement devices shall be permitted as provided in section
28.01.



   C.   Accessory banquet or event uses, provided that such uses are
conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the City Code, and
provided further that the City Planner may require the installation of
additional landscaping, screening, or other devices or materials designed to
contain noise, light, and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend
beyond the property line of the site and/or to provide separation from
abutting parking and maneuvering areas.



(Ord. No. 278-BBB, § 3, 7-18-17)



SECTION 12.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot:



      1.   Area:  8 acres.



         A site may consist of one or more contiguous parcels of C-2
zoned property, the total of which shall equal eight acres or more; provided,
however, in order to assure compliance with the intent of the C-2 district, a
development on a parcel of less than eight acres contained within a
contiguous eight  acre site may occur only if reviewed and approved in
conjunction with an overall development plan. In making such determination,
the Planning Department shall consider placement of buildings, parking areas,
landscaping and points of ingress and egress to ensure that the proposed
development is harmonious with existing or future adjacent developments on or
off said site. If a C-2 parcel of property is split so as to create two
contiguous C-2 parcels or if a C-2 parcel of property is developed or
proposed to be developed in conjunction with a contiguous C-2 parcel, then
the minimum yard requirements established from the common lot line of the C-2
parcels may be modified if determined by the City Planner to promote the
intent of the C-2 zoning district.



      2.   Width:  300 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  2.



      2.   In feet:  30.



   C.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  177.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  150.



         c.   Major:  135.



         d.   Secondary:  118.



         e.   Collector:  110.



         f.   Local:  105.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  135.



         h.   Freeway:  75.*



         i.   Private roads:  75.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   The required front yard shall be landscaped and maintained thereafter
in a neat and orderly condition. Driveway approaches but not driveways shall
be permitted in the required front yard. Parking may be permitted to occupy a
portion of the required front yard setback, provided it does not exceed a
distance of 40 feet measured from the required front building setback as
specified in (C)(1) above. Where the majority of the lots are located in a
commercially platted subdivision, the lots abut private roads and/or public
streets with a right-of-way equal to or less than 86 feet as shown on the
Master Road



Plan and adequate access to the building for firefighting and emergency
equipment is available, parking shall be permitted to encroach not more than
60 feet into the required front yard setback measured from the required front
building setback line.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street side setback) is measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 50 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Side:  25 feet. Corner lots shall observe front yard
setbacks for both lot lines abutting the street.



      3.   Rear:  40 feet.



   D.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening,
off-street parking and loading.



(Ord. No. 278-E, § 8, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 278-G, § 5, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-O,
§§ 5, 6, 9-5-95)



SECTION 12.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE  REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   No building shall be closer than 75 feet to the outer perimeter
(property line) of such district when said property line abuts any
residential district.



   B.   The proposed development shall be constructed in accordance
with an overall plan, shall be designed as a single architectural unit with
appropriate landscaping and shall provide initially for the construction of a
minimum of 20,000 square feet of floor area.



   C.   All buildings shall be arranged in a group or groups.



   D.   The distance at the closest point between any two buildings or
groups of units of attached buildings shall not be less than 30 feet.



   E.   Required side and rear yards may be used for off-street
parking, provided adequate access to the rear of the building for
firefighting and emergency equipment is available. Design of rear yard
parking shall be done so as to encourage designated areas for "employee
parking."



   F.   No part of any loading or unloading area may be located closer
than 50 feet to any rear property line adjacent to a residential district.



   G.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   H.   Portions of the site not used for parking, driveways and
building shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (see section 24.02,
environmental provisions) approved by the Planning Department and so
maintained in attractive condition.



   I.   Off-street loading spaces shall be provided in the ratio of at
least one space per each establishment. In the event that several
establishments are under common ownership or control, one space may be
provided for each 6,000 square feet of building floor area.



   J.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04).



   K.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. All dumpsters shall be screened from visibility from any area
visible to the public by use of a wall constructed of the same material as
the building walls to ensure aesthetic compatibility. In reviewing this
request, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards contained herein
and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable conditions as authorized by
section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are satisfied.



   L.   Loading shall be provided only in rear yards. Side yard loading
may be permitted by the Planning Department when such space and loading
facilities do not interfere with parking and circulation, either vehicular or
pedestrian.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 25, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 5, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 12A.  LAKESIDE OVERLAY DISTRICT



SECTION  12.01A INTENT



   The Lakeside Overlay District is intended;



   A.   To provide, through a comprehensive, collaborative planning,
zoning and project review process a development within the Lakeside Overlay
District that is transformative, flexible and mixed-use, where a multitude of
dynamic uses are integrated into a well-planned cohesive development that
best positions Lakeside Mall and the adjoining area for continued, long term
economic vitality and sustainability.  Encouraged  uses in the Lakeside
Overlay District include but are not limited to, retail, restaurant, food and
beverage, entertainment, hotel, medical and healthcare facilities,
educational and vocational training facilities and campuses, office
buildings, residential buildings, and civic or public uses.



   B.   To provide an environment that allows for a higher
intensity/density of overall site usage, fostering a critical mass of people,
buildings, uses, activities, and an overall more efficient, attractive use of
land while still minimizing impacts to abutting uses through careful
attention to building design, use, orientation and materials paired with
appropriate, abundant landscaping.



   C.   To provide safe and efficient integrated access and on-site
circulation for automobiles and pedestrians through a cohesive network of
streets, sidewalks, paths, and public areas.



   D.   To allow a flexibility in the mixture and types of uses,
building designs and overall layout, etc. that can be responsive to changes
in market demands while still promoting quality through a variety of
compatible uses, services and building types throughout the Lakeside Overlay
District which can be accomplished through a mutually agreed upon Development
Agreement between city and developer.



   E.   To provide active and passive recreational spaces, civic
spaces, public art opportunities, and natural landscapes in a meaningful
manner that take a variety of forms and are dispersed throughout the Lakeside
Overlay District area to service residents, business owners, workers and
attract visitors to the overall Lakeside Overlay District.



   F.   To promote a development that meets the goals of the City's
2030 Visioning Plan, in that it provides successful, vibrant and attractive
commercial centers with unique offerings, well maintained and desirable
neighborhoods, plentiful leisure and recreational opportunities, abundant
pedestrian connections, aesthetically pleasing roads and greenspaces and is a
destination for emerging business and entrepreneurs.



(Ord. No. 278-CCC, § 1, 4-2-19)



SECTION 12.02A  APPLICABILITY



   The Lakeside Overlay District shall apply to those properties
designated within the City of Sterling Heights Master Land Use Plan as
Lakeside Village District that are located within Lakeside Circle.



(Ord. No. 278-CCC, § 1, 4-2-19)



SECTION 12.03A  PROCESS



   At the time of request for permitting of any new development that
significantly alters or expands the footprint of Lakeside Mall or its anchor
buildings or creates new buildings or structures, an overall master
development plan shall be submitted pursuant to the City's Planned Unit
Development Ordinance, section 22.03.



(Ord. No. 278-CCC, § 1, 4-2-19)



SECTION 12.04A  EXISTING USES/DEVELOPMENT



   Existing buildings/structures within the Lakeside Overlay District area
shall not be considered as non-conforming provided they were approved and
legal at the time of passage of this Section and have not been modified
unless in compliance with the this Section.



   Until such time as a master development plan is approved pursuant to
section 12.03(A), existing and proposed uses within the existing Lakeside
Mall, its anchors and outbuildings shall be consistent with the applicable
permissible and special approval land uses within the C-2 Planned Comparison
Business District.



(Ord. No. 278-CCC, § 1, 4-2-19)



ARTICLE 13.  C-3 GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT



SECTION 13.00.  INTENT.



   The C-3 General Business District is designed to provide for a wide
diversity of business activities which are predominantly but not necessarily
totally retail in character. In addition to retail uses, a number of other
activities, usually requiring considerable land area and access to major
thoroughfares, are permitted. Uses in this district normally must have good
automobile accessibility, but should not cause congestion on adjacent
thoroughfares.



SECTION 13.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business,
servicing or processing (except for off-street parking or loading) shall be
conducted within a completely enclosed building, except as otherwise provided
herein; that all businesses shall be of a retail and service nature dealing
directly with consumers; and that all goods produced on the premises shall be
sold as retail on the same premises:



   A.   Any one or more of the permitted uses in section 12.01 of the
C-2 district, except as otherwise provided herein;



   B.   Veterinary offices and clinics provided the conditions
enumerated in the C-1 district, section 11.02.A. are satisfied. Planning
Commission permission is not required;



   C.   Building materials, hardware and garden supplies. Outdoor
storage is prohibited;



   D.   New and used passenger vehicle dealers (but excluding dealers
of farm machinery and equipment, construction machinery and equipment and
tractors, trailers and similar industrial and commercial vehicles and
equipment) on parcels containing a minimum of five acres;



   E.   Eating and drinking establishments, (including outdoor eating
areas and catering if accessory to a principally permitted use), banquet
facilities and fast-food restaurants. Fast-food restaurants shall be subject
to the requirements of section 12.02(D)(1), (3),(4), (5), (7), (8) and (9);



   F.   Hotels and motels;



   G.   Mortuaries, as permitted and regulated in the O-2 District
(section 9.02(G));



   H.   Rental of tools and household goods;



   I.   Large appliance repair;



   J.   Automotive supply;



   K.   Automotive rental;



   L.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Department, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   M.   Other similar uses as determined by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. No. 278-E, § 9, 7-30-90; Ord. No. 278-O, § 7, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 278-Y,
§§ 16-18, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-AA, §§ 2, 3, § 3-20-01)



SECTION 13.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USE.



   The following uses and others similar to those cited in this article
may be permitted by the Planning Commission subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   New passenger vehicle dealers (on parcels containing less than
five acres) and outdoor sales lots for the sale of used automobiles, subject
to the following:



      1.   The lot or area shall be provided and maintained with a
permanent durable and dustless surface constructed of either asphalt or
concrete and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose within the site of
all surface water accumulated within the area;



      2.   The location of the site shall be upon a street with a
right-of-way of at least 120 feet (existing or proposed) and shall contain no
fewer than 40,000 square feet;



      3.   Such use shall be located no closer than 500 feet from
any single family zoning district;



      4.   Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60
feet from the intersection of any two streets and shall be determined by the
Engineering Department of the City of Sterling Heights;



      5.   No vehicle repair, bumping, painting or refinishing shall
be done on the lot site. Cleaning and refurbishing of vehicles or units shall
be permitted if done completely within an enclosed building;



      6.   If such a use abuts a street of less than 120 feet of
right-of-way located abutting an R district, a berm and landscaping in the
front yard on such street shall be provided to screen all outdoor facilities,
including storage and display areas from adjacent residential property. In
addition, all other areas of the site shall be landscaped in accordance with
the landscaping requirements contained in section 24.02 of this ordinance;



      7.   Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voices
and or music shall be prohibited;



      8.   Display areas, storage areas and all other vehicle
parking contained on the site shall comply with the parking design and layout
requirements of section 23.03 of this ordinance;



   B.   Businesses of a drive-in nature but not including outdoor
theaters, subject to the following:



      1.   All buildings shall observe the front or street-side
setbacks as specified in section 13.04, area, height and bulk requirements,
plus 25 feet;



      2.   Ingress and egress points shall be located at least 60
feet from the intersection of any two streets and shall be determined by the
Engineering Department of the City of Sterling Heights;



      3.   The entire site other than that area occupied by
buildings and/or structures shall be landscaped or provided with a permanent,
durable and dustless surface constructed of either asphalt or concrete. The
site shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the standards and
specifications of article 24. In addition, the site shall be graded and
drained, hardsurfaced and maintained in accordance with the standards and
specifications of the Engineering Department of the City of Sterling Heights;



      4.   Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voices
shall be so directed or muffled as to prevent said sounds or music from being
audible beyond the boundaries of the site;



      5.   All driveway approaches, road drainage, curbs and curb
cuts shall meet the requirements of the City of Sterling Heights or of other
agencies having jurisdiction thereof;



      6.   All adjacent side yards shall be zoned for business use;



   C.   The following open air business use, subject to the conditions
enumerated:



      1.   Retail sales of plant materials not grown on the site and
sale of lawn furniture, playground equipment, boats and home, garden or
building supplies, when located in excess of 300 feet of the intersection of
major thoroughfares;



   D.   Bowling alleys, tennis houses, racquetball facilities and
similar forms of indoor commercial recreation, provided that no such use
within the building shall be located within 100 feet of any residential
district;



   E.   Gasoline service stations other than gasoline self-service
stations subject to the following:



      1.   The site for the gasoline service station shall have 160
feet of frontage on the principal street serving the station;



      2.   The site shall contain an area of not less than 24,000
square feet;



      3.   All buildings shall observe front or street-side setbacks
as specified in section 13.04, area, height and bulk requirements, plus 15
feet. For purposes of this section, canopies, gasoline pumps and pump islands
shall not be considered buildings but shall observe the setbacks of this
article;



      4.   Curbs, curb cuts, driveway widths (and) acceleration or
deceleration lanes shall meet the requirements of the City of Sterling
Heights or other agencies leaving jurisdiction thereof;



      5.   Storage of vehicles awaiting repair shall be limited to
no more than five such vehicles for each repair bay. In no case shall
vehicles be stored for a period in excess of 15 days;



      6.   In order to facilitate safe pedestrian circulation and
safety, no parking or standing of customer vehicles shall be permitted in the
area immediately adjacent to any customer entrance or payment window;



   F.   Gasoline self-service stations, subject to the following:



      1.   The site for the gasoline self-service station shall have
150 feet of frontage on the principal street serving the station;



      2.   The site shall contain an area of not less than 21,000
square feet;



      3.   All buildings shall observe front or street-side setbacks
as specified in section 13.04, height and public requirements, plus 15 feet.
For purposes of this section, canopies, gasoline pumps and pump islands shall
not be considered buildings, but shall observe the setbacks of this article;



      4.   Curbs, curb cuts, driveway widths and acceleration or
deceleration lanes shall meet the requirements of the City of Sterling
Heights or other agencies having jurisdiction thereof;



      5.   In order to facilitate safe pedestrian circulation and
safety, no parking or standing of customer vehicles shall be permitted in the
area immediately adjacent to any customer entrance or payment window;



   G.   Amusement device centers located in an enclosed mall area of a
shopping center containing a gross floor area of not less than 400,000 square
feet, subject to the following:



      1.   All such uses shall have public access only from the
interior mall pedestrian areas;



      2.   Adequate on-site security for the shopping center mall
shall be provided;



      3.   Noise associated with the use shall be confined within
the tenant space so as to not constitute a nuisance to adjoining or nearby
tenants;



      4.   Such uses shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code;



   H.   Amusement device centers located in an unenclosed shopping
center or planned center development with a gross floor area in excess of
20,000 square feet, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   The days and hours of operation of an amusement device
center may be limited by the Planning Commission based on the size and nature
of the operation, proximity to surrounding residential properties, and the
standards of Section 25.02;



      2.   All patron entrances shall be located at least 500 feet
from the nearest applicable property line of any school, playground, or
public park;



      3.   All patron entrances shall be located at least 200 feet
from any residential district measured by the shortest walking distance
between the patron door and the zoning district line;



      4.   No amusement device center shall be located within 1,000
feet of any existing amusement device center measured from the nearest
applicable walls or leasable space of each center;



      5.   There shall be adequate provision for the parking of
bicycles, in accordance with the bicycle rack requirements set forth
elsewhere in this Zoning Ordinance, for the center or development in which
the amusement device center is proposed to be located;



      6.   The building or part of the building devoted to the use
shall be designed and constructed such that no audible sound may be heard by
adjoining tenants or at the lot line;



      7.   Such use shall be conducted in accordance with all
applicable provisions of the City Code;



   I.   Automobile service centers, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   All repair and service activities shall be confined to
the interior of the building;



      2.   No outdoor storage is permitted;



      3.   An adequate means of waste disposal shall be provided;



      4.   Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that any
noise, dust, smoke, odor, fumes or other negative environmental impacts are
confined to the site;



   J.   Self storage facilities used to provide temporary storage needs
for businesses, apartment dwellers and other individuals on a self-serve
basis, subject to the following:



      1.   The minimum size of the site devoted entirely to such use
shall be not less than seven acres;



      2.   Such use shall (except for frontage on a major
thoroughfare of 120 feet in width or greater) abut C-3 zoned property on at
least two sides or residentially zoned property on one side with all
remaining sides C-3;



      3.   All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major thoroughfare having a right-of-way equal to, or greater than,
120 feet as indicated on the city’s Master Road Plan;



      4.   No storage of combustible or flammable liquids,
combustible fibers or explosive materials as defined in the Fire Prevention
Code or toxic materials shall be permitted within the self-storage buildings
or upon the premises;



      5.   No storage outside of the self-storage buildings shall be
permitted. Storage of rental trucks, specifically intended to serve
individuals and businesses, shall be permitted up to a maximum of five.
Parking of such vehicles shall be in an area designated on the site which is
screened and not visible from residential or office zoned properties or a
public thoroughfare;



      6.   Except as provided herein, the use of the premises shall
be limited to storage only and shall not be used for operating any other
business, for maintaining or repairing of any vehicles, recreational
equipment or other items or for any recreational activity, hobby or purpose
other than the storage of personal items and business items as hereinbefore
set forth;



      7.   Screening shall be provided, as specified in section
24.01;



      8.   A security manager shall be permitted to reside on the
premises to the extent required by such use;



      9.   The site shall be graded, drained, hard-surfaced and
maintained in accordance with the standards and specifications of the
Engineering Department of the City of Sterling Heights;



      10.   Limited retail sales to tenants of products and supplies
incidental to the principal use, such as parking materials, packing labels,
tape, rope, protective covers and locks and chains shall be permitted on the
site devoted to this use;



      11.   Access to the self-service storage facility premises
shall be restricted to tenants only, by means of entrance-controlled devices;



      12.   No building or structure shall be located closer than
150 feet from any abutting residential property;



      13.   The use of barbed wire fence shall not be permitted;



   K.   Miniature golf and golf driving ranges, subject to the
following:



      1.   Such uses shall only abut nonresidentially zoned
properties;



      2.   Devices for the transmission of broadcasting of voices or
music shall be so directed or muffled in order to prevent said sound or music
from being audible beyond the boundaries of the site;



      3.   All lighting shall be directed away from public streets
and abutting uses;



   L.   Automobile wash establishments, subject to the following:



      1.   The site and use shall be located on a major thoroughfare
having a right-of-way equal to or greater than 120 feet as shown on the
Master Road Plan;



      2.   Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that any
noise, dust, smoke, odor, fumes, lighting or other negative environmental
impacts are confined to the site;



      3.   Such use shall (except for frontage on a major
thoroughfare of 120 feet in width or greater) abut non-residentially zoned
property on at least two sides;



   M.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18;



   N.   Gasoline service stations (including self-service stations) and
automobile wash establishments, subject to the following:



      1.   The site for the gasoline service station shall have 190
feet of frontage on the principal street serving the station and car wash;



      2.   The site shall contain an area of not less than 30,000
square feet;



      3.   In order to facilitate safe pedestrian circulation and
safety, there shall be a minimum distance of 24 feet between the principal
building and any pump island. In addition, no parking or standing of customer
vehicles shall be permitted immediately adjacent to any customer entrance or
payment window;



      4.   All buildings shall observe front or street-side setbacks
as specified in section 13.04, area, height and bulk requirements, plus 15
feet. For purposes of this section, canopies, gasoline pumps and pump islands
shall not be considered buildings, but shall observe the setbacks of this
article;



      5.   Curbs, curb cuts, driveway widths and acceleration or
deceleration lanes shall meet the requirements of the City of Sterling
Heights or other agencies having jurisdiction thereof;



      6.   Storage of vehicles awaiting repair shall be limited to
no more than five such vehicles for each repair bay. In no case shall
vehicles be stored for a period in excess of 15 days;



      7.   All car washing activities shall be carried on within a
building. Vacuuming activities shall be permitted in the side or rear yard
only. Self-service vacuum operations shall be located in an area to encourage
use after the vehicle is washed to provide more drip time before the vehicle
exits the site;



      8.   All vacuuming areas, stacking lanes and exit aprons shall
be separate from the station itself. No less than four stacking spaces shall
be provided for each car wash facility;



      9.   A minimum distance of 100 feet shall be maintained
between the exit door of the wash structure to the nearest exit drive
approach of the principal street serving the car wash to permit adequate time
for excess water to drip off of the vehicle. Additional measures, including
the installation of a sloping heated concrete exit ramp of at least 20 feet
in length, a trench drain system and an automated mechanical dryer at the
exit of the wash cycle shall be installed to limit icing conditions and water
run off;



      10.   All automatic car wash facilities must be equipped with
at least one video monitor system, with cameras located in such a manner as
to provide a complete and unobstructed view of the vehicle at all times
within the wash facility. The monitors must be located in an area easily
viewed by the facility employees;



   O.   Dance halls, subject to the following:



      1.   The site and use shall be located on a major thoroughfare
having a right-of-way equal to or greater than 120 feet as shown on the
Master Road Plan;



      2.   The use shall be setback at least 100 feet from any
property line abutting a residentially zoned district;



      3.   Adequate measures shall be taken to ensure that any
noise, lighting and all other negative impacts are confined to the site.



   P.   Banquet and event facilities, subject to the following:



      1.   The use shall be located in a freestanding building.



      2.   The site shall be located upon a major thoroughfare
having an existing or proposed right-of-way of at least 86 feet, as indicated
on the Master Road Plan.



      3.   Any open air area where patrons of the banquet facility
may congregate shall not face any property used for or zoned for residential
use.



      4.   The banquet and event facility shall be operated in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code.



      5.   The City Planner may require the installation of
additional landscaping, screening, or other devices or materials designed to
contain noise, light, and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend
beyond the property line of the site and/or to provide separation from
abutting parking and maneuvering areas.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 26, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-G, §§ 6-10, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
278-O, §§ 8, 9, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 19, 20, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-AA, § 4, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 278-AAA, § 4, 5-3-17; Ord. No. 278-BBB, §
4, 7-18-17)



SECTION 13.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   The following accessory uses may be permitted:



   A.   Accessory buildings and uses incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 13.01 and 13.02 are permitted.



   B.   Amusement devices shall be permitted as provided in section
28.01.



   C.   Accessory banquet or event uses, provided that such uses are
conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the City Code, and
provided further that the City Planner may require the installation of
additional landscaping, screening, or other devices or materials designed to
contain noise, light, and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend
beyond the property line of the site and/or to provide separation from
abutting parking and maneuvering areas.



(Ord. No. 278-BBB, § 5, 7-18-17)



SECTION 13.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Area:                  0,000 square
feet.



      2.   Width:                100 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:                2.



      2.   In feet:                30.



      (Except as otherwise permitted in section 13.04(D).



   C.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front yard street-side setbacks shall be measured from
the centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the
city’s Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from the centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):       137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):       110 feet.



         c.   Major:                95 feet.



         d.   Secondary:             78 feet.



         e.   Collector:             70 feet.



         f.   Local:                65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:             95-foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:             35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:             35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   Parking shall not be permitted in the required front yard, except where
the majority of lots are located in commercial platted subdivisions where the
lot abuts private roads and/or public roads with a right-of-way equal to or
less than 86 feet as shown on the Master Road Plan, and provided further that
adequate access to the building for firefighting and emergency equipment is
available. In those instances, parking shall be permitted to encroach not
more than 20 feet into the required front yard setback measured from the
required front building setback line. If the existing right-of-way is greater
than that shown on the Master Road Plan, the front yard setback (or
street-side setback) as measured from the centerline of the right-of-way
shall be equal to one-half of the actual right-of-way of the street, plus 35
feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Side: 5 feet.  If walls or structures facing such
interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards or not
less than 15 feet shall be provided.  In addition, when a side yard lot line
of the property abuts property zoned for residential purposes, the building
shall be set back no less than 50 feet from the side lot line abutting the
residential district. 



      3.   Rear:  35 feet; however, not within 75 feet of any
residential district.



   D.   The following conditions shall be applied to a building site
with frontage on a major thoroughfare (120 feet of right-of-way) where said
building exceeds 30 feet in height or two stories:



      1.   Minimum yard setback in feet:



         a.   Front: the building shall observe the front yard
setback specified in C-1, plus 15 feet, plus the height of each level of the
building which exceeds 30 feet measured from the nearest point of each level
to the property line. The first 50 feet shall be landscaped and maintained in
a neat and orderly condition. No parking shall be permitted in the 50 foot
required yard;



         b.   Side:  20 feet, plus the height of each level to
the property which exceeds 30 feet measured from the nearest point of each
level to the property line. Side abutting a residential district: 100 feet,
plus the height of each level of the building which exceeds 30 feet measured
from the nearest point of each level to the property line;



         c.   Rear:  50 feet, plus the height of each level of
the building which exceeds 30 feet measured from the nearest point of each
level to the property line. Rear abutting a residential district: 100 feet,
plus the height of each level of the building which exceeds 30 feet measured
from the nearest point of each level to the property line.



      2.   Maximum percentage of site coverage shall be 35%,
including accessory building.



      3.   Landscaped areas shall not be less than 15% of a total
building site.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard spaces, landscaping, off-street
parking and loading.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 27, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-O, § 10, 9-5-95; Ord. No.
278-CC, § 5, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-JJ, §§ 4, 5, 3-4-08)



SECTION 13.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveways and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (see section 24.02,
environmental provisions) approved by the Planning Department and so
maintained in an attractive condition.



   C.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04).



   D.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. All dumpsters shall be screened from visibility from any area
visible to the public by use of a wall constructed of the same material as
the building walls to ensure aesthetic compatibility. In reviewing this
request, the Planning Commission shall apply the standards contained herein
and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable conditions as authorized by
section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are satisfied.



   E.   Loading shall be provided only in rear yards. Side yard loading
may be permitted by the Planning Department when such space and loading
facilities do not interfere with parking and circulation, either vehicular or
pedestrian.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 28, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 6, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 14.  C-4 MULTI USE DISTRICT



SECTION 14.00.  INTENT.



   The C-4 Multi Use District is established to encourage a diversity of
compatible land uses, which may include a mixture of residential, office,
retail, recreational, office research and other miscellaneous uses within an
aesthetically attractive environment conducive to the development and
protection against nuisance type uses and combinations.



   Development shall be guided by an approved project development plan
that conforms with public places and policies and is implemented through the
use of the special approval land use and site plan review processes. The
project development is intended to accomplish the following:



   A.   Help create major new multi use developments in planned
locations with appropriate densities, heights and mixtures of uses;



   B.   Encourage areas devoted primarily to pedestrians by separating
pedestrian from vehicular circulation patterns and by requiring off-street
parking spaces in accordance with this objective and with the objectives of
an approved project development plan;



   C.   Encourage originality, flexibility and innovation in site
planning and development, including architecture, landscaping and graphic
design, in a manner compatible and harmonious with adjoining development and
within the district as a whole;



   D.   Make recreation areas more accessible to the district’s
residents, visitors and nearby residential and commercial areas;



   E.   Create environments conducive to a higher quality of life and
surroundings for residents, businesses, employees and institutions, as
specified in the City of Sterling Heights plans and policies. It is further
the intent that multi use be applied only to those areas where a mixture of
uses and building intensities is designed and arranged to carry out elements
of the city’s Master Land Use Plan, in pursuit of the goals for land use,
population, transportation, housing, public facilities and environmental
quality. In these designated areas, the mixture of uses and building
intensities shall be intended to promote and protect the public health,
safety, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the city.



   The multi use area and any other affected area shall be provided with
adequate public facilities, services and transportation networks to support
the proposed uses; or such facilities, services and transportation networks
should be planned to be provided concurrently with the development of the
project.



   Uses which are not compatible with the overall intent of this district
and which may include activities that would serve to detract from the design
and function of this district are prohibited.



(Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04)



SECTION 14.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, provided that all business,
servicing or processing (except for off street parking or loading) shall be
conducted entirely within a completely enclosed building:



   A.   Retail sales or services as specified in section 12.01;



   B.   Office;



   C.   Hotel or inn;



   D.   Private club, restaurant or fast-food restaurant;



   E.   Theaters, auditoriums, concert halls and similar places of
assembly, when conducted within a completely enclosed building;



   F.   Business and technical schools;



   G.   Health and athletic clubs;



   H.   Artist’s studios and galleries;



   I.   Community center;



   J.   Indoor recreation;



   K.   Library or museum;



   L.   Multiple family residential;



   M.   Common open space, including pedestrian plazas and courts;



   N.   Similar uses as determined by the Zoning Official;



   O.   Automobile service centers, when designed and developed as part
of a larger planned shopping center, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   No freestanding buildings shall be permitted;



      2.   All repair activities shall be conducted within the
building;



      3.   Overhead service doors servicing the facility shall be
positioned so as to minimize negative impacts on abutting properties;



      4.   No outdoor storage is permitted;



      5.   An adequate means of waste disposal shall be provided;



      6.   Adequate measure shall be taken to ensure that any noise,
dust, smoke, odor, fumes or other negative environmental impacts are confined
to the site.



   Outdoor storage and display of merchandise or equipment is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 278-T, §§ 6, 7, 6-3-97)



SECTION 14.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following buildings, structures and other uses similar to those
cited in this article may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to
the general standards of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for
each use:



   A.   Office research as regulated in Article 17;



   B.   Banquet and event facilities, subject to the following:



      1.   The use shall be located in a freestanding building.



      2.   The site shall be located upon a major thoroughfare
having an existing or proposed right-of-way of at least 86 feet, as indicated
on the Master Road Plan.



      3.   Any open air area where patrons of the banquet facility
may congregate shall not face any property used for or zoned for residential
use.



      4.   The banquet and event facility shall be operated in
compliance with all applicable provisions of the City Code.



   C.   Essential services needed to serve the immediate vicinity,
provided that appropriate screening, as determined by the Planning
Commission, shall be required when abutting single family dwellings;



   D.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 21, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-BBB, § 6, 7-18-17)



SECTION 14.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses, or the entire project, enumerated in sections 14.01 and 14.02
are permitted. Included are the following:



   A.   Indoor and outdoor recreational facilities, such as swimming
pools, saunas, game and craft rooms, tennis courts and exercise studios,
which are provided in association with a permitted use;



   B.   Amusement devices shall be permitted if accessory to retail
business, personal service shops, restaurants or in various permitted indoor
commercial recreation facilities as regulated in section 28.01;



   C.   Daycare facilities;



   D.   Parking and loading or unloading facilities and areas provided
in conjunction with a permitted use;



   E.   Radio, telephone and television towers, antennas and similar
structures.



   F.   Accessory banquet or event uses, provided that such uses are
conducted in accordance with all applicable provisions of the City Code, and
provided further that the City Planner may require the installation of
additional landscaping, screening, or other devices or materials designed to
contain noise, light, and or other impacts that are anticipated to extend
beyond the property line of the site and/or to provide separation from
abutting parking and maneuvering areas.



(Ord. No. 278-BBB, § 7, 7-18-17)



SECTION 14.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each project development area:



      1.   Area:  40 acres.



      2.   Width-to-depth ratio:  1 to 4 maximum.



   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the
owner of land from dividing any project development plan into two or more
lots. The project development plan shall include provisions for the
development of any adjoining out-parcels as an integral part of the overall
development concept. The development of any out-parcels shall conform to the
development as reflected in the project development plan.



   B.   Minimum individual lot or parcel requirements: 



      1.   Building coverage is limited to 30% of the gross lot area.



   C.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Building setbacks shall be measured from the centerline
of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s Master
Road Plan as specified in the following schedule, plus the height of the
building which exceeds 30 feet:



         Distance from the centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  177 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  150 feet.



         c.   Major:  135 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  118 feet.



         e.   Collector:  110 feet.



         f.   Local:  105 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  135 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  75 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  75 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than shown on the Master Road
Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from the
centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 75 feet for all classes of roads.



   D.   Side:  20 feet, plus the height of each level of the building
which exceeds 30 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level
to the property line. Side yards abutting any residential district shall
provide a setback of 50 feet, plus the height of the building which exceeds
30 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level to the
property line.



   E.   Rear:  30 feet, plus the height of each level of the building
which exceeds 30 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level
to the property line. Rear yards abutting any residential district shall
provide a setback of 50 feet, plus the height of the building which exceeds
30 feet in height measured from the nearest point of each level to the
property line.



   F.   Distance between buildings: the minimum distance between any
two buildings shall be regulated according to the length and height of such
buildings, and in no instance shall this distance be less than 30 feet. The
formula regulating the required minimum distance between two buildings is as
follows:



S equals LA plus LB plus 2 (HA plus HB), divided by 6



or



S=LA+LB+2(HA+HB)



6



where:



   S   equals required minimum horizontal distance between any wall of
building "A" and any wall of building “B” or the vertical prolongation of
either.



   LA   equals total length of building "A." The total length of
building "A" is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of
building "A" from which, when viewed directly from above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building “A” will intersect any wall of building “B.”



   LB   equals total length of building "B." The total length of
building "B" is the length of that portion or portions of a wall or walls of
building "B" from which, when viewed directly from the above, lines drawn
perpendicular to building "B" will intersect any wall of building "A."



   HA   equals height of building "A." The height of building "A" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "A." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



   HB   equals height of building "B." The height of building "B" at
any given level is the height above natural grade level of any portion or
portions of a wall or walls along the length of building "B." Natural grade
level shall be the mean level of the ground immediately adjoining the portion
or portions of the wall or walls along the total length of the building.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 29, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-T, § 8, 6-3-97)



SECTION 14.05.  PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   Parking requirements shall be governed by Article 23 of this ordinance,
unless as otherwise specified, and shall be permitted to occupy a portion of
the required front yard, provided that there shall remain a minimum
landscaped setback measured from the centerline of each road right-of-way
(R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s Master Road Plan, as follows:



   Distance from centerline:



   a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



   b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



   c.   Major:  95 feet.



   d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



   e.   Collector:  70 feet.



   f.   Local:  65 feet.



   g.   Cul-de-sac:  95 foot radius.



   h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



   i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   In the instance of high-rise office development and selected ancillary
commercial enterprises which will serve the daily needs of the office
workers, there may be less parking demand than if each use were estimated
separately and the parking requirements would be those established for the
particular use. These standards are included in section 23.01E. and F.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 30, 4-17-90)



SECTION 14.06.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Access to each outlot must be from an internal street and not
from abutting major thoroughfare.



   B.   The internal circulation system shall include pedestrian
walkways which provide continuous circulation from the boundary streets to
each lot or parcel within the development, common open space area and all
other important interior site destinations.



   C.   There shall be set aside for common open space not less than
one acre of land for every ten acres of land, or fraction thereof, in the
project development area. Such computation shall exclude the right-of-way
area devoted to the internal street system.



   The location of common open space shall be consistent with the declared
purpose of the common usable open space and, where possible, the common open
space shall be planned as a contiguous area, located on the site in
accordance with the approved project development plan for the maximum benefit
of the area. Protected environmentally sensitive areas, such as woodlands,
wetlands and drainage areas and the island portion of landscaped boulevards,
may be included in the calculation of required common open space.



   Open spaces for public congregation (plazas) are required and must be
equipped or designed to allow pedestrian seating and to be easily observed
and accessible from the pedestrian system.



   D.   As a minimum, there shall be one square foot of open space for
every 100 square feet of gross building floor area. Step space shall not be
counted as meeting this requirement. Such plaza area must be located behind
the required setback and easily accessible to, and visible from, the street,
but in no instance more than three feet above or below the level of the
adjoining grade.



   Within the plaza area, one tree must be planted for each 500 square
feet of plaza area, or portion thereof, up to 2,000 square feet of plaza
area. One additional tree is required for each additional 1,000 square feet
of plaza space. At least 20% of this requirement shall be of the ornamental
variety. Urban design features are encouraged as part of pedestrian plazas.
The following amenities, such as but not limited to ornamental fountains,
stairways, waterfalls, sculptures, arbors, trellises, planted beds, drinking
fountains, clock pedestals, public telephones, awnings, unlit canopies and
similar structures are permitted.



   E.   The buildings shall be constructed of aesthetically pleasing
brick and/or stone building materials or other similar durable building
materials as may be approved by the Planning Department, subject to any
additional requirements set forth in section 26.01, paragraph H.
Architectural style is not restricted. Evaluation of the appearance of a
project shall be based on the quality of its design, relationship to
surroundings, sensitive integration of form, textures and colors with the
particular landscape and setting.



   F.   Portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings or plazas shall be provided with landscaping approved by the
Planning Department in accordance with section 24.02.



   G.   The need for, and type of, screening required between
development features in the C-4 district and abutting zoning districts shall
be determined by the Planning Commission in consideration of the project
development plan.



   H.   In addition to the requirements specified above, the following
additional standards shall apply to the C-4 District.



      1.   Perimeter street setbacks. A minimum landscaped buffer
shall be provided between any perimeter roads and any building or parking
area. Said setback shall be measured from the centerline of each road
right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s Master Road Plan as
follows:



      Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



         c.   Major:  95 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



         e.   Collector:  70 feet.



         f.   Local:  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  95 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   This setback shall be landscaped to include street trees that are the
same or similar species as those on the perimeter of other developments
within the district.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Screening of parking, loading and truck maneuvering
areas. A landscaped berm (maximum slope of 1:3) poured decorative concrete
wall or massed plantings of sufficient height shall be provided to screen the
view of loading and truck maneuvering activity and buffer parking areas from
adjoining public access roads or properties.



   I.   All required landscape areas shall be continuously maintained
in a livable condition. All landscaping shall have an irrigation (water
sprinkler) system installed to assist in maintaining plant materials in a
healthy condition. The Planning Department may waive the irrigation
requirements for those portions of the site characterized by natural
vegetation.



   J.   All site lighting shall conform to the requirements of section
24.06.



   K.   Signs shall be governed by section 28.13 of this ordinance,
unless as otherwise approved as part of the project development plan.



   L.   No other storage of materials or equipment shall be allowed,
except for collection facilities for solid waste and rubbish. All such trash
receptacles shall be located and screened in compliance with the requirements
of section 24.05.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 31, 4-17-90: Ord. No. 278-T, § 9, 6-3-97; Ord. No.
278-OO, § 7, 8-5-09)



SECTION 14.07.  PROCESSING REQUIREMENTS.



   The process for obtaining review and approval of a multi use
development project is as follows.



   A.   Review conference. Prior to committing to any project
development plan or site design, the developer and its professional
consultants shall meet with the Planning  Department and other  appropriate
city departments to review the proposal. The applicant is expected to outline
to the city the project in terms of land use, anticipated building
arrangement and site design and proposed construction timetable. The Planning
Department will review the information and issue a preliminary review and
report to the Planning Commission for its consideration. The preliminary
review and report shall consider the following:



      1.   Whether the proposal has the following characteristics
and furthers the objectives of the multi use district:



         a.   Has three or more significant revenue-producing
uses (such as retail, office, residential, hotel/motel,
entertainment/cultural/recreation) that are well-planned and mutually
supporting;



         b.   Contains significant physical and functional
integration of project components (and thus a relatively intense use of
land), including uninterrupted pedestrian connections;



         c.   Will be developed to produce a coherent project
development plan which identifies the type and scale of uses, permitted
densities and related items;



         d.   Possesses a catalytic use or arrangement that will
drive the synergistic relationship of the multi use mix;



      2.   The relationship of the proposal to the purposes listed
in the intent of the district and other planning considerations for the area
and the City of Sterling Heights as a whole, including specific plans,
programs and policies of the city’s departments and agencies;



      3.   Adequacy of public and private services/infrastructure;



      4.   The impact of the proposal on neighboring properties;



      5.   The proposal’s relationship of different uses on the
site.



   B.   Project development plan review. A project development plan for
the total acreage embraced by the proposal shall be submitted to the City
Planning Commission for its review and approval before any site plan may be
submitted within the multi use district or any development may be undertaken.
This review shall occur in the following sequence:



      1.   An application shall be submitted by the applicant and be
accompanied by statements, plans, evidence, material and documentation
necessary to enable the Planning Commission to make the findings required by
this article. The required documentation shall consist of any or all of the
following:



         a.   A project development plan drawn to appropriate
scale showing the arrangement of the proposed development on the site,
including building locations, driveways, walkways, parking areas, natural
areas (streams, drains, woodlands) and open areas, among other features;



         b.   A narrative which provides the evidence that the
project satisfies the requirements of this ordinance and describes existing
site characteristics, the proposed character of the development and a
discussion of the means of serving the development;



         c.   Statement of covenants, grants of easements and
other restrictions to be imposed upon the uses of land and structures;



         d.   A legal description of the property;



         e.   A schedule indicating the proposed timing of the
development, including phasing and parcelization, if appropriate;



         f.   Any other data, plans or drawings considered by the
Planning Commission to be necessary for the consideration of the proposal.



         All materials required to be submitted as part of the
application shall be submitted in the required number of copies for
distribution to the Planning Commission and appropriate reviewing agencies.



      2.   The Planning Commission shall review the application
materials and reviewing agencies’ comments. In the process of review, the
Planning Commission shall consider:



         a.   Specific development requirements set forth in this
ordinance;



         b.   The location and design of service roads or drives
and driveways, providing vehicular ingress to and egress from each building
site, in relation to streets giving access to the site and in relation to
pedestrian traffic;



         c.   The traffic circulation features within the site
and location of automobile parking areas and may make such requirements with
respect to any matters as will assure:



            (1)   Safety and convenience of both vehicular and
pedestrian traffic, both within the site and in relation to access;



            (2)   Satisfactory and harmonious relationships
between the development on the site and the existing and prospective
development of contiguous land and adjacent parcels and districts;



            (3)   Accessibility afforded to emergency vehicles;



         d.   The arrangement of use areas on the site in
relation to functional, efficient and compatible arrangements within the site
and also to adjacent uses;



            (1)   The treatment of public space;



            (2)   The availability of sewer and water capacity
and the capacity of other utilities;



            (3)   The impact on air quality;



            (4)   The potential noise from commercial and
traffic sources;



         e.   The proposal’s conformity with and compatibility
to the character of the surrounding property and that it will not
substantially interfere with the safety, light, air and convenience of the
surrounding private and public property;



         f.   Any other matters that are within the agencies’
or the commission’s jurisdiction.



   C.   Project development action.



      1.   Upon review of the project development plan, the Planning
Commission shall approve, approve with conditions or deny. If the facts
regarding the proposal being reviewed do not establish, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance
will be met by the proposal, the Planning Commission shall deny incorporating
into a statement containing the conclusions relative to the request under
consideration the specific reasons for the decision.



      2.   Upon approval of the project development plan, the
development shall be pursued to be built substantially in accordance with the
approved project development plan as reflected in subsequent individual site
plans submitted for each parcel or lot of the project. Subsequent amendments
to an approved project development plan shall not require Planning Commission
approval, unless said amendments significantly impact factors considered by
the Planning Commission in approving said plan. Such factors may include
changes to the circulation system, densities and building arrangements. If
the Planning Department deems that there is a substantial change or deviation
from that shown on the approved project development plan, the owner/applicant
or his or her successors shall be required to return to the city for approval
of an amended plan, following the procedure outlined for original approval in
this section.



      3.   Development of the site shall begin within five years
following the approval of the project development plan and pursued diligently
to completion. If development of the site has lapsed for a period exceeding
two years, the owner/applicant, or his or her successors, shall be required
to return to the city for reconsideration of the plan following the procedure
outlined for original approval in this section.



ARTICLE 15.  P-1 VEHICULAR PARKING DISTRICT



SECTION 15.00.  INTENT.



   The P-1 Vehicular Parking District is intended to permit the
establishment of areas to be used solely for off-street parking of private
passenger vehicles as a use incidental to a principal use. This district will
generally be established to serve a use district which has developed without
adequate off-street parking facilities or on portions of sites where it is
intended that building construction will not occur. It also may serve as a
buffer between residential and nonresidential uses.



SECTION 15.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted, subject to the limitations of
this ordinance:



   A.   Off-street vehicular surface parking lots.



SECTION 15.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use.



   A.   Parking structures, subject to the requirements of section
23.04.



   B.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 22, 5-16-00)



SECTION 15.03.  ACCESSORY USES.



   Accessory buildings and uses as regulated by section 28.00, accessory
uses and structures.



SECTION 15.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  2.



      2.   In height:  25 feet.



   B.   Minimum lot size:



      1.   Area:  12,000 square feet.



      2.   Width:  80 feet.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:  None.



   D.   Minimum yard setbacks per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



         c.   Major:  95 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



         e.   Collector:  70 feet.



         f.   Local:  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  95 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



      2.   Rear and side yards: where the P-1 District is adjacent
to a residentially zoned district, screening meeting the requirements for a
moderate intensity impact shall be required along the common property line as
specified in section 24.01. Parking structures shall maintain side and rear
yard setbacks of 20 feet. No such structure shall be located closer than 75
feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such
property line abuts any residential zoning district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, off-street
parking and screening.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 32, 4-17-90)



SECTION 15.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   Parking areas shall be used solely for parking of passenger
vehicles, for periods of less than one day.



   B.   No repair work or service of any kind, or sale or display
thereof, shall be conducted in such parking areas.



   C.   No signs of any kind, other than signs designating the use,
entrances, exits and conditions of use, shall be maintained on such parking
areas.



   D.   Development in any P-1, Vehicular Parking District, shall
observe all applicable requirements of Article 23.



   E.   Portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping, as specified in
section 24.02, approved by the Planning Department and so maintained in an
attractive condition.



ARTICLE 16.  FLOODPLAIN AREA



SECTION 16.00.  INTENT.



   The floodplain provisions are intended to protect the "floodplain
area," as defined below, so that the reservoir capacity shall not be reduced,
thereby creating a danger to areas previously not so endangered in time of
high water or to impede, retard, accelerate or change the direction of the
flow of water or carrying capacity of the river valley or to otherwise
increase the possibility of flood.



SECTION 16.01.  RESTRICTION ON USES.



   All lands included in the floodplain area shall be subject to the
restrictions imposed herein, in addition to the restrictions imposed by any
other zoning district in which said lands are located. Where the regulations
of this article are more restrictive, they shall control.



SECTION 16.02.  FLOODPLAIN AREA DEFINED.



   FLOODPLAIN AREA,as used herein, is deemed to mean that area defined as
(a) special flood hazard area in The Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) Flood Insurance Study (FIS) entitled “Macomb County, Michigan and
all Jurisdictions” and dated 9/29/06.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 6, 1-6-09)



SECTION 16.03.  FLOODPLAIN AREA BOUNDARIES.



   Floodplain area boundaries shall be those areas designated as special
flood hazard areas in The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) entitled “Macomb County, Michigan and all
Jurisdictions” and dated 9/29/06.



(Ord. No. 278-P, § 2, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 7, 1-6-09)



SECTION 16.04.  PERMITTED USES.



   The following uses shall be permitted in floodplain areas subject to
any limitations described herein:



   A.   Gardening, general farming, horticulture, forestry or any
similar agricultural activity;



   B.   Public and private open recreation areas such as parks,
playgrounds, play fields, golf courses and bridle paths;



   C.   Railroads, roads, bridges, dams, weirs and public utilities,
when designed so as not to increase the possibility of flood or be otherwise
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare;



   D.   Surface parking areas regulated by Article 23 of this ordinance;



   E.   On parcels immediately above the floodplain area boundary, or
partly located within such boundary, uses permitted by the zoning districts
otherwise established for the parcel subject to the regulations of such
district provided:



      1.   The elevation of the lowest floor designed or intended
for human habitation shall be at least two feet above the elevation of the
floodplain area boundary;



      2.   In the area below the upper limit of the floodplain area
boundary, dumping or backfilling with any material in any manner is
prohibited, unless through compensating excavation and shaping of the
floodplain area its flow and impoundment capacity will be maintained or
improved;



      3.   Any filling on banks adjacent to a floodplain area
boundary shall have approved erosion control to prevent soil from being
washed into the floodplain. City Council shall adopt erosion control
standards to be enforced by the City Engineer;



   F.   Floodplain areas shall be restricted so as to prohibit any
structure wherein human habitation may be provided for either a place of
residence or employment.



SECTION 16.05.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this section,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards for each use:



   A.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 23, 5-16-00)



SECTION 16.06.  APPLICANT TO PROVIDE TECHNICAL DATA.



   Where topographic data, engineering studies or other studies are
required by any city agency to determine the effects of flooding on a
proposed site and/or the effect of a structure on the flow of water, the
applicant shall submit such data or studies. All such required data or
studies shall be prepared by a registered professional engineer.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 23, 5-16-00)



SECTION 16.07.  ADOPTION OF FLOODPLAIN AREA MAP.



   "The Flood Insurance Study of the City of Sterling Heights," dated May
15, 1986, with the accompanying flood insurance rate map and flood
boundary-floodway maps, as amended from time to time, which designated the
areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management
agency, is adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this ordinance to
more particularly set forth the floodplain areas.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 23, 5-16-00)



SECTION 16.08.  APPEALS FROM PROVISIONS OF THIS ARTICLE.



   Appeals for modification of any of the provisions of this article shall
be made to the  Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of Sterling Heights.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 23, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



ARTICLE 17.  O-R OFFICE RESEARCH DISTRICT



SECTION 17.00.  INTENT.



   The O-R Office Research District is designed to primarily accommodate
office, scientific, business, technological research operations, related
testing operations and other related uses where office, technology and
scientific research activities are mutually dependent or developmental in
nature; in a spacious, open type environment devoid of nuisance factors
commonly present in nonresidential districts; and to permit uses which
support and complement permitted principal uses enumerated in this district
or which are vital to such principal uses and required to be located close to
them; and the result shall be development planned in a coordinated manner,
according to an approved site plan. It is further the intent of this district
to continue all activities within an enclosed building with no outdoor
activities allowed.



SECTION 17.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   All uses permitted in this district shall be conducted completely
within a building in accordance with the standards of this article and
limited to those listed on the approved site plan, and no other uses shall be
permitted unless the appropriate plans are amended in accordance with this
ordinance.



   A.   Corporate headquarter offices, administrative, professional
and/or business offices of permitted principal uses, legal, engineering,
surveying, accounting, architectural and similar professional offices.



   B.   Research, development and testing facilities for technological,
scientific and business establishments, including the development of
prototypes.



   C.   Educational and design facilities whose principal function is
the research and development of new products and processes and technical
training.



   D.   Technological, medical and dental clinics; medical, optical,
pharmaceutical and dental laboratories.



   E.   Data processing and computer centers, including incidental
service and maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.



   F.   Similar uses as determined by the Zoning Official.



SECTION 17.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to
service the immediate vicinity but excluding any outside storage;



   B.   The development of professional, scientific instruments,
electrical or electronic prototypes which meet the performance standards
specified in section 17.06;



   C.   Specialized or customized photographic or graphic design
services;



   D.   Limited retail services customarily incidental to the principal
uses permitted in sections 17.01 and 17.02, subject to the following:



      1.   Not more than 10% of the gross floor area, not to exceed
a total of 1,500 square feet, may be available as a sales area or for display;



      2.   The display of available products shall not be visible
from outside the building;



      3.   All such uses shall be located in a building containing
the permitted principal uses which will be served;



   E.   Planned office research parks, subject to the following:



      1.   All planned office research parks shall have a minimum
site size of ten acres;



      2.   In order to achieve innovative design, the Planning
Commission may modify specific height or placement standards in conjunction
with an approved development plan for the site. Whenever a specific standard
is varied, the extent of the change and the basis for it shall be documented
as part of the approval;



   F.   Trade or technical schools;



   G.   Printing, publishing, photographic processing or allied
industries;



   H.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 24, 5-16-00)



SECTION 17.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 17.01 and 17.02 are permitted.
Accessory uses, other than parking and trash receptacles, shall be contained
within an enclosed structure.



SECTION 17.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Area:  40,000 square feet.



      2.   Width:  140 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  2.



      2.   In feet:  30.



      (Building height may exceed 30 feet, provided that the front,
rear and side yard setbacks are increased three feet for each one additional
foot of building height.)



   For development of more than one building, height limit zones shall be
delineated on a site plan. The zones shall be based on considerations of
architectural character, natural light, air circulation, views, solar access,
relation to neighboring buildings and fire protection and safety. The
proposed height of each building shall be shown on the site plan.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  5,000 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



         c.   Major:  95 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



         e.   Collector:  70 feet.



         f.   Local:  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  95 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   The required front yard shall be landscaped and maintained thereafter
in a neat and orderly condition. Parking shall not be allowed within the
required front yard setback. If the existing right-of-way is greater than
that shown on the Master Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side
setback) as measured from the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal
to one-half of the actual right-of-way of the street plus 35 feet for all
classes of roads.



      2.   Side:  25 feet one side; 100 feet total. No building
shall be located closer than 75 feet to the outer perimeter (property line)
of such district when such property line abuts any residential district.



      3.   Rear:  75 feet. No building shall be located closer than
100 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of this district when such
property line abuts any residential district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening,
off-street parking and loading. The location of buildings and uses and
distances between buildings shall be as shown on the site plan. Distances
between buildings shall be sufficient to meet fire regulations and to provide
for natural light, air circulation and solar access.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 33, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-AA, §§ 5, 6, 3-20-01)



SECTION 17.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping (see section 24.02,
environmental provisions) approved by the Planning Department and so
maintained in an attractive condition. Parking lots shall be landscaped so as
to reduce heat and glare, to divide parking lots into smaller units and to
buffer adjacent areas, where necessary. All plantings shall be live and shall
be properly and regularly maintained. Dead or dying materials shall be
replaced in accordance with approved plans.



   C.   Outdoor storage of vehicles, equipment, supplies or products;
outdoor processing, repair or other operations; or outdoor display of goods,
materials, products, equipment or processes is prohibited. No display shall
be permitted in a window or in any other location visible from a street or an
adjacent lot. Trash and other waste materials shall be stored within a
principal or accessory building or shall be totally screened from view from a
street and adjacent lot and shall not be located in a required yard. Utility
meters and control devices shall also be located and screened.



   D.   Loading and unloading areas, as specified in section 23.05, are
not required in the O-R Office Research District. All loading and unloading
activities shall be confined to inside the building. Loading areas shall be
confined to rear yard areas with all such activities screened from view
off-site. Side yard loading areas may be permitted by the Planning Department
when such space and loading facilities do not interfere with parking and
circulation, either vehicular or pedestrian, and/or where a residential
district abuts the rear property line. Loading activities shall be limited in
duration to a period of time not to exceed 24 hours.



   E.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. In reviewing this request, the Planning Commission shall apply the
standards contained herein and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable
conditions as authorized by section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are
satisfied.



   F.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by an approved architectural detail so as not to be
visible from off the site (section 24.04).



(Ord. 278-OO, § 8, 8-5-09)



SECTION 17.06.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS OF USES.



   It is the intent of this section to require that each permitted use
shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by control of noise, odor,
glare, vibration, smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity and
the like. The performance standards set forth in subsection (A) following
shall be complied with, and any use which fails to comply with the standards
shall be in violation of this ordinance and be subject to penalties as
accorded by law. The sum of the effects of concurrent operations on two or
more lots measured at any property line shall not be greater or more
offensive to the senses than the standards contained herein. Compliance with
the provisions of this subsection by single or mutual changes in operational
levels, scheduling of operations and other adjustments is permitted. In case
of conflict among these standards and federal and state regulations, the most
restrictive standard or regulation shall apply.



   A.   General regulations and limitations on uses.



      1.   Noise. Noise shall not exceed 60 decibels (db(A))
equivalent daytime and 55 decibels (db(A)) equivalent nighttime, as measured
at any site line which is adjacent to any residential, office or commercial
zone. In no case shall the maximum noise level exceed 60 db(A).



      2.   Odors. Odors from any use shall not be discernible at the
property line to a greater degree than odors from plants for the manufacture
of electronic equipment. The values given in table III (Odor Thresholds) in
the latest revision of Chapter 5, "Physiological Effects," in the "Air
Pollution Abatement Manual," by the Manufacturing Chemists’ Association,
Inc., Washington, D.C., copyright 1951, shall be used as standard in case of
doubt concerning the character of odors emitted. In such case, the smallest
value given in table III shall be the maximum odor permitted. Detailed plans
for the prevention of odors crossing property lines may be required before
approval of a site plan by the Planning Department.



      3.   Glare. Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from
floodlights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general
illumination, shall not be visible at any property line.



      4.   Exterior lighting. Any lights used for exterior
illumination shall comply with the  exterior lighting standards of section
24.06.



 




Schedule of Maximum Illumination
(in footcandles measured at the surface)



Illumination of
 
Intensity


General
 
0.5


Driveway
 
1.0


Parking
 
1.0


Walks
 
0.5


Protective
 
1.0


Building
 
3.0


Loading areas
 
1.0




 



   No light measured (at eye level) at the property line between
nonresidential and any residential district or use shall be greater than
one-quarter footcandle at the side and rear property line, nor greater than
one-half footcandle or the intensity of the available street lighting at the
front property line, whichever is greater. Lighting shall be arranged so as
to reflect light away from adjacent residential areas.



      5.   Vibration. Vibration shall not be discernible at any
property line to the human sense of feeling for three minutes or more
duration in any one hour. No discernible vibration should be detectable at
all at any residential district boundary. Vibration at any time shall not
produce an acceleration of more than 0.1 gravities or shall result in any
combination of amplitudes and frequencies beyond the "safe" range of table 7
United States Bureau of Mines Bulletin No. 442, "Seismic Effects of Quarry
Blasting" on any structure. The methods and equations of said Bulletin No.
442 shall be used to compute all values for the enforcement of this provision.



      6.   Smoke. Emission of smoke on the site shall be controlled
so that a nuisance will not result. Emission of smoke shall not exceed the
number 1 standard as established by the Ringelmann Chart.



      7.   Dusk dirt and fly ash. No person, firm or corporation
shall operate or cause to be operated, maintain or cause to be maintained any
process for any purpose or furnace or combustion device for the burning of
coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, without maintaining and operating
while using said process or furnace or combustion device, recognized and
approved equipment, means, methods, device or contrivance to reduce the
quantity of gasborne or airborne solids or fumes emitted into the open air,
which is operated in conjunction with said process, furnace or combustion
device so that the quantity of gasborne or airborne solids shall not exceed
20 hundredths grains per cubic foot of the carrying medium at the temperature
of 500°F. For the purpose of determining the adequacy of such device, these
conditions are to be conformed to when the percentage of excess air in the
stack does not exceed 50% at full load. The foregoing requirement shall be
measured at the A.S.M.E. test code for dust-separating apparatus. All other
forms of dust, dirt and fly ash shall be completely eliminated insofar as
escape or emission into the open air is concerned. The city may require such
additional data as is deemed necessary to show that adequate and approved
provisions for the prevention and elimination of dust, dirt and fly ash have
been made.



      8.   Gases. Fumes or gases shall not be emitted at any point
in concentration or amounts that are noxious, toxic or corrosive. The values
given in table I (Industrial Hygiene Standards - Maximum Allowable
Concentration for eight-hour day, five days per week), table III (Odor
Thresholds), table IV (Concentrations of Substance Causing Pain in the Eyes)
and table V (Exposures to Substances Causing Injury to Vegetation) in the
latest revision of Chapter 5, "Physiological Effects," that contains such
tables, in the "Air Pollution Abatement Manual," by the Manufacturing
Chemists' Association, Inc., Washington, D.C., are established as guides for
the determination of permissible concentration or amounts. Detailed plans for
the elimination of fumes or gases may be required before approval of the site
plan.



      9.   Hazard. Operations shall be carried on with reasonable
precautions against fire and explosion hazards.



      10.   Radiation and radioactivity. All activities involving
radioactive materials shall be conducted according to state and federal rules
and regulations adopted for human safety. Operations shall cause no dangerous
radiation, as specified by the regulations of the United States Nuclear
Regulatory Commission, at any property line.



      11.   Electrical radiation. Electrical radiation shall not
adversely affect at any point any operations or any equipment other than
those of the creator of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from
electrical radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations
is permitted.



      12.   Waste. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be
handled, stored, treated and/or disposed of in compliance with all federal,
state, county and/or city laws and regulations.



      13.   Utilities underground. All lines for telephone,
electric, television and other similar services distributed by wire or cable
shall be placed underground entirely throughout the development area, except
for major thoroughfare right-of-way, and such conduits or cables shall be
placed within private easements provided to such service companies by the
developer or within dedicated public ways. All such facilities placed in
dedicated public ways shall be planned so as not to conflict with other
underground utilities. All such facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service
Commission.



      14.   Heat. Operations generating heat shall be contained
within a building. In no case shall the generated heat raise the ambient
temperature at a property line higher than the prevailing normal temperature
at the time of occurrence.



      15.   Storage. Above ground outside storage shall not be
permitted. The storage of explosives shall not be permitted. Underground
storage of flammable materials shall not be permitted unless it is accessory
to the principal use and specifically approved by all applicable local, state
and federal review authorities.



(Ord. No. 278GG, § 1, 12-6-05)



ARTICLE 18.  TRO TECHNICAL RESEARCH OFFICE DISTRICT



SECTION 18.00.  INTENT.



   The TRO Technical Research Office District is intended to accommodate
research, technical, office and related storage activities which serve the
needs of nearby commercial, industrial and educational establishments. The
primary characteristic of uses allowed in this district is the pursuit of
scientific and technical knowledge and provisions of facilities to serve the
needs generated by those endeavors. Uses in this district shall not emit
smoke, dust, dirt or odor or gas particles and/or energy radiation in amounts
which would be detrimental to the environmental quality. All uses located
within this district shall be designed and operated so as to produce no
sound, glare or vibration discernible at the property lines in excess of the
normal intensity of street or traffic noises or vibration noticeable at such
points.



SECTION  18.01. PERMITTED USES.



   A.   Educational, research and design facilities charged with the
principal function of research and development of new products and processes
and technical training.



   B.   Industrial, scientific or commercial research, development and
testing laboratories.



   C.   Executive and administrative offices for concerns whose plants
or other facilities are not permitted in the TRO district.



   D.   Industrial, medical and dental clinics, medical, optical,
pharmaceutical and dental laboratories and veterinary hospitals and clinics.



   E.   Data processing and computer centers, including service and
maintenance of electronic data processing equipment.



   F.   Legal, engineering, surveying, accounting, architectural and
similar professional offices.



   G.   Trade, industrial or technical schools.



   H.   Radio and television broadcasting stations, excluding towers.



SECTION 18.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to
service the immediate vicinity but excluding any outside storage, subject to
applicable regulations of section 3.02(I). Wireless communication towers,
antennas and related facilities shall be further subject to the provisions of
section 28.18;



   B.   Ambulance service dispatch centers, subject to the following:



      1.   All ingress and egress from the site shall be directly
onto a major thoroughfare having an existing or proposed right-of-way width
greater than 120 feet, as indicated on the city’s Master Road Plan;



      2.   All parking for emergency vehicles shall be located in
the rear yard and shall be contained within the site;



   C.   The assembly of professional and scientific instruments,
electrical or electronic machinery and appliances and machines, such as
phonographs, radios, television sets, office computing and accounting
machines and similar equipment;



   D.   Printing, publishing, photographic processing or allied
industries;



   E.   Warehouse and wholesale establishments used in conjunction with
any of the principal uses permitted in sections 18.01 and 18.02, excluding
truck terminals;



   F.   Limited retail sales of products customarily incidental to the
principal uses permitted in sections 18.01 and 18.02, subject to the
following:



      1.   The total floor area within the structure devoted to
sales and display shall not exceed 10% of the floor area of the entire
building;



      2.   The display of products for sale shall not be visible
from outside the building.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 25, 5-16-00)



SECTION 18.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses, including assembly operations limited to
the development of prototypes, which are customarily incidental or
specifically related to a principal use enumerated in sections 18.01 and
18.02 are permitted.



SECTION 18.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Area: None.



      2.   Width:  None.



      3.   Depth:  250 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stores:  3.



      2.   In feet:  30.



   C.   Maximum lot coverage by building:  None.



   D.   Maximum floor area of any building in square feet:  None.



   E.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as follows:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  137 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  110 feet.



         c.   Major:  5 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  78 feet.



         e.   Collector:  70 feet.



         f.   Local:  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:  95 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  35 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  35 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject lot.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than that shown on the Master
Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from
the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



   F.   Side:  15 feet one side; 30 feet total. No building shall be
located closer than 50 feet, and no parking shall be located closer than 20
feet from the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such
property line abuts any residential district.



   G.   Rear:  50 feet. No building shall be located closer than 50
feet, and no parking shall be located closer than 20 feet from the outer
perimeter (property line) of this district when such property line abuts any
residential district.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 34, 4-17-90)



SECTION 18.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All storage of equipment or supplies used in any production or
assembly shall be within an enclosed building.



   C.   Front yard loading and unloading docks and truckwells shall be
prohibited along major thoroughfares and/or existing or proposed
rights-of-way of 120 feet or greater. Along thoroughfares or rights-of-way of
less than 120 feet, below grade loading shall be permitted in the required
front yard. In no instance shall above grade or elevated loading or standing
areas for loading and unloading be permitted in the required front yard.



   D.   Loading areas shall be screened from view from any adjacent
residential property.



(Ord. No. 278-OO, § 9, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 19.  M-1 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



SECTION 19.00.  INTENT.



   The M-1 Light Industrial District is intended to accommodate industrial
activities whose external effects are minimal and in no way detrimental to
surrounding districts, plus wholesale, warehousing and intensive service
activities of a nature such as not to justify their inclusion in the
commercial use district, but whose external effects also are nondetrimental.
All uses in the district are intended to be compatible with one another. It
is further the intent to carefully conserve land in the M-1 Zone for
manufacturing and related uses, only in special circumstances will certain
convenience services needed to serve the basic light industrial and related
uses be permitted. All uses located within this district shall be so designed
and operated as to observe the performance standards and regulations of use
contained herein. The processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form
for use in an industrial operation at another location shall not be permitted.



SECTION 19.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   All uses in this district shall be conducted wholly within a building
with a landscaped front yard and with the side or rear yard used for loading
and customer and employee parking.



   A.   Any one or more permitted uses in the O-R district as regulated
in section 17.01 of this ordinance.



   B.   Warehousing and wholesale establishments and mini-warehouses.



   C.   Light manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly, packing
or treatment of articles from previously prepared raw materials which meet
the requirements of this district.



   D.   Printing, publishing, photographic processing or allied
industries.



   E.   Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, provided that such
plants shall not deal directly with consumers on a retail basis.



   F.   Utility and public service facilities and uses needed to
service the immediate vicinity but excluding any outside storage.



   G.   Local union halls and offices.



   H.   Trade or industrial schools.



   I.   Commercial ambulance services.



   J.   Post offices and other public facilities, including DPW yards.



   K.   Building construction material wholesalers and contractors
without outdoor storage.



   L.   Uses permitted under Article 22, Section 22.05 B 1, in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 22.05.



   M.   Similar uses, as determined by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. No. 278-PP, § 1, 12-1-09)



SECTION 19.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards for each use:



   A.   Building and construction material wholesalers and contractors,
including but not limited to storage facilities and storage yards for
building materials, sand, gravel, lumber and construction contractor’s
equipment, subject to the following:



      1.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land within an industrial district;



      2.   All outdoor storage shall be surrounded by an approved
obscuring wall or fence of at least eight feet in height; provided, however,
those sides abutting any major thoroughfare as described in the Master Road
Plan shall be screened by an obscuring wall of at least eight feet in height;



   B.   Nonautomotive painting and varnishing shops, lumber and planing
mills, subject to the following:



      1.   The site for such use shall, except for frontage on a
public street, abut only land within an industrial district;



      2.   Devices and controls adequate to meet the standards
enumerated in section 19.06 relative to sound, vibration, smoke, odor or gas
shall be installed;



      3.   Adequate means of sanitary disposal of any waste material
shall be provided;



      4.   All painting and varnishing operations shall be conducted
within an enclosed building;



   C.   New and leased car sales establishments, excluding auto
auctions, subject to the following:



      1.   Devices and controls adequate to meet the standards
enumerated in section 19.06 relative to sound, vibration, smoke, odor or
gases shall be installed;



      2.   Adequate means of sanitary disposal of any waste material
shall be provided;



      3.   All areas provided for storage of automobiles shall be
hard-surfaced and maintained with a permanent durable and dustless surface
constructed of asphalt or concrete and shall be so graded and drained as to
dispose within the site of all surface water accumulated within the area;



      4.   Parking of vehicles for the display and sale of new car
sales and lease establishments shall be permitted in the front yard setback.
Any such display, however, shall observe the setback requirements specified
in section 19.04, area, height and bulk requirements, minus 30 feet;



   D.   Auto service centers and reconditioning establishments, subject
to the following:



      1.   All repair operations shall be conducted within an
enclosed building;



      2.   Devices and controls adequate to meet the standards
enumerated in section 19.06 relative to sound, vibration, smoke, odor or
gases shall be installed;



      3.   Adequate means of sanitary disposal of any waste
materials shall be provided;



      4.   Storage of vehicles awaiting repair or pickup shall be
restricted to parking spaces reflected on the approved site plan. In no case
shall vehicles be stored for a period in excess of 15 days;



   E.   Automobile repair garages, subject to the following:



      1.   The site for any such use shall (except for frontage on a
public street) abut only land within a commercial or industrial district);



      2.   All overhead service doors servicing the facility shall
either face industrially zoned property or the public street if the doors are
within 75 feet of a commercial zoned district;



      3.   All repair operations shall be conducted within an
enclosed building;



      4.   Devices and controls adequate to meet the standards
enumerated in section 19.06 relative to sound, vibration, smoke, odor or
gases shall be installed;



      5.   Adequate means of sanitary disposal of any waste
materials shall be provided;



      6.   Parked vehicles waiting to be repaired shall be located
in designated areas and screened from public view by a decorative masonry
wall meeting the requirements of section 24.01;



   F.   Recreational vehicle storage, subject to the following:



      1.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land within an industrial district;



      2.   All such storage shall be enclosed within a building or
shall be surrounded by an approved obscuring wall or fence of at least eight
feet in height; provided, however, those sides abutting any major
thoroughfare as described in the Master Road Plan shall be screened by an
obscuring wall of at least eight feet in height;



      3.   Holding tank disposal facilities shall be provided which
shall meet all state, county and city requirements;



      4.   No major repair or maintenance of any vehicles shall be
performed on the premises;



      5.   The site or area shall be hard-surfaced and maintained
with a permanent durable and dustless surface constructed of asphalt or
concrete and shall be so graded and drained as to dispose within the site of
all surface water accumulated within the area;



   G.   Limited retail sales of products customarily incidental to the
uses permitted in sections 19.01 and 19.02, subject to the following:



      1.   No more than 10% of the gross floor area, not to exceed a
total of 1,500 square feet, may be available as a sales area or for retail
display;



      2.   Retail sales and display shall be limited to the specific
item or items manufactured, processed, fabricated or produced and/or the
display of the components used in fabrication of the finished product
produced;



      3.   The Planning Department may require additional parking to
be provided not to exceed the retail requirements of section 23.02 if the
parking for the industrial use is determined by the Planning Department to be
insufficient to accommodate both the industrial and retail operations of the
site;



      4.   Signage and lighting shall be compatible with surrounding
industrial uses;



      5.   The display of products for sale shall not be visible
from outside the building;



      6.   All such uses shall either be located in a building
containing the permitted principal uses which will be served or in service
centers consisting of one or more buildings designed with common drives,
parking and loading areas and landscaping;



   H.   Automobile impound lots, subject to the following:



      1.   The entire area shall be enclosed on all sides with
fencing not less than six feet in height;



      2.   The site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land within an industrial district;



      3.   A concrete driveway of at least 15 feet in width shall be
installed to provide access to the site from a public thoroughfare;



      4.   The site or area used as the impound lot shall be hard
surfaced or maintained with a durable gravel base which shall be maintained
in a dust-free condition and shall be so graded and drained so as to dispose
within the site of all surface water accumulated within the area;



      5.   The impounded lot shall not be located within a planned
industrial park;



      6.   Storage of all materials shall be in conformance with
applicable Fire Department codes, rules and regulations;



      7.   Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for the
parking of vehicles of participants in periodic auctions to be held on the
site;



      8.   All buildings and/or structures shall conform with
applicable codes and ordinances;



      9.   Permanent or portable sanitary facilities shall be
provided on site or available for use within 300 feet of the impound lot;



      10.   Lighting shall be provided to enhance security on the
site;



      11.   The impound lot shall be maintained for the exclusive
storage of vehicles and articles impounded, seized or recovered by authorized
governmental agencies and shall not be used by the operator of the impound
lot or any contractor for the storage of articles or vehicles;



      12.   The operation of the lot shall be in accordance with all
applicable federal and state statutes and regulations and all applicable
local codes, ordinances and regulations;



   I.   Indoor recreation facilities, including the ice arenas,
gymnastic facilities and tennis facilities;



   J.   Truck, utility trailer, industrial and commercial vehicles and
equipment, boat, recreation vehicle and mobile home rental facilities,
subject to the following conditions:



      1.   No storage shall be permitted within the front yard
setback;



      2.   All outdoor storage areas shall be paved;



      3.   The minimum size of the site devoted entirely to such use
shall be not less than five acres;



   K.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02.(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18;



   L.   Lighted outdoor commercial sports centers, including baseball,
golf driving ranges, miniature golf and other intense activities. Because
such centers possess the unique characteristic of often being used late into
the night while attracting large numbers of spectators and attendant
vehicular traffic in conjunction with ingress and egress to parking areas,
these uses shall be permitted only in industrial districts subject to the
following conditions:



      1.   Outdoor commercial sports centers shall be permitted only
upon parcels of land zoned M-1 and M-2 which are surrounded by similarly
zoned property on all sides, except a side abutting a major thoroughfare of
120 feet of right-of-way or greater. Such uses shall be limited to parcels of
property which exceed 20 acres and are not conducive to industrial
development by virtue of large floodplain areas, previous landfill use or
similar circumstances. The petitioner shall provide the Planning Commission
with supporting documentation and data, including but not limited to
topographic surveys, soil tests and any other information determined to be
necessary for the Planning Commission to determine whether these requirements
have been met;



      2.   Because it is of primary concern to the city to preserve
large areas of industrial property for industrial uses, the Planning
Commission when considering approval of such a use shall take into account
the compatibility of the lighted outdoor commercial sports center with
existing and future industrial development and the requirements of sections
25.02 and 25.03;



      3.   The proposed internal site design of the facility shall
meet all standards of the city and other affected governmental agencies,
including but not limited to those standards pertaining to proper drainage,
lighting, hard-surfacing and other engineering standards;



      4.   Points of ingress and egress shall be available to the
complex only from abutting major thoroughfares of 120 feet of right-of-way or
greater. The site shall comply with all standards of the City of Sterling
Heights and other affected governmental agencies relative to driveways,
acceleration and deceleration lanes and related items;



      5.   The use and parking area shall be screened from adjacent
major thoroughfares with berms and other approved landscaping;



      6.   All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be
installed so as to be confined within and directed upon the site;



      7.   Devices for the transmission of broadcasting of voices or
music shall be so directed as to prevent said sound from being audible beyond
the lot lines of the site;



      8.   Storage buildings, restroom facilities, facilities for
the sale and consumption of food, beverages and refreshments and other
similar accessory uses shall comply with all standards of the City of
Sterling Heights and other affected governmental agencies. Such accessory
facilities shall operate only during the hours of operation of the principal
use of the property;



   M.   Firearm and archery ranges, subject to the following:



      1.   All activities shall take place within an enclosed
building;



      2.   The use shall comply with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, rules, regulations and licensing requirements;



   N.   Kennels, subject to the following:



      1.   No such use shall be located within 150 feet of any
residential zone;



      2.   All housing of animals shall be done in completely
enclosed freestanding buildings or with a corner tenant in such a manner as
to produce no offensive odor or audible sound at the lot line or to adjacent
tenants;



      3.   An adequate, enclosed method of refuse storage and
disposal shall be maintained so that no public nuisance shall be created at
any time;



      4.   The site shall be located so as to have one property line
abutting a major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-of-way, existing
or proposed;



      5.   Outdoor exercise areas shall be secured or fenced and
shall not be located within 50 feet of any property line.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 35, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-F, § 7, 8-8-90; Ord. No.
278-P, § 3, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-R, § 9, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 26,
5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 7, 3-20-01)



SECTION 19.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 19.01 and 19.02 are permitted,
including the following:



   A.   Operations required to maintain or support any use permitted
above on the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power
facilities, government facilities, public utilities and medical facilities;



   B.   Sleeping quarters for security and maintenance personnel. Such
quarters shall not be constructed as permanent housekeeping facilities or
units for family living, except as may be permitted in conjunction with an
approved mini-warehouse;



   C.   Amusement devices, as regulated by section 28.01;



   D.   Outside storage shall be so limited to currently licensed cars,
trucks and vehicles, finished and semifinished manufactured materials
produced on the premises and equipment necessary as an accessory to the
principal use, provided the following conditions are complied with:



      1.   All storage shall be located to the rear of the building;



      2.   A masonry wall, not less than four feet nor more than
eight feet high, landscaping with a chain link or pressure-treated obscuring
wood fence shall enclose the storage area;



      3.   It is mutually understood by the property owner and the
city that whenever a different material is to be stored than that agreed upon
in the original request, a new approval shall be required from the Planning
Department;



      4.   The city shall also find, before granting this approval,
it will not tend to further:



         a.   Impair the adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property;



         b.   Increase the hazard from fire, flood and other
dangers;



         c.   Diminish the market value of adjacent land and
buildings;



         d.   Increase the congestion on the public street;



         e.   Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort
and general welfare;



      5.   The height of any materials to be stored outside shall
observe the following setbacks from the perimeter of the enclosed storage
area.



 

Setback
 
Height


0-25 feet
 
8 feet


25-50 feet
 
15 feet


50+ feet
 
50 feet



 



SECTION 19.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Width:  100 feet.



      2.   Depth:  200 feet.



      3.   Area:  20,000 square feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  None.



      2.   In feet:  35.



      Building height may exceed 35 feet, provided that yard setbacks
to that point of the building which exceeds 35 feet are increased two feet
for each additional foot of building height over 35 feet.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  5,000 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   A building or any portion of it that does not exceed 30
feet in height may be permitted to extend up to 40 feet into any required 75
foot front yard, or up to 15 feet into any required 50 foot front yard.



      2.   Side:  5 feet.  If walls of structures facing such
interior side lot lines contain windows or other openings, side yards of not
less than 15 feet shall be provided. No building shall be located closer than
50 feet to the outer perimeter (property line) of such district when such
property line abuts any residential district.



      3.   Rear:  50 feet. No building shall be located closer than
50 feet, and no storage shall be located closer than 20 feet from the outer
perimeter (property line) of this district when such property line abuts any
residential district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage: the maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening,
off-street parking and loading. The location of buildings and uses and
distances between buildings shall be as shown on the site plan.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 36, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-G, §§ 11, 12, 9-18-90; Ord.
No. 278-X, § 5, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 8, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 278-BB, §
4, 12-18-01; Ord. No. 278-CC, § 6, 6-3-03)



SECTION 19.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping, as specified in
section 24.02, approved by the Planning Department and so maintained in an
attractive condition.



   C.   Every use involving the receipt or delivery of materials shall
provide space for vehicle standing so loading or unloading will not take
place in any public street, alley or right-of-way. Loading and unloading
shall be provided in such a manner that backing from a public street with a
right-of-way of 86 feet or greater will not be facilitated. Loading and
unloading docks and truck wells are prohibited in required front yards along
major thoroughfares and/or existing or proposed rights-of-way of 120 feet or
greater. Along thoroughfares or rights-of-way of less than 120 feet, below
grade loading shall be permitted in the required front yard. In no instance
shall above grade or elevated loading be permitted in the required front yard.



   D.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazard and is aesthetically
compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site. Landscaping
plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters) and
elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be submitted
to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. In reviewing this request, the Planning Commission shall apply the
standards contained herein and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable
conditions as authorized by section 25.03(D) to ensure the standards are
satisfied.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 8, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 10, 8-5-09)



SECTION 19.06.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS OF USES.



   It is the intent of this section to require that each permitted use
shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by control of noise, odor,
glare, vibration, smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity and
the like. The performance standards set forth in subsection A, following,
shall be complied with. In case of conflict among these standards and federal
and state regulations, the most restricted standard or regulation shall apply.



   A.   General regulations and limitations on uses.



      1.   Noise. Noise shall not exceed 65 decibels measured at the
front site line and as measured at any site line which is adjacent to an O-R,
office, commercial or residential district.



      2.   Odors and gases. No obnoxious odors or gases shall be
emitted which may be harmful or irritating to the public health and/or safety.



      3.   Glare and heat. Glare and heat from arc welding,
acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be shielded in such a
manner as to prevent any danger or discomfort to persons outside of any
building where such operation is being conducted.



      4.   Exterior lighting. During business hours after sunset,
the parking areas shall be adequately lighted for safety of users and
security of adjacent property owners. All lighting shall  comply with the
exterior lighting standards of section 24.06.



      5.   Vibration. Shall not cause a ground displacement
exceeding .003 inch as measured at any site line of the premises and not
detectable at any residential district boundary.



      6.   Smoke. Emission of smoke shall not exceed the number 2
standard as established by the Ringelmann Chart for periods aggregating four
minutes in any 30 minutes.



      7.   Dirt, dust and fly ash. The emission of dirt, dust and
fly ash shall not exceed three-tenths grains per cubic foot of flue gas as
measured at stack temperatures of 500°F with not to exceed 50% excess air.
No haze shall be caused by such emission which would impair visibility.



      8.   Radioactive materials. No radioactive materials shall be
emitted in excess of standards established by the U.S. Bureau of Standards
for human safety.



      9.   Power. Power utilized in any industrial activity shall be
derived only from electrical energy or smokeless fuels containing less than
20% volatile content on a dry basis. Bituminous coal shall be fired only by
mechanical equipment.



      10.   Electrical radiation. Electrical radiation shall not
adversely affect at any point any operations or any equipment other than
those of the creator of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from
electrical radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operations
is permitted.



      11.   Waste. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be
handled, stored, treated and/or disposed of in compliance with all federal,
state, county and/or city laws and regulations.



      12.   Bulk storage of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum
gases and the like. The bulk storage of such materials, either above ground
or underground, shall not be permitted unless permitted by the Fire Marshal.



      13.   Fire Code. Uses and activities in the M-1 district shall
observe all applicable provisions of the Sterling Heights Fire Code.



(Ord. No. 278GG, § 2, 12-6-05)



ARTICLE 20.  M-2 HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT



SECTION 20.00.  INTENT.



   The M-2 Heavy Industrial District is intended to provide land for the
more large-scale and intense manufacturing, fabricating and assembling uses.
While such uses may occasionally produce external physical effects noticeable
to a limited degree beyond the boundaries of the site, nevertheless, every
possible effort shall be made to minimize such effects. All uses located
within this district shall be so designed and operated as to observe the
performance standards and regulations of use contained herein.



SECTION 20.01.  PERMITTED USES.



   All uses permitted in this district shall be constructed and conducted
wholly in accordance with the standards of this article and limited to one or
more of the following uses:



   A.   Any one or more permitted uses allowed in the M-1 Light
Industrial District and any special approval land uses as regulated in the
M-1 district;



   B.   Any manufacturing or other industrial type or related use
(including the assembly, alteration, cleaning, fabrication, finishing,
machining, processing, production, repair, servicing, storage, testing or
treating of materials, goods or products) which is not injurious or offensive
to the occupants of adjacent premises by reason of the emission or creation
of noise, vibration, smoke, dust or other matter, toxic and noxious
materials, odors, fire or explosive hazards or glare or heat, including but
not limited to the following:



      1.   The manufacturing, fabrication and assembly of motor
vehicle equipment and parts, farm machinery and equipment, heavy industrial
machinery and equipment;



      2.   Manufacture of major appliances;



      3.   Brick or building block manufacture;



      4.   Pressing, stamping or forming of major sheet metal parts;



      5.   Manufacture of iron, aluminum, bronze and other castings;



   C.   Certain uses which by their nature would be dangerous in a
community with large residential areas are prohibited. This shall include the
manufacture of explosives, gasoline and other crude oil by-products;



   D.   Uses permitted under Article 22, Section 22.05 B 1, in
accordance with the standards set forth in Section 22.05.



   E.   Similar uses, as determined by the Zoning Official.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 35, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-PP, § 2, 12-1-09)



SECTION 20.02.  SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES.



   The following uses, and others similar to those cited in this article,
may be permitted by the Planning Commission, subject to the general standards
of section 25.02 and the specific standards imposed for each use:



   A.   Junk yards, subject to the following:



      1.   The entire site shall be enclosed on all sides by an
obscuring masonry wall at least eight feet in height and of sufficient
strength to serve as a retaining wall;



      2.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land located within an M-2 district, and one property line shall
abut a railroad right-of-way;



      3.   Adequate standing and parking facilities shall be
provided on the site so that no loaded vehicle at any time stands on a public
right-of-way awaiting entrance to the site;



      4.   The outdoor storage of scrap material shall not exceed a
height of 20 feet;



   B.   Refuse and garbage incinerators, subject to the following:



      1.   Such use shall be located on a site of not less than 20
acres;



      2.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land located within an M-2 district, and one property line shall
abut a railroad right-of-way;



      3.   Screening along the perimeter of the site shall be
required as determined by the Planning Commission;



      4.   All roads on the premises shall be paved with concrete or
a bituminous hard surface;



      5.   Adequate standing and parking facilities shall be
provided on the site so that no packer or other collection vehicle at any
time stands on a public right-of-way awaiting entrance to the site;



      6.   No part of the structure in which any incinerator furnace
is housed shall be located less than 200 feet from any property line on the
premises or less than 400 feet from any public street or highway right-of-way;



      7.   Emission of smoke, dirt, dust and fly ash shall be
controlled through the use of electrostatic precipitators or other equipment
of equal or better efficiency, which shall meet all applicable federal, state
and local air pollution control regulations;



      8.   Loaded packer or other collection vehicles shall be
unloaded and the loads placed in the incinerator within one hour after the
vehicles arrival on the premises;



      9.   The proposed plan of operation shall be approved by the
Macomb County Health Department and Michigan Department of Natural Resources
prior to issuance of a certificate of compliance;



      10.   The storage and disposal of ash shall be regulated by
the appropriate county, state or federal authorities. No ash shall be stored
closer than 100 feet to any property line;



      11.   No portion of the site shall be located within 1,320
feet from any residential zoning district;



   C.   Refuse transfer and recycling stations, subject to the
following:



      1.   Such use shall be located on a site of not less than two
acres;



      2.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land located within an M-2 district and abutting a railroad
right-of-way;



      3.   Screening along the perimeter of the site shall be
required as determined by the Planning Commission;



      4.   All areas adjacent to the transfer point, such as the
tipping floor, the turning area and the area supporting the trailer while it
is being packed, shall be paved with concrete;



      5.   Adequate standing and parking facilities shall be
provided on the site so that no packers or other collection vehicles at any
time stand on a public right-of-way awaiting entrance to the site. The
standing and parking facilities shall be paved with concrete;



      6.   No part of the structure in which any transfer operation
is housed shall be located less than 50 feet from any property line on the
premises;



      7.   Emission of smoke, dirt, dust and fly ash shall be
controlled through the use of electrostatic precipitators or other equipment
of equal or better efficiency, which shall meet all applicable federal, state
and local air pollution control regulations;



      8.   The transfer facility and the adjacent area shall be kept
clean and free of litter;



      9.   Sewage, solid or liquid and other liquids or dangerous
substances in quantities considered to be detrimental to the operation of the
transfer facility shall be excluded. An exception may be considered when the
type of material, the equipment and method of handling have been submitted
for approval. This provision in no way precludes the right of the transfer
facility operator to exclude any material as a part of his or her operational
standards;



      10.   All salvage and transfer operations shall be conducted
wholly within an enclosed building;



      11.   If refuse is to remain at the transfer facility beyond
the working day, such material shall be stored in a leakproof, fly and rodent
resistant structure or container;



      12.   Equipment adequate in size and quantity, and in an
operational condition, shall be available at all times. If, for any reason,
the transfer facility is rendered inoperable for more than 24 hours, an
alternate method, as approved by the city, shall be available;



      13.   No refuse shall be burned at the transfer facility.
Arrangements shall be made for adequate fire protection and extinguishing of
accidental fires. Refuse which is burning, or at a temperature which is
likely to cause a fire, or is of highly flammable or explosive nature, shall
not be acceptable in the transfer facility;



      14.   The proposed plan of operation shall be approved by the
Macomb County Health Department, or other applicable agencies, prior to the
issuance of a certificate of compliance;



      15.   All roads on the premises shall be paved with concrete
or a bituminous hard surface;



      16.   No portion of the site shall be located within 1,320
feet from any residential zoning district;



      17.   A sufficient number of containers shall be available to
preclude excessive refuse storage in the building awaiting transfer. No
overflow from containers shall be permitted;



   D.   Truck terminals and truck storage yards, subject to the
following:



      1.   Adequate ingress and egress shall be provided from a
major thoroughfare of at least 120 feet of right-of-way, existing or proposed;



      2.   Such use shall not occupy an area greater than ten acres;



      3.   Dispatching and business offices shall be subject to the
requirements of the district;



      4.   Maintenance and repair facilities shall be conducted
totally within an enclosed building;



      5.   There shall be no areas designed or designated on the
property for storage of inoperative trailers, vehicles or waste materials
other than normal maintenance;



   E.   Warehouse-showroom retail sales of furniture, furnishings and
appliances, subject to the following:



      1.   Not less than 70% of the total building area is devoted
to warehousing, the receiving of merchandise, offices and utility area;



      2.   On-site railroad service is available and used for the
operation of the warehouse showroom;



      3.   Off-street parking is provided pursuant to the parking
ratios set forth in this ordinance for the various uses to be conducted;



      4.   Minimum site size for such use shall be not less than
five acres;



      5.   The site shall have direct and unobstructed frontage
access to a major thoroughfare;



      6.   The warehouse showroom structure shall have a minimum
square footage of 100,000 square feet;



   F.   Public utilities, as regulated by section 3.02.(I). Wireless
communication towers, antennas and related facilities shall be further
subject to the provisions of section 28.18;



   G.   Concrete and asphalt crushing plants, subject to the following:



      1.   Such use shall be located on a site of not less than five
acres;



      2.   Such site shall (except for frontage on a public street)
abut only land located within an M-2 district. No portion of the site shall
be located closer than 1,500 feet from any residentially zoned properties.
The entire site shall be enclosed on all sides within a decorative skirting
masonry wall of at least eight feet in height and of sufficient strength and
durability to serve as a retaining wall;



      3.   All driveways and surface roads on the premises shall be
paved with concrete;



      4.   All materials brought in to be recycled and/or crushed
shall be stored on concrete pads at a height not to exceed 15 feet.
Sprinklers with automatic timers shall be installed to keep materials
awaiting processing moist and free from a generation of fugitive dust;



      5.   The facility and all of its operations shall comply with
all of the performance standards set forth in section 20.06, as well as all
applicable federal, state, county and local statutes, regulations, rules,
orders and ordinances. Systems shall be employed to contain and process all
emitted or discharged materials from the facility in an environmentally sound
manner;



      6.   The crushing plant and associated equipment shall be
constructed with materials so as to enclose all equipment (except vehicles)
which generate significant levels of noise;



      7.   No equipment utilized for crushing shall be located less
than 200 feet from any property line on the premises;



      8.   Exterior storage shall be limited to the storage of
products that are to be, or have been, crushed and operable vehicles and
equipment used at the facility;



   H.   Concrete and asphalt plants, subject to the following:



      1.   Such use shall be located on a site of not less than five
acres;



      2.   Such site shall abut only land located within an M-2
district. No portion of the site shall be located closer than 1,320 feet from
any residentially zoned property;



      3.   Screening along the perimeter of the site shall be
required as determined by the Planning Commission in order to minimize any
adverse effect on adjacent property owners;



      4.   All driveways and service roads on the premises shall be
paved with concrete;



      5.   All areas of the site, which are not paved for parking,
driveways, loading or operation, shall be landscaped and maintained in
accordance with section 24.02, environmental provisions;



      6.   All aggregate and bulk materials shall be stored in
concrete bunkers. Such storage shall not exceed 15 feet in height. The
bunkers shall be equipped with sprinklers operated by automatic timers to
keep materials moist and to control fugitive dust;



      7.   The plant shall be constructed so as to enclose all
equipment except vehicles which generate significant levels of noise;



      8.   The facility and all of its operations shall strictly
comply with all of the performance standards set forth in section 20.06, as
well as all applicable federal, state, county and local statutes,
regulations, rules, orders and ordinances. Systems shall be employed to
contain and process all discharged materials from the facility in an
environmentally sound manner;



      9.   The facility shall be equipped with an approved waste
water recycling system to avoid contaminated water or liquids from being
discharged to ground water, surface water or storm sewers. This shall include
a wash-out, wash-down system to recover and recycle particles of cement
and/or asphalt and other by-products processed from trucks used to transfer
the product. The drainage system shall be designed and constructed in a way
to prevent contaminated water, liquids or sediment from entering the storm or
sanitary sewer in an untreated form;



      10.   The facilities shall be equipped with approved air
pollution control system to ensure that no offensive smoke, dirt particles or
odors are discharged into the environment that would be a nuisance to
neighboring property owners or other residents of the city;



      11.   No part of the structure which is utilized to
manufacture or process the product shall be located less than 100 feet from
any property line on the premises;



      12.   All on-site and off-site utilities and improvements
required by the city as a condition of approval of the special land use shall
be installed in accordance with applicable city standards prior to operation;



      13.   Exterior storage shall be limited to the storage of
aggregate and bulk material in bunkers, operable vehicles and equipment used
to transport the materials for processing at the facility. No inoperable
vehicles and equipment shall be stored on the property. This provision shall
not prohibit maintenance and repair of vehicles or equipment in an enclosed
building;



   I.   Lighted outdoor commercial sports centers, including baseball,
wave pools, water slides, golf driving ranges, miniature golf and other
intense activities. Because such centers possess the unique characteristic of
often being used late into the night while attracting large numbers of
spectators and attendant vehicular traffic in conjunction with ingress and
egress to parking areas, these uses shall be permitted only in industrial
districts subject to the conditions set forth in section 19.02.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 9, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 27, 5-16-00)



SECTION 20.03.  ACCESSORY USES PERMITTED.



   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the principal
permitted uses enumerated in sections 20.01 and 20.02 are permitted,
including the following:



   A.   Operations required to maintain or support any use permitted
above the same lot as the permitted use, such as maintenance shops, power
facilities, government facilities, public utilities and medical facilities;



   B.   Sleeping quarters for security and maintenance personnel. Such
quarters shall not be constructed as permanent housekeeping facilities or
units for family living, except as may be permitted in conjunction with an
approved mini-warehouse;



   C.   Accessory buildings and uses, including special plants to treat
industrial wastes;



   D.   Amusement devices shall be permitted as regulated in section
28.01.



SECTION 20.04.  AREA, HEIGHT AND BULK REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The minimum size of each lot per building:



      1.   Width:  100 feet.



      2.   Depth:  250 feet.



   B.   Maximum height of any structure:



      1.   In stories:  None.



      2.   In feet:  50.



      Building height may exceed 50 feet, provided that yard setbacks
to that point of the building which exceeds 50 feet are increased two feet
for each additional foot of building height over 50 feet.



   C.   Minimum building floor area:



      1.   Area:  10,000 square feet.



   D.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



      1.   A building or any portion of it that does not exceed 30
feet in height may be permitted to extend up to 40 feet into any required 75
foot front yard, or up to 15 feet into any required 50 foot front yard.



      2.   Side:  15 feet are required along the interior side lot
lines. No building shall be located closer than 50 feet and no storage or
parking shall be located closer than 20 feet from the outer perimeter
(property line) of such district when such property line abuts any
residential district.



      3.   Rear:  50 feet. No building shall be located closer than
50 feet and no storage or parking shall be located closer than 20 feet from
the outer perimeter (property line) of this district when such property line
abuts any residential district.



   E.   Maximum lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage shall be
governed by meeting all requirements for yard space, landscaping, screening,
off-street parking and loading. The locations of buildings and uses and
distances between buildings shall be as shown on the site plan.



(Ord. No. 278-A, § 37, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-G, § 13, 9-18-90; Ord. No.
278-X, § 6, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 9, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 278-BB, § 5,
12-18-01)



SECTION 20.05.  STRUCTURE AND SITE REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   The exterior of all buildings hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in section
26.01, paragraph H. The architecture and exterior finish of any building
shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of uniform finish on
all sides of its exterior.



   B.   All portions of the site not used for parking, driveway and
buildings shall be provided with a lawn or landscaping, as specified in
section 24.02, approved by the Planning Department and so maintained in an
attractive condition.



   C.   All storage accessory to the principal use shall be in the rear
yard and shall be completely screened with a wall, not less than six feet
high or with a chain link type fence and a greenbelt planting strip so as to
obscure all view from any adjacent residential or commercial districts or
public street.



   D.   Every use involving the receipt or delivery of materials shall
provide space for vehicle standing so loading or unloading will not take
place in any public street, alley or right-of-way. Loading and unloading
shall be provided in such a manner that backing from a public street with a
right-of-way of 86 feet or greater will not be facilitated. Loading and
unloading docks and truck wells are prohibited in required front yards along
major thoroughfares and/or existing or proposed rights-of-way of 120 feet or
greater. Along thoroughfares or rights-of-way of less than 120 feet, below
grade loading shall be permitted in the required front yard. In no instance
shall above grade or elevated loading be permitted in the required front yard.



   E.   Once a building line has been established by the construction
of a principal building upon an approved site, no other principal building or
use shall be located between the established building line and the front lot
line (or side lot line abutting a side street) without first obtaining
approval of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the
building and/or use proposed to be located in front of the established
building to determine whether the building or use is of such location, size
and character to be in harmony with the appropriate and orderly development
of the balance of the site, is not detrimental to the development of adjacent
uses, does not create any vehicular or pedestrian hazards and is
aesthetically compatible with the buildings and uses located upon the site.
Landscaping plans, site plans (including signs and the location of dumpsters)
and elevations of all sides of any building to be constructed shall be
submitted to enable the Planning Commission to determine whether the proposed
additional building and/or use conforms with the requirements of this
section. In reviewing this request, the Planning Commission shall apply the
standards contained herein and in section 25.02 and may impose reasonable
conditions as authorized by section 25.03(D) to ensure that the standards are
satisfied.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 10, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 11, 8-5-09)



SECTION 20.06.  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS OF USES.



   It is the intent of this section to require that each permitted use
shall be a good neighbor to adjoining properties by control of noise, odor,
glare, vibration, smoke, dust, liquid wastes, radiation, radioactivity and
the like. The performance standards set forth in subsection A, following,
shall be complied with. In case of conflict among these standards and federal
and state regulations, the most restricted standards or regulations shall
apply.



   A.   General regulations and limitations on uses.



      1.   Noise. Noise shall not exceed 70 decibels measured at the
front site line and as measured at any site line which is adjacent to any
industrial or commercial district or 70 decibels when adjacent to any O-R,
office or residential district.



      2.   Odors and gases. No obnoxious odors or gases shall be
emitted which may be harmful to public health and/or safety.



      3.   Glare and heat. Glare and heat from arc welding,
acetylene torch cutting or similar processes shall be deflected in such a
manner as to prevent any danger to persons outside of any building where such
operation is being conducted.



      4.   Exterior lighting. During business hours after sunset,
the parking areas shall be adequately lighted for safety of users and
security of adjacent property owners. All lighting shall  comply with the
exterior lighting standards of section 24.06.



      5.   Vibration. Shall not cause a ground displacement
exceeding .003 inch as measured at any site line of the premises.



      6.   Smoke. Emission of smoke shall not exceed the number 2
standard as established by the Ringelmann Chart for periods aggregating three
minutes in any 15 minutes when starting a new fire.



      7.   Dirt, dust and fly ash. The emission of dirt, dust and
fly ash shall not exceed three-tenths grains per cubic foot of flue gas as
measured at stack temperature of 500°F with not to exceed 50% excess air. No
haze shall be caused by such emission which would impair visibility.



      8.   Radioactive materials. No radioactive materials shall be
emitted in excess of standards established by the U.S. Bureau of Standards
for human safety.



      9.   Power. Power utilized in any industrial activity shall be
derived only from electrical energy or smokeless fuels containing less than
20% volatile content on a dry basis. Bituminous coal shall be fired only by
mechanical equipment.



      10.   Electrical radiation. Electrical radiation shall not
adversely affect at any point any operations or any equipment other than
those of the creator of the radiation. Avoidance of adverse effects from
electrical radiation by appropriate single or mutual scheduling of operation
is permitted.



      11.   Waste. All sewage and industrial wastes shall be
handled, stored, treated and/or disposed of in compliance with all federal,
state, county and/or city laws and regulations.



      12.   Bulk storage of flammable liquids, liquified petroleum
gases and explosives. The bulk storage of such materials, either above ground
or underground, shall not be permitted unless a special permit is obtained
from the Fire Marshal.



      13.   Storage.



         a.   Inside and underground storage other than junk.
Such storage is permitted provided compliance is made with all applicable
fire and safety and health regulations.



         b.   Outside storage other than junk. No materials,
goods and/or supplies used in connection with or part of any industrial use
shall be stored, located or deposited in a manner so as to obstruct or
interfere with any roadway on the premises which could be used as a means of
access for firefighting equipment.



         c.   Outside storage of junk and/or industrial waste
incident to an industrial use. Any such storage shall not exceed ten days and
shall be completely enclosed within a tight, unpierced masonry, wood or metal
fence.



      14.   Rodent/vermin control. All waste products shall be
stored in closed containers to control rodents and vermin.



(Ord. No. 278GG, § 3, 12-6-05)



ARTICLE 21.  PCD PLANNED CENTER DISTRICT



SECTION 21.00.  INTENT.



   The Planned Center District is intended to provide, through
comprehensive planning, zoning and project review for the development of high
intensity, multipurpose centers in planned locations which will serve as
focal points within the total urban design of the city, while providing
stability and longevity for the economic development of the City of Sterling
Heights.



   The importance and impact of said centers require that their location
be limited and that the plans for their development be given extensive review
as to the effect on the total community.



   This district is designed as an optional form of development to
encourage innovation and variety in the design and arrangement of highly
concentrated, integrated and diversified functions within a given development
area, while ensuring through a comprehensive development plan and review
process, an integrated compatibility between its own elements and
compatibility with adjacent forms of development.



   Due to the magnitude and arrangement of development in a planned center
district, it is anticipated that division of the property may become
necessary. In order to facilitate this division, compliance with the
subdivision regulations of the City of Sterling Heights and the Subdivision
Control Act of 1967, as amended, is encouraged at the preliminary planning
stages.



   The development of a Planned Center District shall be permitted only
upon property which was zoned O-3, C-2, M-1 or M-2 immediately preceding its
reclassification to planned center district or upon property which can be so
developed consistent with the goals and objectives of the Master Land Use
Plan. Such development shall be permitted only upon terms acceptable to the
city and the developer.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94)



SECTION 21.01.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.



   Planned Center District developments may be permitted only after
extensive review is performed and public hearings on the development plan are
held by the Planning Commission and the City Council in accordance with the
procedure set forth herein and subject to the following conditions.



   A.   Basic land conditions.



      1.   The minimum site area shall be 100 acres.



      2.   The site area for computing all requirements shall
consist of contiguous land under single ownership or control.



      3.   A Planned Center District development shall be permitted
to be located only upon property which has a minimum of 500 feet of frontage
on each of a minimum of two roads with an existing or proposed right-of-way
of 120 feet or greater, as indicated on the Master Road Plan.



      4.   The proposed development(s) must be in basic accord with
the intent of the Planned Center Development District.



   B.   Uses permitted.



      1.   All uses permitted as principal uses permitted, special
land uses permitted subject to special conditions and Planning Commission
approval and accessory uses permitted in the following districts, except as
otherwise provided in this section: RM-1, RM-2 and RM-3, O-1, O-2 and O-3,
C-2 and C-3. Rehabilitation centers, new and secondhand automobile,
recreational vehicle, boat and mobile home dealers, rentals and leasing,
mortuaries, equipment and tool rentals, fuel oil dealers, adult bookstores,
adult video stores, adult motion picture theaters, cabarets, massage parlors,
full and self service gasoline stations and self storage facilities shall be
excluded.



      2.   In multiple family districts, only multiple family
dwelling units of the uses permitted in said district, in combination with
permitted uses as desired in the other named districts, shall be permitted.



      3.   All uses permitted as principal uses in the M-1 district
shall be permitted, provided such use is identified and incorporated as part
of the Comprehensive Development Plan on land which was zoned for M-1 or M-2
use immediately preceding its rezoning to Planned Center District.



      4.   Additional uses upon review by the Planning Commission
and approval by the City Council after a determination that one or more of
the following conditions exist:



         a.   That the use is related and reasonably necessary or
convenient for the satisfactory and efficient operation of a complete and
integrated planned center development;



         b.   That the use is similar in character to one or more
of the above permitted uses.



      5.   Any uses which are permitted only as special land uses
shall be permitted in the Planned Center District only after review and
approval of the Planning Commission under Article 25 of this ordinance.



      6.   Freestanding buildings and uses, apart from major
building complex or elements, may be permitted after review of the Planning
Commission and approval by the City Council following the finding that the
form and location of the subject freestanding building or buildings and the
land uses contained therein are reasonably necessary for the proper
functioning of the planned center development.



      7.   Once a planned center development is approved, any
changes in the land use designated for particular areas of the PCD
development upon which the approval was based must be submitted and reviewed
by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.



      8.   In order to provide consistency and compatibility with
the city Master Land Use Plan at least 55% of all land area (excluding public
rights-of-way) contained in the planned center development shall be developed
with primary uses, and upon completion of the development, at least 55% of
the ground floor square footage of the development shall be developed with
primary uses. For purposes of this section, PRIMARY USES shall mean uses
permitted under the zoning classification of the property immediately prior
to rezoning to the Planned Center District classification and uses compatible
with existing developments surrounding the property.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 8, 1-6-09)



SECTION 21.02.  LOCATION AND SITE STANDARDS.



   A.   Due to the magnitude of development permitted, both in scale
and intensity, and the attendant impact upon vehicular circulation facilities
and public utilities, the Planned Center District shall be considered only
for those properties indicated on the Master Land Use Plan for intense
development (i.e., industrial, high-rise office, planned business). Further,
as the Planned Center District is intended to provide for an optional form of
development, rezoning and/or development of a planned center development can
only be carried out if the terms and nature of development are acceptable to
both the city and the developer.



   B.   An owner or developer controlling a minimum of 100 acres,
contemplating the development of a high intensity multi-purpose complex on
property zoned PCD or within the area designated for intense development, may
apply for rezoning to the Planned Center District on the basis of a
development plan which conforms to the standards contained herein. This plan
shall be presented as a part of the application for rezoning along with any
other information or materials required hereunder.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94)



SECTION 21.03.  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   In order to achieve the intent of this district, the following shall
serve as a guide and minimum standards for the development of plans.



   A.   Vertical relationship of uses.



      1.   Commercial uses (including hotels) may include at-grade,
below-grade and above-grade parking and pedestrian areas. Further,
restaurants and other similar uses may be permitted above office areas where
such uses are compatible with, and reasonably necessary for, the proper
functioning of the total planned center development.



      2.   Office uses may include at-grade, below-grade and
above-grade parking and pedestrian areas. In addition, office uses may be
located above or below commercial uses or any combination of the above uses.



      3.   Multiple family developments may include at-grade,
below-grade and above-grade parking and pedestrian areas, commercial uses,
office uses or a combination thereof; however, in no case shall multiple
family dwelling units be permitted to be located below the above-described
uses within a single vertical structure.



   B.   Horizontal relationship of uses.



      1.   Transitional use areas. There shall be required within
the boundary of the proposed project, or upon immediately adjacent property
under the developer’s control, development of transitional use areas
whenever the proposed project abuts property planned to be developed for
residential use. The Planning Commission shall review and make a
recommendation to the  City Council and the City Council shall determine
transitional use areas in the proposed project in order to assure maximum
compatibility with the existing and/or future development of abutting
property.



      2.   Perimeter yards. All structures within the proposed
project, excluding surface off-street parking, shall conform to the standards
set forth in the O-3, Office Commercial Service District, in determining the
required perimeter yards. For the purpose of this section, perimeter yards
shall refer to those adjacent to the total project boundaries.



      3.   Internal building relationship. Multiple family dwelling
units shall be set back from any adjacent structure a distance not less than
that derived from the formula set forth in section 6.04(D) of this ordinance.
Further, buildings containing residential elements in addition to other uses
shall be positioned such that the angle of vision is not less than 45 degrees
between any residential building face having exterior views and any adjacent
building or building element of similar height.



      4.   Accessory uses. Except as otherwise provided, accessory
uses within a planned center development building complex shall be included
within the principal use structure or attached to such structure by means of
a fully enclosed structural attachment.



   C.   Off-street parking.



      1.   The requirements for off-street parking shall conform to
the schedule provided in Article 23 and shall be applied cumulatively for all
uses within the project.



      2.   In recognition of the potential multi-purpose use of a
portion of the off-street parking facilities, the Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Council the sharing of up to 10% of the total required
parking spaces when the Planning Commission determines that such sharing and
consequent reduction in off-street parking will not impair the functioning of
the planned center development or have an adverse effect on traffic
circulation within or adjacent to the site.



      3.   The number of parking spaces required under section 23.02
for such use may be decreased by 10% of the total required parking, provided
the Planning Commission and the City Council determine that such sharing and
consequent reduction of off-street parking will not impair the functioning of
the planned center development or have an adverse effect on traffic
circulation within or adjacent to the site. In such case, the landscaping
which is installed must be arranged such that parking may be installed in its
place at a later date if such a demand arises. If the developer requests the
option of landscaping in lieu of additional parking, parking must be
installed at the request of the City of Sterling Heights in the event such a
need arises. The landscaped area authorized by this provision shall be in
addition to those required by other sections of this ordinance.



      4.   Provisions identified in subparagraphs 2 and 3 above are
intended to provide greater flexibility in the design of parking areas. It is
the intent of these provisions to assist in the elimination of large, open,
uninterrupted parking areas. Developers are encouraged to vary parking area
elevations from at-grade to below-grade and introduce landscape treatment
into the parking area.



      5.   There shall be limited access from a planned center
development to abutting major roads and all access to parking shall be from
an internal collector roadway system.



   D.   Land use buffers and landscaping. The need for and type of
screening required between the Planned Center District and adjoining zoning
districts shall be determined by the city and developer as part of the
development plan approval process. In addition, the following requirements
shall apply:



      1.   Front and street-side setbacks shall be measured from the
centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance with the city’s
Master Road Plan, as specified in the following schedule:



         Distance from centerline:



         a.   Regional (204' R.O.W.):  177 feet.



         b.   Regional (150' R.O.W.):  150 feet.



         c.   Major:  135 feet.



         d.   Secondary:  93 feet.



         e.   Collector:  85 feet.



         f.   Local:



            Industrial  80 feet.



            All others  65 feet.



         g.   Cul-de-sac:



            Industrial  105 foot radius.



            All others  90 foot radius.



         h.   Freeway:  75 feet.*



         i.   Private roads:  75 feet.**



   *   Freeways shall be measured from the established right-of-way
line.



   **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback shall be
measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the subject
lot. There shall be no setback requirement from private driveways.



   The required front yard shall be landscaped and maintained thereafter
in a neat and orderly condition. If the existing right-of-way is greater than
that shown on the Master Road Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side
setback) as measured from the centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal
to one-half of the actual right-of-way of the street plus 75 feet for major
and regional roads, one-half of the actual right-of-way plus 50 feet for
secondary, collector and industrial local roads and one-half of the actual
right-of-way plus 35 feet for all other local roads. The landscaping shall
contain berms and plantings in accordance with the requirements of section
24.02.



      2.   A minimum of 10% of the net site area (after excluding
the paved portion of thoroughfares and preserved woodlands and wetlands)
shall be developed and maintained as landscaped areas. The landscaping
required under subparagraph 1, above, may be used to satisfy this requirement.



      3.   A Planned Center District development containing any
residential uses shall provide an open space for such uses at a rate of no
less than 450 square feet per dwelling unit. This open space area shall be in
addition to any open spaces required by any other sections of this article.
Such open space shall be fully accessible to all residents of the residential
development. To assure the permanence of the open space and its continued
maintenance, the developer shall provide a proposed open space agreement for
review and approval by the City Attorney. The open space agreement must be in
a form satisfactory to the city and shall include the following:



         a.   The proposed manner of holding title to the open
space;



         b.   The proposed manner of payment of taxes;



         c.   The proposed method of regulating the use of open
space;



         d.   The proposed method of maintenance of the open
space and the means of paying for such maintenance;



         e.   Provision for maintenance of the open space by the
city if it is not satisfactorily maintained and a method of cost recovery for
such expenses;



         f.   Any other facts relating to the legal or practical
problems of ownership and maintenance of the open space.



      4.   In order to provide an orderly transition of density,
where the proposed Planned Center District project immediately abuts an
R-100, R-90, R-80, R-70 or R-60 district (not including districts separated
by a major thoroughfare), the city may require that the area immediately
abutting and within 300 feet of any R-100, R-90, R-80, R-70 or R-60 district
shall be developed with one family residential lots or shall be developed as
open recreation space. In such case, an open space agreement satisfying the
requirements of subparagraph 3 above shall be provided.



   E.   Major thoroughfares in Planned Center Districts.



      1.   Where a planned or proposed major thoroughfare, secondary
thoroughfare or collector road is included partially or wholly within the
project area of a Planned Center District development, the portion of such
roadway shall be provided as a public right-of-way meeting the width
standards as stated in the Master Road Plan for such right-of-way. The
alignment of the roadway shall be in general conformance to the proposed
alignment as shown on the Master Road Plan.



      2.   Direct access to major roadways shall be limited to
locations specifically approved by the City Council after review and
consideration by the Planning Commission.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 9, 1-6-09)



SECTION 21.04.  REZONING SUBMISSION PROCEDURES AND CONDITIONS.



   A.   Procedure for application. Application for rezoning to the
Planned Center District classification shall be made to the city. The
applicant shall be required to submit the following material for review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission:



      1.   A property survey of the exact acreage requested for
rezoning, done by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer (Scale: 1" =
50');



      2.   A preliminary development plan of the entire area carried
out in sufficient detail as to show the topography, land uses proposed, the
densities and scale of development, the system of pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, including off-street parking areas, and the relationship to
adjacent properties and uses (Scale: 1" = 50');



      3.   A written statement containing the following supporting
documentation:



         a.   The intent of nonresidential development, type and
gross and net square feet (including the area designated to be developed with
primary uses);



         b.   The number and type of residential units
contemplated and calculations of the resultant population and school
population by school type;



         c.   Calculation of the off-street parking required and
provided for each element of the development;



         d.   Calculation of the landscaped open space area
required and provided;



         e.   Additional information, including but not limited
to soil, wetlands and woodlands surveys, market studies and intended
scheduling of development.



   B.   Review by Planning Commission and City Council. The preliminary
development plan and supporting information and request for PCD rezoning
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and a recommendation shall be
made to the City Council relative to the plan’s conformance to the intent
of the Master Land Use Plan and the provisions of this article.



   C.   Public hearing. Where a request has been made to rezone
property in order to develop a Planned Center District project, approval of
the preliminary development plan shall be granted in conjunction with the
rezoning approval only after a public hearing has been held by the Planning
Commission and a recommendation made to the City Council.



   D.   Final development plan required. Approval of the preliminary
development plan by the City Council shall not constitute approval of the
final development plan but shall be deemed as approval of the land use
proposal and shall serve as a guide in the preparation of the final
development plan. No development shall occur until a final development plan
of the planned center project site has been prepared by the developer which
after review and comment is approved by the city in accordance with the
procedures set forth in section 21.05. Approval under this section is based
on the preliminary development plan submitted and the plan is, therefore, an
integral part of the rezoning.



   E.   Duration of approval. Approval of the preliminary development
plan by the City Council shall be effective for a period of five years.
Extensions of this approval period may be granted by the City Council after
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission.



   F.   Other possible developments. In presenting and considering
rezoning and development proposals under this article, it is understood by
the City Council and the petitioner that reasonable development could occur
under the application of other zoning classifications to the subject property
and, thus, the application of the Planned Center District classification is
fully at the discretion of the City Council.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 10, 1-6-09)



SECTION 21.05.  FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   A.   On parcels zoned Planned Center District or upon the rezoning
of land to the Planned Center District by the City Council, the developer may
submit a final development plan for consideration and approval by the City
Council after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, including
the following:



      1.   The final development plan for the entire area under the
Planned Center District classification shall be of sufficient detail to
indicate specific land uses, general building locations, off-street parking
areas, open spaces, greenbelts and the vehicular and pedestrian circulation
system for the development in accordance with the requirements set forth in
section 21.04,A,4;



      2.   A list of intended exterior building facade materials
from which the buildings within the Planned Center District will be
constructed;



         a.   Acceptable exterior building facade materials shall
include but not be limited to:



            i.   Brick veneers;



            ii.   Architectural masonry units;



            iii.   Stone veneers and granite;



            iv.   Architectural pre-cast concrete panels.



      If colors and elevations for buildings to be constructed are
available for particular buildings, they shall be submitted. Evaluation of
the appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design,
relationship to surroundings, sensitive integration of form, textures and
colors with the particular landscape and setting. A building facade design
must be considered in its entirety. The intent is to promote integration and
mixture of materials where more than one material is used on a building. If
only one material is used, architectural detailing and articulation, massing,
texture and form must be introduced into the building’s facade design.



         b.   Unacceptable exterior building facade materials
shall include but not be limited to:



            i.   Plywood or plywood base products;



            ii.   Corrugated or fluted metal siding;



            iii.   Vinyl or aluminum siding;



            iv.   Concrete utility block or other
nonarchitectural masonry units;



            v.   Prefabricated aggregate building panels.



      3.   An overall landscape plan for the development, indicating
intended landscaped areas. Details of specific plantings shall not be
required at the final development plan stage;



      4.   Any restrictions or requirements intended to be imposed
by the developer upon owners or tenants within the Planned Center District
development to ensure that the development is completed as an integrated,
aesthetically pleasing development;



      5.   The proposed densities of the development, to determine
compliance with section 21.07 below;



      6.   A statement as to what impact the Planned Center District
will have on existing resources and utilities and what actions the developer
intends to take to alleviate any burdening of such resources.



   B.   Approval of the final development plan shall be effective for a
period of three years. One year extensions may be granted by the City
Council. Such approval shall not be granted until the following conditions
are met:



      1.   Review and recommendation by the City Planning Commission
for consistency with the City Master Development Plan, the previously
approved planned center development plan and development in the area;



      2.   Provisions satisfactory to the City Council have been
made to assure the financing and/or installation of all streets and necessary
utilities related to the proposed development;



      3.   All dedications of public rights-of-way or planned public
open spaces have been made or otherwise assured in a manner acceptable to the
City Council;



      4.   The City Council determines that there exists a
reasonably harmonious relationship between the general location of buildings
on the site relative to buildings on lands in the surrounding area; that
there is a reasonable architectural and functional compatibility between
structures on the site and structures within the surrounding area to assure
proper relationships between:



         a.   The topography of the adjoining lands as well as
that of the site itself, including any significant natural or manmade
features;



         b.   The relationship of the general locations of
buildings within the planned center district development to those developed
on adjacent land (i.e., entrances, service areas and mechanical
appurtenances);



         c.   The rooftops of buildings that may lie below street
levels or from the windows of higher buildings located upon adjacent property;



         d.   Landscape plantings, off-street parking areas and
service drives on adjacent lands;



         e.   Compliance with street, road and public utility
layouts approved for the area;



         f.   The architecture of the proposed building(s),
including overall design and facade materials used. Architectural design and
facade materials for proposed buildings are to be complimentary with
buildings located in the surrounding area. It is not intended that contrasts
in architectural design and use of facade materials are to be discouraged,
but care shall be taken so that any such contrasts will not be so out of
character with existing building designs and facade area within the
surrounding areas so as to create an adverse effect on the stability and
value of the surrounding properties. If the architectural design and
elevations for particular proposed buildings are available, they shall be
submitted.



   C.   Upon final approval by the City Council of the final
development plan for any proposed planned center project, the final
development plan and other documentation shall be kept on file by the City
Clerk. All construction and development must be done in accordance with the
final development plan, unless it is amended by the developer and the City
Council.



   D.   When the Planned Center District project is to be developed in
stages, an overall development plan shall be submitted to aid in
consideration of the more detailed site plan for that area within which
construction is to proceed. Each subsequent submittal shall include an
overall development plan that reflects the construction activity that has
occurred and that portion that remains conceptual. Adequate yard areas shall
be reserved where the subject development phase abuts land proposed for
future phases of the development.



      1.   There shall be a reasonably harmonious relationship
between the location of individual buildings on the site to others within the
site and the surrounding area and architectural and functional capability
between structures within the site and structures within the surrounding area
to assure proper relationships between:



         a.   The topography of the adjoining lands as well as
that of the site itself, including any significant natural or manmade
features;



         b.   The relationship of one building to another,
whether on site or on adjacent land (i.e., entrances, service areas and
mechanical appurtenances);



         c.   The rooftops of buildings that may lie below the
street levels or from the windows of higher adjacent buildings;



         d.   Landscape plantings, off-street parking areas and
service drives on adjacent lands;



         e.   Compliance with street, road and public utility
layouts approved for the development;



         f.   The architecture of the proposed building(s) upon
the site, including overall design and facade materials used. Architectural
design and facade materials are to be complimentary with existing or proposed
buildings within the site and upon adjacent properties. It is not intended
that contrast in architectural design and use of facade materials are to be
discouraged, but care should be taken so that any such contrast will not be
so out of character with existing building designs and facade materials both
on and off the site so as to create an adverse effect on the stability and
value of other properties within the site or on adjacent properties. The City
Planner may require changes to the site plans if the proposed buildings do
not meet these requirements.



   E.   In order to ensure that development within this district will
occur in accordance with this ordinance, no final development plan for the
Planned Center District project, or any portion thereof, may be approved
which allows those uses designated as secondary to exceed the primary uses,
either existing or proposed to exist upon completion of that phase, in size,
scale or magnitude.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 11, 1-6-09)



SECTION 21.06.  DENSITY AND INTENSITY CONTROL.



   Those provisions of a proposed development plan presented under this
article which contemplate residential development shall conform to the
following in establishing the permitted density:



   A.   Low rise residential development which may be required by the
Planning Commission and City Council as transition to residential lands
abutting the subject property shall conform to the density standards of the
related conventional zoning districts;



   B.   High rise residential development proposed as an integral part
of the development plan for a Planned Center District project shall be
subject to the development standards of the RM-3 district. The land area used
in the computation of density shall be no more than 20% of the net
nonresidential project area.



   Residential building elements of a height greater than that permitted
by the RM-1 and RM-2 districts may be permitted after review by the Planning
Commission and approval by the City Council following a finding that the form
and location of the subject building elements are proper and reasonable in
conjunction with the form of the total planned center project and compatible
with development in the adjacent area. Such a potential increase in permitted
structure heights shall include no attendant increase in dwelling unit
density over that permitted if developed in compliance with all conventional
regulations.



   On those sites indicated by the Master Land Use Plan for high rise
nonresidential development, the development of any element of a development
proposed for high density residential use shall be subject to the development
standards of the RM-3 district.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94)



SECTION 21.07.  SITE PLAN APPROVAL.



   Upon approval by the City Council of the final development plan,
Planned Center District projects shall comply with the site plan review
procedures and requirements of Article 26, in addition to any requirements
contained herein.



   A.   Area and bulk requirements. Except as otherwise provided
herein, all uses within the Planned Center District shall comply with the
area, bulk, height and replacement of building requirements of the use
district in which the proposed use is first permitted as a principal use.
Requests for variances to the area and bulk requirements shall be considered
by the  Zoning Board of Appeals. There shall be no variances to any
requirements of the Planned Center District, except as to the area and bulk
requirements.



   B.   Structure and site requirements.



      1.   Each building constructed within the Planned Center
District shall be constructed of aesthetically pleasing brick and/or stone
building materials or other similar durable building materials which were
approved as part of the final development plan and approved by the Office of
Planning, subject to the review procedures set forth in this article and in
section 26.01, paragraph H. The Office of Planning shall not disapprove
building materials which were approved as part of the final development plan
unless they are not compatible with existing buildings or proposed buildings
for which approval has already been granted. Evaluation of the appearance of
a project shall be based on the quality of its design, relationship to
surroundings, sensitive integration of form, textures and colors with the
particular landscape and setting. A building façade design must be
considered in its entirety. The intent is to promote integration and mixture
of materials where more than one material is used on a building. If only one
material is used, architectural detailing and articulation, massing, texture
and form must be introduced into the building's façade design.



      2.   Portions of the site not used for parking, driveways and
buildings or plazas shall be provided with landscaping approved by the Office
of Planning in accordance with section 24.02;



      3.   Roof-mounted appliances and fixtures shall be effectively
screened on all sides by the roof line so as not to be visible from off the
site (section 24.04);



      4.   Loading shall be provided only in rear yards. Side yard
loading may be permitted by the Office of Planning when such space and
loading facilities do not interfere with parking and circulation, either
vehicular or pedestrian.



(Ord. No. 278-M, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09; Ord. No.
278-OO, § 12, 8-5-09)



ARTICLE 22.  SPECIAL DEVELOPMENT OPTIONS



SECTION 22.00.  SITE CONDOMINIUMS.



   A.   Intent. The intent of these requirements is to ensure that all
condominium subdivisions are developed in compliance with accepted planning
and engineering standards applicable to similar forms of development as
reflected in the ordinances and requirements of the City of Sterling Heights.
Single family detached condominiums may be allowed as a permitted use in the
one family residential zoning districts.



   B.   Submission requirements. All condominium subdivision plans
shall be submitted for site plan review as required by section 26.02 of this
ordinance and section 66 of the State of Michigan Condominium Act (Public Act
59 of 1978) and include the following additional information:



      1.   A survey of the condominium subdivision site;



      2.   A plan delineating all natural features on the site,
including but not limited to ponds, streams, lakes, drains, floodplains,
wetlands and woodland areas;



      3.   The location size, shape, area and width of all
condominium units and common areas and the location of all proposed streets;



      4.   A copy of the master deed and all restrictive covenants
to be applied to any residential detached site condominium project shall be
furnished to the city for review prior to the granting of final site plan
approval;



      5.   A utility plan showing a sanitary sewer, water and storm
drainage improvements, plus all easements granted to the city for
installation, repair and maintenance of all utilities;



      6.   A street construction, paving and maintenance plan for
all streets within the proposed condominium subdivision plan;



      7.   A storm drainage and stormwater management plan,
including all line, swales, drains, basins and other facilities.



   C.   Review. Pursuant to authority conferred by section 141 of the
Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, all condominium
subdivision plans shall require approval by the Planning Department before
units may be sold or site improvement initiated. The review process shall
consist of the following two steps.



      1.   Preliminary plan review. In the preliminary review phase,
the Planning Department shall review the overall plan for the site, including
basic road and unit configurations and the consistency of the plans with all
applicable provisions of this zoning ordinance. Plans submitted for
preliminary review shall include information specified in items (1) through
(3) of the submission requirements.



      2.   Final plan review. Upon receipt of preliminary plan
approval, the applicant should prepare the appropriate engineering plans and
apply for final review by the Planning Department. Final plans shall include
information as required by items (1) through (7) of section 22.00(B). Such
plans shall be reviewed by the City Attorney and the City Engineering
Department. Further, such plans shall be submitted for review and comment to
all applicable local, county and state agencies as may be appropriate. Final
approval shall not be granted until such time as all applicable review
agencies have had an opportunity to comment on said plans.



   D.   District requirements. The development of all condominium
subdivisions shall observe the applicable yard setback and minimum floor area
requirements of the district within which the project is located. The
dwelling unit density of the project shall be no greater and spacing no less
than would be permitted if the parcel were subdivided for that specific
zoning district, pursuant to the Subdivision Control Act, Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended.



   E.   Design standards. All development in a site condominium
subdivision shall conform to the engineering and planning design standards of
the subdivision ordinance. All streets shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable city codes, ordinances and engineering standards. Public
street connections shall be required, where necessary, to provide continuity
to the public road system.



   F.   Utility easements. The condominium subdivision plan shall
include all necessary public utility easements granted to the City of
Sterling Heights to enable the installation, repair and maintenance of all
necessary public utilities to be installed. Appropriate dedications for
sanitary sewers, lines and storm drainage improvements shall be provided.



   G.   Final acceptance. The city shall also require all the
appropriate inspections. After construction of the condominium subdivision,
an as-built reproducible mylar of the completed site is to be submitted to
the city for review by the Engineering Department. A final certificate of
occupancy and any building bonds will not be released to the developer/owner
until said as-built mylar has been reviewed and accepted by the city.



(Ord. No. 278-I, § 1, 2-5-91; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 28, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 12, 1-6-09)



SECTION 22.01.  ONE FAMILY CLUSTER OPTION.



   A.   A one family cluster development shall be permitted at the
developer's option, provided that the Planning Commission determines after
review of documentation submitted in compliance with paragraph E and after a
public hearing, that the parcel meets the qualification requirements of
paragraph B, and that the proposed one family cluster development meets the
site design requirements of paragraph C.  The overall density permitted
under this option remains substantially the same as is permitted in a
conventional subdivision development (see section 22.01 D, permitted
densities).



   B.   Qualification of parcel. In order to qualify a parcel for
development under this section, the Planning Commission shall determine that
the parcel has at least one of the following characteristics identified in
paragraphs one through six, supported by documented evidence as required
below, prepared by a registered architect, professional community planner,
landscape architect, engineer or similar professional in environmental design:



      1.   The parcel contains natural assets which would be
preserved through the use of cluster development. Such assets may include
natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat for
wildlife, wetlands and bodies of water (i.e., streams, rivers, or other
natural assets) which should be preserved. Requests for qualification under
these conditions must be supported by documented evidence;



      2.   The parcel contains substantial portions of floodplain
and wetlands worthy of preserving. A floodplain and wetlands map, certifiable
by the appropriate federal, state or county agency, indicating the extent of
the wetlands and floodplain area, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission in order to support the proposal for the parcel’s qualification
for cluster development;



      3.   The parcel is either too small or unusually shaped to be
reasonably platted as a conventional subdivision development. This
characteristic shall not be considered present if there is adjoining property
that can be reasonably combined with the parcel to enable development of a
conventional subdivision;



      4.   A parcel fronting on a major or secondary thoroughfare
(as designated on the Master Road Plan) of no more than 360 feet of depth
measured from the front lot line abutting such thoroughfare, which, if
platted as a conventional subdivision, would result in a substantial portion
of the lots abutting such thoroughfare;



      5.   The adjoining or adjacent land uses warrant a creative
development alternative to facilitate a smooth transition between
conventional single family residential areas and uses which are or are likely
to be incompatible;



      6.   A substantial portion of the parcel is characterized by
poor soil conditions resulting from landfill activities. A detailed map of
the parcel identifying that area where poor soil conditions exist shall be
presented along with soil borings documenting the same;



      7.   In the absence of any of the above criteria, a parcel may
be considered for qualification under this option if it expands or integrates
existing common areas from adjoining developments of a similar nature,
creates amenities in the form of woodlands, lakes, open spaces and common
recreational areas and facilities or creates some other unique feature which
will enhance the lifestyle and single family character of the area;



      6.   A request for the one family cluster option shall not be
approved when:



         a.   The request would be contrary to the purpose of the
option, which is to create better residential developments for the community
by preserving open space, wetlands, woodlands and other natural assets and
compatible use patterns;



         b.   The proposal would be contrary to the health,
safety and general welfare of the developed and established residential areas
in the immediate vicinity;



         c.   The proposal does not provide the privacy and
character of single family living; or



         d.   The request does not provide for a sound physical
development.



   C.   Site design requirements. All cluster developments shall
conform to the following restrictions.



      1.   Within the cluster development, a minimum of 20% of the
total parcel shall be in preservation areas. Road rights-of-way, bodies of
water, utility easements, regulated wetlands, floodways, required yard areas
and limited common areas not available for use by all of the residents within
the development, while included in the total parcel area, shall be excluded
from the preservation area calculations.



      2.   On parcels which contain wetlands, floodplains and/or
landfill areas, the following shall apply:



         a.   When the wetland, floodplain and/or landfill area
does not comprise 50% of the parcel, 25% of this land will be included in
acreage for computation of density;



         b.   When the wetland, floodplain and/or landfill
comprises 50% or more of the parcel, a 25% density increase will be permitted
on land other than wetland, floodplain and/or landfill;



         c.   No density credit will be allowed for any bodies of
water on the parcel, even if the entire shoreline is within the parcel to be
developed; however, an area to be improved into a lake or pond, when approved
by the city, shall not be excluded from the 25% density credit.



      3.   Buildings within a cluster development shall maintain the
following minimum setbacks from a shoreline:



 

Number of Living Units per Building
 
Minimum Setback from Shoreline


1 (single detached)
 
35 feet


2 attached
 
40 feet


3 or 4 attached
 
50 feet



 



      4.   The placement of housing units and other improvements
shall be designed in such a way as to preserve wooded areas contained on the
site. A tree preservation plan is required to be submitted to confirm the
location of all wooded areas to be preserved.



      5.   There shall be no dwelling units or development other
than streets, utility pathways, parking and recreation areas allowed within a
defined floodplain.



      6.   There shall be no development or modification of any kind
within a designated wetlands or floodplain area without there first being
issued a use permit by the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) and/or the
Zoning Board of Appeals, as required. However, a DNR permit does not
guarantee approval by the city. Developers are encouraged to include the
Local Planning Department in the negotiation process with the DNR.



      7.   In order to provide an orderly transition where the
project proposed for use as a cluster development abuts a one family
residential district, the abutting one family district shall be effectively
buffered by providing one of the following forms of transition within the
cluster development as determined to be appropriate by the Planning
Department:



         a.   Detached single family dwellings subject to the
standards of the applicable standards of section 28.08;



         b.   Natural stand of trees;



         c.   Effective landscape buffering (as specified in
section 24.01).



      8.   Attaching of single family dwelling units may be
permitted when said dwelling units are attached by means of an approved
architectural wall detail or through a common wall in only the garage portion
of adjoining structures. The maximum number of units which may be attached in
the above described manner shall be four. Variety in the design of individual
units shall be provided by the use of design details which do not appear to
be continuous or repetitious, such as private entranceways or private outdoor
courtyards. A building pattern which is repetitious throughout a project
should not be used.



      9.   Utilization of cluster housing provides greater
flexibility in grouping dwelling units and achieving more optimum development
of problem site areas. However, it is also necessary to provide some
variation between dwelling units and provide some visual and functional open
space adjacent to each of the dwelling units. It is, therefore, required that
each dwelling unit shall:



         a.   Have no more than 75% of the length of any exterior
wall of a living unit in common with a garage or any portion of an adjacent
dwelling unit;



         b.   Not have common walls with a garage or any portion
of an adjacent dwelling unit on more than two exterior walls of any one
dwelling unit;



         c.   Provide at least a six foot variation in building
setback between two adjoining dwellings along any common building facade.
This variation in setback may be provided between a dwelling unit and its
attached garage when the attachment of dwellings occurs through the
attachment of garages sharing a common facade line or through a variation in
setback of attached garages;



         d.   For detached units, a variety of elevations with
different architectural details shall be provided in order to ensure that the
development is visually pleasing.



      10.   Except as provided herein, the area, height and bulk
requirements of the applicable residential zoning district shall apply.



      11.   Yard requirements shall be provided as follows:



         a.   Minimum spacing between ends of buildings shall be
determined by the number of living units that are arranged in any building
group, as shown in the following table:



 

Number of Living Units per Building
 
Minimum Distance (feet) Between Buildings


1 (single detached - 1 story)
 
10


1 (single detached - 2 story)
 
15


2 attached
 
20


3 or 4 attached
 
30



 



         b.   Between ends of two buildings having a different
number of attached living units, the minimum distance (feet) will be as
follows:



   Between a:



 

      1-unit and 2-unit building
 
15


      1-unit and 3-unit building
 
20


      1-unit and 4-unit building
 
25


      2-unit and 3-unit building
 
25


      2-unit and 4-unit building
 
30


      3-unit and 4-unit building
 
30



 



         c.   All buildings shall be set back the following
minimum distances from the centerline:



 



Type of Abutting Street
 
Minimum Setback (feet) from Centerline of Public Street
 
Minimum Setback (feet) from Paving of Private Street


Public:
 
 
 
 


   Major
 
100 feet
 
 


   Secondary
 
83 feet
 
 


   Collector
 
65 feet (living area)
 
 


 
 
55 feet (nonliving area)
 
 


   Cul-de-sac
 
70 feet (living area)
 
 


 
 
60 feet (nonliving area)
 
 


   Local
 
45 feet (living area)
 
 


 
 
35 feet (nonliving area)
 
 


Private:
 
 
 
 


   General Circulation
 
30 feet (living area)
 
 


 
 
20 feet (nonliving area)
 
 


   Limited Circulation
 
 
 
20 feet (living and nonliving areas)




 



         d.   All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of 35
feet from adjoining single family residential. In addition to the parking
area required for each cluster unit under section 23.02, separate off-street
hard surfaced parking areas shall be established evenly throughout the
development to facilitate vehicular traffic circulation where private streets
of less than 28 feet in width are used. There shall be at least one-half
additional parking space provided for each cluster unit.



      12.   Cluster housing is designed to appeal principally to
smaller households (e.g., childless couples, single adults and retirees).
This market group wants housing which provides for both the basic needs and
amenities found in conventional single family developments but without such
owner and maintenance responsibilities associated with it or the larger unit
size requirements of low density zoned  properties.



   Each dwelling unit constructed in the one family cluster development
shall have as a minimum, a two car attached garage, full basement, two
bedrooms, two full bathrooms and adjoining open space for patio or deck. No
less than 75% of the exterior of the first story (excluding doors and
windows) of all buildings, including all chimneys, hereafter erected shall be
constructed of brick or stone building materials.



   The minimum floor area per dwelling unit requirements may be adjusted
in accordance with the following schedule:



 

Zoning District
 
Minimum Dwelling Unit  Size for One Unit Building (square feet)
 
Minimum Dwelling Unit Size for Multiple Unit    Buildings (square feet)
 
Average Dwelling Unit Size for Multiple Unit Buildings (square feet)


R-100
 
1,500
 
1,350
 
1,500


R-90
 
1,500
 
1,350
 
1,500


R-80
 
1,400
 
1,250
 
1,400


R-70
 
1,250
 
1,100
 
1,250


R-60
 
No adjustment allowed
 
 
 
 



 



      13.   At least two deciduous or evergreen trees per dwelling
unit (at least a two and one-half inch caliper measured one foot above the
ground for deciduous trees and five feet in height for evergreen trees) shall
be planted in the project area, in addition to existing vegetation. Location
of such trees, as well as existing trees, shall be indicated on the site plan
in accordance with the environmental provisions.



      14.   An undulating landscaped berm, at least five feet high,
meeting the requirements of section 24.01(B)(2), or equivalent natural
buffer, shall be provided along the entire property abutting a major or
secondary thoroughfare. Slopes of said berm shall be gentle enough so as not
to erode when planted with grass; berm locations shall be designed so that
the view of oncoming traffic is not obscured at the intersection, as per the
requirements of section 28.03. The Engineering Department shall review the
proposed berm to determine that adequate drainage is provided.



      15.   A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted prior to
final site plan approval.



      16.   Sidewalks are required to be installed along all major,
secondary and collector roads. The developer shall have the option of
installing sidewalks adjacent to local streets, or in lieu thereof may
install a pedestrian circulation system within the common areas to the rear
of the unit. The developer must obtain approval from the city of the
pedestrian circulation system or the plan showing the location of the
sidewalks to be installed as part of the site plan approval. If the developer
elects to install sidewalks adjacent to any local street, the garage,
driveway approach and sidewalks shall be designed and constructed so that
vehicles parking on the driveway of the unit will not obstruct pedestrian
circulation on the sidewalk.



      17.   The applicant shall provide satisfactory assurance that
the amenities and those areas shown on the plan for use by the public or
occupants of the development will be, or have been, irrevocably committed for
that purpose. The city may require that conveyances or other documents be
placed in escrow to accomplish this purpose and that a performance guarantee,
as prescribed in section 29.04, be provided.



      18.   Fencing shall not be permitted on the interior of the
development, except as approved by the Planning Department in accordance with
the following:



         a.   All fencing shall be uniform in character and
design;



         b.   All fencing shall be in scale with the development.



      19.   The developer shall deposit with the City Clerk a cash
deposit, certified check or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the
city covering the estimated cost of common area improvements associated with
the project (as verified by the city) for which special land use approval is
sought. The performance guarantees shall be deposited at the time of the
issuance of the permit authorizing the activity or project. As improvements
have been completed, the city shall release a proportionate share of any cash
deposits made on the required improvements as the work has progressed.



      20.   All yard improvements to the project area shall be in
conformance with the site improvements identified and accepted as part of the
approved site plan.



      21.   Open space requirements shall be provided as follows:



         a.   All areas which are reserved for open space,
including active recreation areas and those left in a natural state (such as
stands of trees and woodlands, wetlands and similar assets) shall be designed
and laid out in such a manner so that the benefits may accrue directly to the
residents of the development;



         b.   Access to the open space areas shall be provided by
streets or pedestrian accessways for those units comprising the development
that to not directly abut the common area;



         c.   No active recreation areas shall be located at or
along the outer perimeter of the development unless such areas can be
connected to similar recreation areas in an adjacent residential development.
Open space areas designed for passive recreational use or are retained as
natural areas may extend to or along the outer perimeter of the development;



         d.   The common area shall be designed and laid out in
such a manner that all land reserved for common use shall maintain proper
drainage. The entire common area may, however, be located in a floodplain;



         e.   In reviewing the common areas of the concept plan,
the following shall govern:



            (1)   The location, size and overall shape of the
proposed common area shall be suitable for the purpose for which it is
intended;



            (2)   Those portions of the total common area
intended for active recreational purposes shall be of adequate size and shape
to permit active recreational use. The active recreation area shall not be
established within any woodland, wetland or other natural area that was used
to satisfy the qualification criteria under section 22.01 or within any other
woodland, wetland or natural area designated by the city to be preserved;



            (3)   The location, size and shape of the proposed
access points, open spaces, recreational areas and proposed accessory
structures shall be clearly designated on the plan along with general use
patterns and the pedestrian circulation plan to determine that the open space
is reasonably located in relation to the units in the development.



      22.   All streets within the development shall be constructed
in accordance with the city engineering standards and all other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.



   D.   Permitted densities. In all parcels which have been qualified
for cluster development, a total unit count, up to but not exceeding the
following limits, may be permitted, the following density per acre is
consistent with conventional platted development and offers no density bonus.



 

   R-60 - 4.55 dwelling units per acre*
 
60 x 120 = 7,200


   R-70 - 4.0 dwelling units per acre*
 
70 x 120 = 8,400


   R-80 - 3.5 dwelling units per acre*
 
80 x 125 =10,000


   R-90 - 3.0 dwelling units per acre*
 
90 x 130 =11,700


   R-100 - 2.55 dwelling units per acre*
 
100 x 140 =14,000



 



   *   Density computation includes all roads but excludes that land
ineligible for computation under section 22.01(C) (site design requirements).
Within any area of the site developed for housing, development shall not
exceed eight units per acre.



   E.   Submittal procedures. Two distinct steps are required to
develop a parcel of land under the one family cluster option: qualification
of parcel and site plan approval.



      1.   Qualification of parcel.



         a.   All applications for qualification of a parcel for
one family cluster development shall include the petitioner’s name, address
and interest in the property (which supporting documentation of the interest
in the property), as well as the name, address and interest of each person
having a legal or equitable interest in the property covered by this
application. In addition, the petitioner shall include documentation
substantiating one or more of the characteristics outlined in paragraph B,
qualification of parcel, section 22.01 and shall provide the most recent
available (not older than six years) aerial photograph depicting the entire
site and provide a concept plan (drawn to scale) showing how the petitioner
intends to develop the site. The concept plan shall include the following:



            (1)   Outline of the property showing the
relationship of abutting properties and/or structures;



            (2)   Placement and basic configuration of
buildings;



            (3)   Circulation pattern;



            (4)   Preservation/open space areas;



            (5)   Density calculations and number of units
proposed;



            (6)   Buffering/screening techniques to be used.



         This concept plan shall become the basis for the site plan
approval process. Substantial departures from the concept plan shall not be
approved.



         b.   Upon receipt of the completed application, the
request shall be given to the Planning Commission for scheduling of a public
hearing. The Planning Commission shall not act on the request until notice by
mail or personal delivery has been sent to the owner of each property for
which qualification is being considered and to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property in
question. Said notice shall include the time and place of the public hearing
and shall be sent not less than five days before the scheduled public
hearing. In addition, not less than 15 days notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city.



         c.   The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the
application based upon the criteria set forth in this section. The Planning
Commission must be satisfied with the concept plan submitted in order for the
parcel to qualify for development under the one family cluster option. The
Planning Commission may impose reasonable conditions upon any approval to
ensure that the spirit and intent of this section is upheld. The Planning
Commission shall not, however, be required to approve a request even though
it satisfies one or more of the criteria outlined in this section if the
request does not fulfill the spirit and intent of this development option.



         d.   Approval of the concept plan by the Planning
Commission shall not constitute final site plan approval by the Planning
Department but shall be deemed approval of qualification of the site.
Approval of the concept plan shall serve as a guide in the preparation and
review of the final site plan.



         e.   Approval of the qualification of the parcel shall
remain valid for a period of one year from the date of approval, during which
time application for site plan approval must be filed. Extensions of this
approval may be granted by the Planning Commission after review.



      2.   Site plan approval:



         a.   Site plans shall provide the following:



            (1)   Structural outline (building envelope) of
all structures proposed on the site;



            (2)   Architectural renderings of building facade
elevations, typical floor plans and topography shall be drawn at a two foot
contour interval. Elevation drawing shall be drawn to scale and need only be
a sample of development throughout the site. Where more than one type of
structure or design is intended, the sample elevation and corresponding floor
plans of each type shall be submitted;



            (3)   A plan identifying the areas to be dedicated
as open space and recreational use showing access, location and any
improvements. To assure the permanence of the open space and its continued
maintenance, the developer shall provide a proposed open space agreement for
review and approval by the City Attorney. The open space agreement must be in
a form satisfactory to the city and shall include the following:



               (a)   The proposed manner of holding title
to the open space;



               (b)   The proposed manner of payment of
taxes;



               (c)   The proposed method of regulating the
use of open space;



               (d)   The proposed method of maintenance of
the property and the financing thereof;



               (e)   Any other facts relating to the legal
or practical problems of ownership and maintenance of the open space;



            (4)   The location of access drives, streets,
off-street parking areas, sidewalks and the like;



            (5)   A landscape plan showing location, extent
and type of plantings, screening and the like in accordance with the
environmental provisions of Article 24.



         b.   Approval of a site plan under this section shall be
effective for a period of one year from date of approval. If development is
not started in this period, the site plan approval shall expire unless an
extension is requested, in writing, by the applicant and approved by the
city. Any change that represents a significant change from the concept plan
approved by the Planning Commission shall be resubmitted to the Planning
Commission for review and approval.



(Ord. No. 278-H, § 1, 12-18-90; Ord. No. 278-I, §§ 2-11, 2-5-91; Ord. No.
278-N, §§ 14-18; Ord. No. 278-R, § 10, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-X, §§ 7, 8,
4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 29, 30, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-CC, §§  7, 8,
9, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 22.02.  PLANNED SUBDIVISION OPTION.



   A.   Intent. The intent of this section is to permit single family
residential development which, through design innovation, will encourage
creative development alternatives which will benefit the total community by
preserving desirable open space in the form of wetlands, woodlands and other
natural assets, in conjunction with the development of detached single family
residential dwellings and provide additional detached unit design
alternatives to conventional subdivision development for unusual sites.  The
planned subdivision option shall be at the discretion of the city after
review and recommendation by the Planning Commission and approval by the City
Council.



      1.   This option may be utilized by modification of the R-80,
R-90 and R-100 single family residential, district standards outlined in this
article, subject to the conditions herein imposed. The overall density
permitted in these single family residential districts remains substantially
the same as is permitted in a conventional subdivision development.



      2.   Planned subdivision developments may be permitted only
after a public hearing on qualification has been held by the Planning
Commission, a recommendation has been made to the City Council by the
Planning Commission and the City Council has approved the request in
accordance with the criteria set forth herein.



   B.   Qualification of parcel. In order to qualify a parcel for
development under this section, the Planning Commission shall determine that
the parcel has at least one of the following characteristics, supported by
documented evidence as required below, prepared by a registered architect,
professional community planner, landscape architect, engineer or similar
professional in environmental design:



      1.   The parcel contains natural assets which would be
preserved through the use of the planned subdivision option. Such assets may
include natural stands of large trees, land which serves as a natural habitat
for wildlife, wetlands and bodies of water (i.e., streams, rivers or other
natural assets) which should be preserved. Requests for qualification under
these conditions must be supported by documented evidence;



      2.   The parcel contains substantial portions of floodplain
and wetlands worthy of preserving. A floodplain and wetlands map, certifiable
by the appropriate federal, state or county agency, indicating the extent of
the wetlands and floodplain area, shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission in order to support the proposal for the parcel’s qualification
for use of the planned subdivision option;



      3.   The parcel is either too small or unusually shaped to be
reasonably platted as a conventional subdivision development. This
characteristic shall not be considered present if there are adjoining
properties that can be reasonably combined with the parcel to enable
conventional development to occur;



      4.   Where the adjoining or adjacent zoning or land uses
warrant a creative development alternative to facilitate a smooth transition
between uses;



      5.   In the absence of any of the above criteria, a parcel may
be considered for qualification under this option if it creates amenities in
the form of woodlands, lakes, open spaces and common recreational areas and
facilities expands or integrates existing common areas from adjoining
developments of a similar nature or creates some other unique feature which
will enhance the lifestyle and single family character of the area;



      6.   A request for the planned subdivision option shall not be
approved if:



         a.   The request would be contrary to the purpose of the
option, which is to create better residential developments for the community
by preserving open space, wetlands, woodlands and other natural assets and
compatible use patterns;



         b.   The proposal would be contrary to the health,
safety and general welfare of the developed and established residential areas
in the immediate vicinity;



         c.   The proposal does not provide the privacy and
character of single family living;



         d.   The request does not provide for a sound physical
development.



   C.   Subdivision design requirements. All planned subdivision option
developments shall conform to the following restrictions:



      1.   Within the planned subdivision, a minimum of 20% of the
total parcel shall be in preservation areas. Road rights-of-way, bodies of
water, utility easements, regulated wetlands, floodways, required yard areas
and limited common areas not available for use by all of the residents within
the development, while included in the total parcel area, shall be excluded
from the preservation area calculations;



      2.   On parcels which contain wetlands or floodplains, or
both, the following shall apply:



         a.   When the wetland or floodplain, or both, does not
comprise 50% of the parcel, 25% of this land will be included in acreage for
computation of density;



         b.   When the wetland or floodplain, or both, comprise
50% or more of the parcel, a 25% density increase will be permitted on land
other than wetland or floodplain;



         c.   No density credit will be allowed for any bodies of
water on the parcel, even if the entire shoreline is within the parcel to be
developed; however, an area to be improved into a lake or pond, when approved
by the city, shall not be excluded from the 25% density credit.



      3.   Design standards:



         a.   The minimum lot and area requirements permitted
under this option shall be as follows:



 

Zoning District
 
Minimum Lot Width
 
Minimum Lot Area/Lot Depth (where lots to rear to common areas)
 
Minimum Lot Area/Lot Depth (where lots rear rear or rear to side)


R-100
 
90
 
11,700/130
 
12,150/135


R-90
 
80
 
10,000/125
 
10,400/130


R-80
 
70
 
8,750/125
 
8,750/125



 



         b.   Side yard areas shall be in accordance with the
following schedule, provided the requirements set forth herein are satisfied:



 

Zoning District
 
Least Side Yard
 
Total of Both Side Yards


R-100
 
10
 
20


R-90
 
8
 
20


R-80
 
5
 
15



 



         c.   Where side entry garages are provided, the side
yard requirements for the R-90 and R-100 districts shall be:



 


 
Least Side Yard
 
Total of Both Side Yards


R-100
 
5
 
20


R-90
 
5
 
15



 



   However, in no case shall the distance between the side lot line and
the front entrance of the side entry garage be less than 22 feet.



         d.   The placement of housing units and other
improvements shall be designed in such a way as to preserve wooded areas
contained on the site. A tree preservation plan is required to be submitted
to confirm the location of all wooded areas to be preserved.



         e.   There shall be no dwelling units or development
other than street, utilities, pathways, parking and recreation areas allowed
within a defined floodplain and shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Board of Appeals, as required.



         f.   There shall be no development or modification of
any kind within a designated wetland or floodplain area without there first
being issued a wetlands use permit by the Department of Natural Resources
(DNR) and/or the Zoning Board of Appeals, as required. However, a DNR permit
does not guarantee approval by the city. Developers are encouraged to include
the local planning staff in the negotiation process with the DNR.



         g.   At least two deciduous or evergreen trees per lot
(at least a two and one-half inch caliper measured one foot above the ground
for deciduous trees and five feet in height for evergreen trees) shall be
planted in the front yard of each lot, in addition to existing vegetation.
The trees shall be planted by the builder prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy. All trees shall meet the requirements of section 24.02.



      4.   Open space requirements:



         a.   All areas which are reserved for open space,
including active recreation areas and those left in a natural state (such as
stands of trees and woodlands, wetlands and similar assets) shall be designed
and laid out in such a manner so that the benefits may accrue directly to the
residents of the development;



         b.   Access to the open space areas shall be provided by
streets or pedestrian accessways for those units comprising the development
that do not directly abut the common area;



         c.   No active recreation areas shall be located at or
along the outer perimeter of the development, unless such areas can be
connected to similar recreation areas in an adjacent residential development.
Open space areas designed for passive recreational use or are retained as
natural areas may extend to or along the outer perimeter of the development;



         d.   The common area shall be designed and laid out in
such a manner that all land reserved for common use shall maintain proper
drainage. The entire common area may, however, be located in a floodplain;



         e.   In reviewing the common areas of the plan, the
following shall govern:



            (1)   The location, size and overall shape of the
proposed common area shall be suitable for the purpose for which it is
intended;



            (2)   Those portions of the total common area
intended for active recreational purposes shall be of adequate size and shape
to permit active recreational use. The active recreation area shall not be
established within any woodland, wetland or other natural area that was used
to satisfy the qualification criteria under section 22.02 or within any other
woodland, wetland or natural area designated by the city to be preserved;



            (3)   The location, size and shape of proposed
access points, open spaces, recreational areas and proposed accessory
structures are clearly shown on the plan and identified and shall be clearly
designated on the plan along with general use patterns and the pedestrian
circulation plan to determine that the open space is reasonably located in
relation to the units in the development.



         f.   To assure the permanence of the open space and its
continued maintenance, the developer shall provide a proposed open space
agreement for review and approval by the City Attorney.



   D.   Permitted densities. In all parcels which have been qualified
for development under the planned subdivision option, a total lot count up
to, but not exceeding, the following limits, may be permitted by the Planning
Commission. The following density factors are consistent with conventional
platted development and offer no density bonus.



      1.   R-80 districts:  3.5 dwelling units per acre;*



      2.   R-90 districts:  3.0 dwelling units per acre;*



      3.   R-100 districts:  2.55 dwelling units per acre.*



   *   Density computation includes all roads but excludes that land
ineligible for computation under section 22.02C (subdivision design
requirements).



   E.   Submittal procedures. Two distinct steps are required to
develop a parcel of land under the planned subdivision option: qualification
of parcel and plat approval.



      1.   Qualification of parcel.



         a.   All applications requesting qualification of a
parcel for a planned subdivision development shall include the petitioner’s
name, address and interest in the property with supporting documentation of
the interest in the property along with the name, address and interest of
each person having a legal or equitable interest in the property covered by
this application. In addition, the petitioner shall include documentation
substantiating one or more of the characteristics outlined in paragraph B,
qualification of parcel, section 22.02 and shall provide the most recent
available (not older than six years) aerial photograph depicting the entire
site.



         b.   Upon receipt of the completed application, the
request shall be given to the Planning Commission for placement on an agenda.
Each Planning Commissioner shall review the proposed request and should make
a preliminary inspection of the site if deemed necessary.



         c.   Upon receipt of the completed application, the
request shall be given to the Planning Commission for scheduling of a public
hearing. The Planning Commission shall not act on the request until notice by
mail or personal delivery has been sent to the owner of each property for
which qualification is being considered and to all persons to whom real
property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundaries of the property in
question. Said notices shall include the time and place of the public hearing
and shall be sent not less than five days before the scheduled public
hearing. In addition, not less than 15 days notice of the time and place of
such public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city.



         d.   The application shall include a minimum of three
copies of the plat superimposed on the most recent available (not more than
six years old) aerial photograph so that the subdivision can be related to
the additional natural conditions on the site and to adjacent development.



         e.   If the Planning Commission is satisfied that the
request meets the criteria specified for approval under this article, it
shall forward a recommendation to City Council with any conditions upon which
such approval should be based. If the Planning Commission determines that the
request does not meet the criteria or finds that the approval of the proposal
would be detrimental to existing development in the general area and should
not be approved, it shall recommend denial to the City Council and shall
record reasons thereof in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting. The
Planning Commission recommendation, together with copies of the request,
including all layouts and other relevant information shall be forwarded to
the City Clerk for consideration by the City Council. The Clerk shall place
the matter on the agenda of City Council. The City Council shall approve or
deny the request for qualification based upon the criteria set forth in this
section.



         f.   Approval of qualification of a parcel for
development under this option by the City Council shall not constitute final
plat approval. Approval under this section is based upon the plan submitted.
Approval of the qualification of the parcel shall remain valid for a period
of one year from the date of approval, during which time application for
subdivision plat approval must be filed. Extensions of this approval may be
granted by the City Council after review.



      2.   Plat approval.



         a.   Application for approval of a plat under this
planned subdivision option shall conform to the requirements of the State of
Michigan Subdivision Control Act and the subdivision regulations of the City
of Sterling Heights, as modified by this ordinance;



         b.   Upon tentative approval of the preliminary plat,
the developer shall provide a proposed open space agreement for review and
approval by the City Council. The agreement shall set forth the manner of the
dedication and title of the open land or common areas, manner of ownership,
the applicable restrictive covenants, the rights and duties of owners with
respect to maintenance and repairs of common areas, the method for payment of
assessments and a mechanism for city oversight of such maintenance and use of
common areas, if required.



(Ord. No. 278-N, §§ 19-22, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 278-R, § 11, 8-20-96; Ord. No.
278-T, § 10, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-U, § 9, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-X, § 9,
4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-CC, §§ 10,11, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-NN, §§ 13, 34,
1-6-09)



SECTION 22.03.  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.



   A.   Intent. 



      1.   The intent of this section is to encourage innovation and
to allow more efficient use of land through the use of regulatory flexibility
in the consideration of proposed land uses within the city consistent with
the requirements of the city's Master Land Use Plan.  It is the further
intent to replace the usual approval process involving rigid use and bulk
specifications by the regulations contained in this Section and by the
utilization of an approved development plan.



      2.   The planned unit development (PUD) permitted under this
section shall be considered as an option to the development permitted in all
zoning districts and shall be mutually agreeable to the developer and the
city.  Development under this section shall be in accordance with a
comprehensive physical development plan establishing functional use areas,
density patterns, and vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems. The
development is to be in keeping with the physical character of the city and
the area surrounding the proposed development, preserving as much natural
vegetation and terrain as possible. 



   B.   General Requirements for PUD. PUDs may be permitted after
review and recommendation of the conceptual development plan by the Planning
Commission and approval of the City Council in accordance with the procedures
set forth herein and after public hearings on the concept plan have been held
by the Planning Commission and the City Council, subject to the following
conditions:



      1.   Basic land conditions.



         a.   PUDs may be permitted in all zoning districts.



         b.   The site area used for computing density shall
consist of contiguous land under single ownership or control.



         c.   The proposed development must be in basic accord
with the intent of the PUDs.



         d.   The city may also qualify sites where an
innovative, unified, planned approach to developing the site would result in
a significantly higher quality of development, the mitigation of potentially
negative impacts of development, or more efficient development than
conventional zoning would allow.



      2.   Uses permitted.



         a.   All uses permitted as principal uses permitted, or
special approval land uses and accessory uses permitted in all zoning
districts.  Multiple uses contained in a PUD must be complementary in
nature.  If a PUD includes residential uses, the housing types may be
clustered to preserve common open space, in a design not feasible under the
underlying zoning district regulations.  The PUD must provide a
complementary variety of housing types and/or a complementary mixed-use plan
of residential and/or non-residential uses that is harmonious with adjacent
development.



      3.   Residential density.



         a.   The maximum permitted densities within a PUD shall
be governed by the zoning district in which it is located.  The overall
dwelling density for single or multiple family residential districts cannot
exceed the maximum dwelling unit density computed for the entire gross site
area based on the allowable density of the underlying zoning district. 



         b.   At the discretion of the City Council, after review
and recommendation by the Planning Commission, the maximum density permitted
may be increased, by up to 25% of the permitted zoning density within that
district, provided that the development meets the intent and all other
standards of the PUD provisions and all other city ordinances.



         c.   A majority of the proposed residential units within
all residential districts must be developed as either single family,
two-family, or multiple family as determined by the underlying zoning.



      4.   Mixed use and commercial PUDs.



         a.   A PUD may include residential and non-residential
uses as determined by the City Council after review and recommendation of the
Planning Commission.  The use of creative development concepts including
mixed uses should be used to create commercial nodes and gateways and
facilitate renovation of existing retail centers as opposed to creating strip
commercial centers along major thoroughfares.



         b.   Setback and other dimensional requirements of the
underlying zoning district(s) shall be used as guidelines for reviewing a
proposed mixed-use or commercial PUD, which requirements may be modified by
the City Council to achieve the intent of the PUD after review and
recommendation of the Planning Commission.



         c.   Permitted commercial uses shall be limited to those
determined by the City Council after review and recommendation of the
Planning Commission, to be suitable for the site and compatible with the
surrounding area.  Any uses listed as special approval land uses shall be
required to comply with specific conditions relating to such uses, although
no additional review process is needed, other than the PUD approval process.



         d.   Attached residential units may be permitted as a
transitional use between commercial uses and lower density residential in a
mixed-use PUD where the underlying zoning is commercial.



         e.   Elderly housing may be permitted in a mixed-use or
commercial PUD.  The permitted dwelling unit density of the elderly housing
component shall be evaluated based upon the type of elderly housing proposed
(i.e. independent, assisted, etc.), the conditions of the site, anticipated
traffic impacts, and character of surrounding uses and the neighborhood.



      5.   Design and layout conditions.  The Planning Commission
and City Council shall use any applicable standards for approval contained in
city ordinances related to land use and any adopted development guidelines.



         a.   Where a planned or proposed major, secondary, or
collector thoroughfare is included partially or wholly within the project
area of a PUD, such portion of the roadway shall be provided as a public
right-of-way with the width standards as stated in the master road plan for
the right-of-way.  The alignment of the roadway shall be in general
conformance to the proposed alignment as shown on the master plan.



         b.   In order to provide an orderly transition of
density, where the project being proposed for use as a PUD immediately abuts
a residential district, (not including districts separated by a major
thoroughfare), the City may require that the area immediately abutting the
district shall be developed with a like development or landscaped open space.



         c.   Site design standards should include frontage
beautification, buffering devices, landscaping, walkway linkages, controlled
vehicular access, and attractive signage.



      6.   Area, height and bulk conditions.



         a.   All yards, height, bulk, minimum floor area, lot
coverage, lot area, and lot width requirements for single-family development
shall be in conformance with the requirements of the applicable zoning
districts, including special development options, unless otherwise modified
by the approved development plan.



         b.   All yards, height, bulk, minimum floor area, and
lot coverage requirements for multiple-family and attached development shall
meet the requirements of RM-1, and RM-2 Districts, as applicable, unless
otherwise modified by the approved development plan.



         c.   All other uses permitted within the applicable
districts shall be subject to the requirements of the respective districts
unless otherwise modified by the approved development plan.



   C.   Submittal procedures and conditions.  Two distinct steps are
required to develop a parcel of land as a PUD development:  approval of the
concept plan and site plan approval.  Any person owning or controlling land
may make application to the City Council for consideration of a PUD. In order
to adequately review the site plan, the applicant shall be required to submit
the following materials to the city:



      1.   Submittal of proposed PUD concept plan.  The proposed
PUD concept plan shall contain at least the following:



         a.   A boundary survey of the exact acreage being
requested done by a registered land surveyor or civil engineer (Scale: 1
inch  = 200 feet).



         b.   A current aerial photograph of the area shall be
provided (Scale: 1 inch = 200 feet).



         c.   Application form and required fee.



         d.   A narrative indicating the period of time within
which it is contemplated the project will be completed.



         e.   A site plan with four-sided elevations showing a
layout of the uses and structures in the PUD and their locations including:



            (1)   Layout of proposed land use, acreage
allotted to each use, residential density overall and by underlying zoning
district, and generalized building footprints;



            (2)   Roads, parking areas, drives, driveways, and
pedestrian paths;



            (3)   Building setbacks and spacing;



            (4)   General location and type of landscaping
proposed;



            (5)   Any significant woodlands that will be
preserved;



            (6)   A preliminary layout of the stormwater
drainage plan, including detention or retention pond locations;



            (7)   Locations of public or private utilities; and



            (8)   Identification of each phase, if a
multi-phase development is proposed.



         f.   Any additional graphics or written materials
reasonably requested by the Planning Commission or City Council to assist in
determining the impacts of the proposed site plan, including, but not limited
to, economic or market studies; impact on public primary and secondary
schools and utilities; traffic impacts; impact on significant natural,
historical, and architectural features and drainage; impact on the general
area and adjacent property; and estimated construction costs.



      2.   Planning Commission review of proposed PUD plan:  Upon
receipt of an application by the city, such request shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for its review and recommendation.  In its review, the
Planning Commission shall consider the following:



         a.   That all applicable provisions of this section 
have been met.  Insofar as any provision of this section shall be in
conflict with the provisions of any other section of this code, the
provisions of this section shall apply to the lands embraced within a PUD
area.



         b.   That adequate areas have been provided for all
utilities, walkways, recreational areas, parking areas and other open spaces,
and areas to be used by the public or by residents of the community.



         c.   The plan provides for an efficient, aesthetic, and
desirable use of the open areas and the plan is in keeping with the physical
character of the city and the area surrounding the development.



         d.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing
to hear and consider comments relating to the PUD proposal.



         e.   Upon finding that the conditions outlined above
have been satisfactorily met, and following the public hearing, the Planning
Commission will within a reasonable time forward its report and
recommendation to the City Council.



      3.   Approval of PUD Concept Plan:  Upon receipt of the
report and recommendation from the Planning Commission, the City Council
shall consider whether or not all conditions have been satisfactorily met and
thereafter shall hold a public hearing to hear and consider comments to the
PUD proposal.



         a.   The City Council shall review the conceptual plan,
together with the findings of the Planning Commission, and shall approve,
approve with conditions, or deny the conceptual plan.



         b.   Once an area has been included within a plan for a
PUD that has been approved by the City Council, no development may take place
in such area nor may any use thereof be made except in accordance with a City
Council approved amendment thereto.



         c.   The owner must receive final site plan approval for
the proposed  development within 12 months of approval of the conceptual
plan, obtain a building permit within 18 months of conceptual plan approval,
and complete development of the PUD within 30 months of conceptual plan
approval.  This time limitation may be extended by the City Council in
response to a request from the owner.



         d.   Approval of the concept plan by the City Council
shall not constitute final site plan approval.  Approval of the conceptual
plan shall serve as a guide in the preparation and review of the final site
plan.



   D.   Site plan review. Upon approval of the PUD conceptual plan by
the City Council, a site plan review is required in accordance with Article
26 Site Plan Review Requirements and Procedures prior to the issuance of
building or zoning compliance permits.  Site plans shall also provide the
following:



      1.   Structural outline (building envelope) of all structures
proposed on the site;



      2.   Architectural renderings of building facade elevations,
typical floor plans and topography shall be drawn at a two-foot contour
interval.  Elevation drawing shall be drawn to scale.  Where more than one
type of structure or design is intended, the sample elevation and
corresponding floor plans of each type shall be submitted;



      3.   A plan identifying the areas to be dedicated as open
space and recreational use showing access, location and any improvements. 
To assure the permanence of the open space and its continued maintenance, the
developer shall provide a proposed open space agreement for review and
approval by the City Attorney.  The open space agreement must be in a form
satisfactory to the city and shall include the following:



         a.   The proposed manner of holding title to the open
space;



         b.   The proposed manner of payment of taxes;



         c.   The proposed method of regulating the use of open
space;



         d.   The proposed method of maintenance of the open
space area and the financing thereof;



         e.   Any other facts relating to the legal or practical
problems of ownership and maintenance of the open space;



      4.   The location of access drives, streets, off-street
parking areas, and sidewalks;



      5.   A landscape plan showing location, extent and type of
plantings and screening in accordance with the environmental provisions of
Article 24.



   E.   Regulatory flexibility.  The City Council may increase,
decrease, waive, or otherwise modify the current standards within the Zoning
Ordinance including, but not limited to: use, density, intensity, setbacks,
building heights, parking, design standards, project design standards, and
landscape standards provided the modification is found to improve the quality
of development above and beyond what could be developed under the underlying
zoning, or results in a higher level of public benefit, and to achieve the
purpose of this article.  The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no variance
authority for PUD projects.



(Ord. No. 278-FF, § 1, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 22.04.  CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY/DEVELOPMENT AREAS.



   A.   Intent.  Pursuant to section 5 of Act 280 of the Public Acts
of 2005, as amended, ("Corridor Improvement Authority Act"), the City Council
has created the Corridor Improvement Authority of Sterling Heights to
encourage redevelopment of certain commercial areas and promote economic
growth within the city. The City Council has adopted a Development Plan
setting forth guidelines for improvements within the areas of the city which
have been designated as a "Development Area". Improvements made within the
designated Development Area must comply with the guidelines and standards of
the applicable Development Plan, as amended from time to time.  The
Development Plan is intended to enhance public spaces, utilize a consistent
theme/style along rights-of-way, provide a unified building style for
development and redevelopment, and to promote economic growth and enhanced
property values within the Development Area.



   B.   Definitions.  The definitions below shall apply to the words
and phrases used in this section 22.04.  Words and phrases not defined in
this section 22.04, paragraph B but defined in article 31 shall be given the
meanings set forth in article 31.  All other words shall be given their
common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 



      CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY (AUTHORITY).  The Corridor
Improvement Authority of Sterling Heights created by the City Council
pursuant to section 5 of the Corridor Improvement Authority Act.



      CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DEVELOPMENT AREA (DEVELOPMENT AREA). A
geographic area designated by the city council pursuant to the Corridor
Improvement Authority Act where certain improvements may be eligible for
financing available under the Corridor Improvement Authority Act to
facilitate redevelopment and promote economic growth.



      CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT DEVELOPMENT PLAN (DEVELOPMENT PLAN). A
development plan adopted by the city council pursuant to the Corridor
Improvement Authority Act to facilitate redevelopment and to promote economic
growth within the Development Area.



      CORRIDOR IMPROVEMENT AUTHORITY PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE (PLAN REVIEW
COMMITTEE).  The review committee designated by the City Council to perform
a preliminary review of a site plan for a site within a Development Area to
determine compliance with the goals and design objectives of the Development
Plan.



   C.   Corridor Improvement Authority Plan Review Committee; Review of
Site Plan by Plan Review Committee.  A Plan Review Committee comprised of
the City Development Director, City Planner, Economic Development Manager,
and Public Services Manager is created to review site plans for any proposed
development within a Development Area for compliance with the goals and
design guidelines and standards of the applicable Development Plan.  Upon
completion of this review by the plan review committee, a summary and
recommendation shall be forwarded to the office of planning for further site
plan review and/or approval by the reviewing authority (Office of Planning,
Planning Commission, or City Council, as the case may be) under the
procedures set forth in article 26.  As part of the review, the plan review
committee shall encourage construction that adheres to the principles of the
Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating
System developed by the U.S. Green Building Council (USGBC) that promotes a
whole-building approach to sustainability by recognizing performance in five
key areas of human and environmental health: sustainable site development,
water savings, energy efficiency, materials selection, and indoor
environmental quality.



   D.   Redevelopment. Recognizing that changes to a previously
approved land use designation within a Development Area will occur due to
functional obsolescence or changing market conditions, the guidelines and
standards set forth in the applicable Development Plan as amended from time
to time to meet the objectives of the Corridor Improvement Authority shall
constitute the minimum standards for redevelopment of sites within the
Development Area. 



   E.   Site Landscaping, Improvements and Lighting. In addition to the
general site landscaping requirements of article 24, the applicable
guidelines and standards set forth in the Development Plan relating to the
planting of street trees, ornamental trees, shrubs and perennials and the
installation of integrated paving improvements and street lighting shall
apply to development or redevelopment of sites within the Development Area.



   F.   Administrative Modification of Guidelines and Standards. The
plan review committee shall have authority to modify the guidelines and
standards set forth in the Development Plan where due to unusual or unique
conditions of the property, literal compliance with the provisions of the
Development Plan as to a particular site within a Development Area would be
impossible, or would involve practical difficulties or unnecessary
hardships.  The plan review committee shall recommend approval of such a
modification only if the need for the modification is beyond the control of
the site owner/applicant and is not self-created.  (Examples:  Improvements
required by the Development Plan cannot be made because of physical
conditions of the property such as floodplain, wetlands, or other
topographical conditions, or as a result of laws or regulations applied to
the site by other governmental agencies, such as the Michigan Department of
Transportation, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Road Commission
of Macomb County, or Macomb County Public Works Department.)  In approving
such a modification, the plan review committee may impose reasonable
conditions to ensure that the improvements constructed in compliance with the
modified guidelines and standards will be in harmony with the objectives of
the Corridor Improvement Authority, public safety and welfare secured, and
substantial justice done.



(Ord. No. 278-II, § 1, 3-19-07)



Section 22.05. MAJOR INDUSTRIAL FACILITY REDEVELOPMENT OPTION (IFR).



   A.   Intent.



      1.   The intent of the Major Industrial Facility Redevelopment
Option is to provide optional flexible design standards for distressed and/or
obsolete major industrial facilities and properties, zoned M-1 Light
Industrial or M-2 Heavy Industrial consistent with the city Master Land Use
Plan, while providing stability and longevity for the economic development of
the city.



      2.   The Major Industrial Facility Redevelopment Option is
intended to provide for the development of high intensity, multi-purpose
centers upon major industrial facility sites of 12 acre minimum in size, with
not less than 150,000 square feet of existing buildings on the existing
site  through comprehensive planning, zoning, and project review.  The
regulations under this development option are designed to encourage
innovation and variety in the design and placement of highly concentrated,
integrated and diversified functions, while ensuring compatibility between
uses and adjacent forms of developments, through the review process.  Unless
specifically modified by the IFR Option regulations, redevelopment must
comply with standards of the underlying zoning designation.  In the event of
a conflict between the standards of the underlying zoning and those of the
IFR Option, the standards of the IFR Option shall control.



   B.   General Requirements.



      1.   Uses Permitted.



         a.   All uses permitted as principal uses and special
approval land uses subject to applicable special conditions permitted in the
TRO, O-R, M-1 and M-2 districts, except for the following uses:



Ambulance service dispatch centers, new/used vehicle sales and leasing, auto
service centers and reconditioning establishments, automobile repair garages,
recreational vehicle storage, automobile impound lots, firearm and archery
ranges, kennels, veterinary clinics, junk yards, refuse and garbage
incinerators, refuse transfer and recycling stations, concrete and asphalt
plants and crushing operations shall be excluded.



         b.   Hotels (two or more stories)



         c.   Restaurants (excluding fast food restaurants),
subject to the following:



            (1)   The use shall not have drive-in,
drive-through, or in-car service. Carry-out service may be permitted provided
it is a minor part of the restaurant service (40% or less of total sales)



            (2)   The building shall be designed to be an
integral part of, or as a compatible accessory use to, an existing or
proposed IFR Option area. The layout of the proposed use shall be designed to
encourage pedestrian traffic from the nearby uses.



            (3)   No freestanding restaurant shall be located
within 500 feet of another freestanding restaurant, except if such uses are
separated by a public thoroughfare of not less than 120 feet of right-of-way.



         d.   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental
to principal permitted uses enumerated above.



      2.   Redevelopment Standards.



         a.   Freestanding buildings and uses, apart from major
building complex or elements, may be permitted following the finding that the
form and location of the subject freestanding building or buildings and the
land uses contained in them are reasonably necessary for the proper
functioning of the IFR area.



         b.   The exterior of all newly erected buildings shall
be constructed of brick and/or stone building materials or other similar
durable, decorative building materials as may be approved by the Planning
Department, subject to any additional requirements set forth in Section
26.01, paragraph H.  Additions and renovations to existing buildings and
structures shall be consistent with these requirements or the architecture
and materials used on the existing buildings and structures that are to
remain on the parcel.  The architecture and exterior finish of any newly
erected building shall be complementary and compatible in style and be of
uniform finish on all sides of its exterior.



   C.   Location and Site Standards.



      1.   Area and Bulk Requirements of Redeveloped Parcel under
IFR Option.



         a.   Minimum parcel size:



            Restaurant use:                 1 acre



            Hotel, TRO, or O-R use:            3 acres



            M-1 or M-2 use:               10 acres



         b.   Maximum height of any structure:  None.  When the
building height exceeds 50 feet, yard setbacks to any points of the building
which exceed 50 feet shall be increased one foot for each additional foot of
building height over 50 feet.



         c.   Minimum building floor area:  None



         d.   Minimum yard setback per lot:



            (1)   Front and street-side setbacks shall be
measured from the centerline of each road right-of-way (R.O.W.) in accordance
with the city's Master Road Plan, as follows:



            Distance from centerline:



               (a)   Regional (204' R.O.W.):
      137 feet.



               (b)   Regional (150' R.O.W.):      110
feet.



               (c)   Major:               95
feet.



               (d)   Secondary:            78
feet.



               (e)   Collector:            70
feet.



               (f)   Local:               65
feet.



               (g)   Cul-de-sac:            95-fo
ot radius.



               (h)   Freeway:             35
feet.*



               (i)   Private roads:
            35 feet.**



      *   Freeways shall be measured from the established
right-of-way line.



      **   In the case of private roads, the front yard setback
shall be measured from the road easement or common usage line abutting the
subject lot.



   The required front yard shall be landscaped and maintained thereafter
in a neat and orderly condition. Driveway approaches, but not driveways,
shall be permitted in the required front yard.



   If the existing right-of-way is greater than shown on the Master Road
Plan, the front yard setback (or street-side setback) as measured from the
centerline of the right-of-way shall be equal to one-half of the actual
right-of-way of the street, plus 35 feet for all classes of roads.



            (2)   Side: 15 feet are required along the
interior side lot lines.  No building shall be located closer than 50 feet
and no storage or parking shall be located closer than 20 feet from the outer
perimeter (property line) of such district when such property line abuts any
residential district.



            (3)   Rear: 35 feet.  No building shall be
located closer than 50 feet and no storage or parking shall be located closer
than 20 feet from the outer perimeter (property line) of this district when
such property line abuts any residential district.



         e.   Maximum lot coverage.  The maximum lot coverage
shall be governed by meeting all of the requirements for yard space,
landscaping, screening, off-street parking and loading.  The locations of
buildings and uses and distances between buildings shall be as shown on the
approved site plan.



      2.   Parking.



         a.   The Planning Department may permit a reduction of
the parking requirement for the development of IFR area parcels by an amount
not to exceed 10%, subject to the following:



            (1)   A landscaped reserve area capable of
accommodating the required number of parking spaces shall be specified on the
site plan that could accommodate an expansion of the existing parking
facilities in the future if required.  The developer shall execute an
agreement, in a form satisfactory to the city, that will obligate the
property owners to install additional parking at the city's request if the
need arises;



            (2)   Any such provisions for installation of
additional parking shall be set forth in a recordable instrument recorded at
the office of the Macomb County Register of Deeds, describing the area
affected by the agreement;



         b.   Where the owners of two buildings desire to utilize
common off-street parking facilities, the Planning Department may permit such
dual function, provided that the following conditions have been met:



            (1)   The normal business hours of the two
buildings or uses generally do not overlap.



            (2)   The common parking lot meets the off-street
parking requirements of the larger building or more intensive use, plus 15%.



            (3)   In the event that there is a change of uses
to uses which do not meet the criteria established for shared parking, the
property owner shall install the required number of spaces prior to issuance
of a certificate of occupancy for the approved uses.



            (4)   A landscaped reserve area capable of
accommodating the required number of parking spaces shall be specified on the
site plan that could accommodate an expansion of the existing parking
facilities, in the future if required.  The developer shall execute an
agreement, in a form satisfactory to the city that will obligate the property
owners to install additional parking at the city's request if the need arises.



            (5)   Any such provisions for parking shall be set
forth in a recordable instrument recorded at the office of the Macomb County
Register of Deeds, describing the area affected by the agreement.



   D.   Procedures for Development of Parcel Under IFR Option.  There
are two distinct steps to obtaining approval to develop a parcel of property
under the IFR Option:  (1) qualification of the parcel and concept plan, and
(2) site plan approval.  An applicant desiring to develop a parcel of
property under the IFR Option must first obtain approval of qualification of
the parcel and concept plan before proceeding with submitting an application
for site plan approval.



      1.   Qualification of parcel.  An applicant requesting
qualification to develop a parcel under the IFR Option shall comply with the
following procedures:



         a.   An application for qualification that includes the
following information shall be submitted for consideration by the Planning
Commission, accompanied by the applicable application fee established by a
resolution or the annual appropriations ordinance approved by the City
Council:



            (1)   The applicant's name, address, and contact
information, and interest in the property to be redeveloped, including any
adjacent parcels to be included in the redevelopment (with written evidence
of authority to act on behalf of the property owner(s) if applicant does not
own the property), along with the applicant's signature evidencing the
accuracy and completeness of the application



            (2)   The name, address, and contact information
of the legal owner of the property, if different than the applicant (with
supporting documentation of the interest in the property), along with the
owner's signature evidencing the accuracy and completeness of the application;



            (3)   The name, address, and contact information
of each person having a legal or equitable interest in the property covered
by the application, along with a description of the interest and the person's
signature evidencing consent to the request;



            (4)   The total acreage of the existing parcel
(minimum acreage for qualification--12 acres) that is to be redeveloped under
the IFR Option, plus the acreage of any adjacent parcels to be combined with
existing parcel for redevelopment;



            (5)   The total lot coverage of existing buildings
and structures (minimum lot coverage for qualification--150,000 square feet)
developed on the parcel to be redeveloped under the IFR Option, plus lot
coverage of buildings and structures on any adjacent parcels to be combined
with existing parcel for redevelopment;



            (6)   The current use of any building or
structures on the parcel, or if vacant, the use of land;



            (7)   If any building or structure upon the parcel
is vacant, the most recent use of the building or structure prior to it
becoming vacant and the date the building or structure became vacant;



            (8)   If any building or structure upon the parcel
is anticipated to become vacant, a description of the building or structure
anticipated to become vacant, the date of anticipated vacancy, and the
current use of the building or structures anticipated to become vacant;



            (9)   If the parcel proposed to be redeveloped is
vacant due to the demolition of buildings or structures, a description of the
buildings or structures that have been demolished and the approximate date of
the demolition;



            (10)   A description of the proposed redevelopment
(including the use and location of the buildings, structures, or property as
proposed to be redeveloped (if known), and their proximity to adjacent
buildings, structures, and uses that will continue on the parcel or adjacent
parcels;



         b.   The applicant shall submit a concept plan (drawn to
scale) showing how the buildings, structures, or parcel are proposed to be
redeveloped under the IFR Option. The concept plan shall include the
following (to the extent known):



            (1)   An outline of the parcel for which
qualification is requested, showing the relationship of abutting properties
and/or structures that are not proposed to be redeveloped;



            (2)   An outline of any abutting properties for
which qualification is requested, if the application includes adjacent
parcels proposed to be combined with the parcel currently owned and developed;



            (3)    The proposed placement and the basic
configuration of buildings and structures;



            (4)   The elevations and materials of any proposed
buildings or structures proposed to be constructed;



            (5)   The proposed circulation pattern for the
parcel;



            (6)   Any proposed redevelopment, relocation, or
improvement of on-site or off-site infrastructure or site improvements
(roads, drives, parking areas, utilities, retention areas, open space areas,
landscaping, etc.);



            (7)   The location of any proposed preservation or
open space areas to be designated;



            (8)   Buffering/screening techniques to be used;



            (9)   Legal descriptions of all parcels included
in the request (including those of adjacent parcels requested to be
redeveloped under the IFR Option); and



            (10)   A depiction of the location of the parcel
on a location map.



         c.   Upon receipt of the completed application and the
required application fee, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the
Planning Commission and notice given in accordance with the notice
requirements set forth in Section 28.20.



         d.   After completion of the public hearing, the
Planning Commission shall approve or deny the application for qualification
of the parcel based upon the criteria set forth in this section, or postpone
action if the Planning Commission determines that additional information or
time is needed to properly consider the request.  In order to approve a
request for parcel qualification, the Planning Commission must be satisfied
that the parcel meets the minimum acreage and building lot coverage
requirements, and that the concept plan provides a reasonable basis for
redevelopment of the buildings, structures, and land contained on the parcel
proposed for redevelopment under the IFR Option.



         e.   The Planning Commission may modify the minimum
qualification standards relating to parcel size or minimum lot coverage of
existing buildings where the Planning Commission determines that such
modification will enable the parcel and/or existing buildings to be more
expeditiously redeveloped consistent with the spirit and intent of the IFR
Option.



         f.   The Planning Commission shall not be required to
approve a requested parcel qualification if the Planning Commission
determines that the parcel does not meet the parcel qualification criteria,
or that the concept plan does not fulfill the spirit and intent of the IFR
Option.  If the Planning Commission is not satisfied that the proposal
satisfies all of the criteria for approval, it may deny qualification of the
parcel for redevelopment under the IFR Option, or require the applicant to
make revisions to the proposal and concept plan in order to meet the
requirements, spirit, and intent of this section. 



         g.   The Planning Commission may impose reasonable
conditions upon any approval or modification of standard to ensure that the
spirit and intent of this section is upheld.



         h.   Approval of qualification of the parcel and the
concept plan by the Planning Commission shall not constitute final site plan
approval of the redevelopment under the IFR Option but shall be deemed
approval to proceed with site plan submittal and review to determine whether
the site plan for the proposed redevelopment conforms with the parcel
qualification, the concept plan, and all applicable codes and ordinances of
the City.  Approval of qualification of the parcel and the concept plan
shall serve as guides in the preparation and review of the final site plan.
Site plan approval must be obtained from the Planning Department prior to
proceeding with any construction or development of the parcel under the IFR
Option.



         i.   Approval of qualification of the parcel and the
concept plan shall remain valid for a period of one year from the date of
approval, during which time application for site plan approval must be filed.
Extensions of this approval may be granted by the Planning Commission after
review.



         j.   If an applicant does not obtain site plan approval
for a proposed redevelopment under the IFR Option within 1 year after
approval of parcel qualification and the concept plan, the approval of parcel
qualification and concept plan shall expire unless an extension, in writing,
has been requested prior to expiration of the approval period and
subsequently obtained from the Planning Commission.



      2.   Site Plan Review.  In addition to obtaining approval of
qualification of the parcel and the concept plan for redevelopment under the
IFR Option, administrative site plan review is required for any proposed
development or redevelopment of a site in accordance with Article 26 Site
Plan Review Requirements and Procedures prior to the issuance of building or
zoning compliance permits.  Site plans for development under the IFR Option
shall also provide the following information in addition to that required
under Article 24:



         a.   Structural outline (building envelope) of all
structures proposed on the site.



         b.   Architectural renderings of building façade
elevations and typical floor plans.  Elevation drawings shall be drawn to
scale.  Where more than one type of structure or design is intended, the
sample elevation and corresponding floor plans of each type shall be
submitted.



         c.   The location of access drives, streets, off-street
parking areas, and sidewalks.



         d.   A landscape plan showing location, extent and type
of plantings and screening in accordance with the environmental provisions of
Article 24.



      The approval procedures set forth in Article 26 shall apply to
site plans for development under the IFR Option.



      3.   Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to
prevent the owner of land in an IFR area from dividing a parcel into two or
more lots provided the resultant parcels meet the standards set forth in
Section 22.05 and the land division regulations of the city code. A project
development or redevelopment plan may include any adjoining parcels that are
intended to become an integral part of the IFR area and overall development
concept.



(Ord. No. 278-PP, § 3, 12-1-09)



SECTION 22.06  COMMERCIAL REDEVELOPMENT PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT OPTION.



   A.   Intent.



      1.   The intent of the Commercial Redevelopment Planned Unit
Development  Option ("CRPUD Option") is to provide a
renovation/redevelopment option for eligible commercial establishments and
shopping centers in C-1 Local Convenience Business, C-2 Planned Comparison,
or C-3 General Business Districts that will provide more flexible,
streamlined standards and procedures to encourage upgrading, beautification
and revitalization of the commercial establishment or shopping centers.



      2.   The CRPUD Option is intended to provide opportunities for
renovation, enhancement, beautification, reoccupancy and revitalization of
vacant, underdeveloped, or underutilized commercial establishments or
shopping centers which were developed many years ago when the needs, land
uses, and applicable regulations were substantially different than they are
presently.  Land use regulations applicable to such uses have changed in
order to reflect changing needs and economic realities.



      3.   The Planning Commission and City Council of the City of
Sterling Heights are desirous of having such commercial establishments or
shopping centers be renovated, redeveloped, and reoccupied with vibrant uses
which provide economic vitality to the commercial establishment or shopping
center, other tenants, City residents, and the community at large.



      4.   Therefore, in the interest of promoting productive use of
such properties, as contemplated in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, Public
Act 110 of 2006, as amended, MCL 125.3201 et seq., this section is intended
to authorize renovation, redevelopment, beautification, reoccupancy and
revitalization of commercial establishments or shopping centers which qualify
under the qualification standards of this section.



   B.   Recommendation of Plan Review Committee of Eligibility for
Redevelopment or Enhancement of Commercial Establishment or Shopping Center
Under the Commercial Redevelopment Planned Unit Development Option.



      1.   In order for a commercial establishment or shopping
center to be considered for approval to redevelop or enhance a commercial
establishment or shopping center under the CRPUD Option, the owner or
developer of the commercial establishment or shopping center must informally
meet with a Plan Review Committee comprised of the City Development Director,
City Planner, City Engineer, Economic Development Manager, any other City
Manager designee and Business Development Manager to discuss the applicant's
intentions with respect to renovating, enhancing, beautifying, reoccupying
the building or tenant spaces, and otherwise revitalizing the commercial
establishment or shopping center.  There shall be no fee for this initial
preliminary conference.  The owner or developer shall furnish the Plan
Review Committee with pre-preliminary conceptual site plan which shows the
intended redevelopment and reoccupancy changes intended to be made under the
CRPUD Option.  In determining whether the proposed redevelopment or
reoccupancy of the commercial establishment or shopping center will be
recommended to the Planning Commission for proceeding under the CRPUD Option,
the applicant and the Plan Review Committee shall consider the following
criteria:



         a.   The size of the commercial establishment or
shopping center parcel shall be 25 acres or less  and the age and general
condition of the shopping center (priority given to shopping centers over 20
years of age).



         b.   The current zoning of the commercial establishment
or shopping center and the extent to which it complies with current standards
of the Zoning Ordinance, City Code, and other regulatory provisions relating
to exterior design, ingress and egress, pedestrian accessibility, signage and
landscaping.



         c.   The current occupancy level, tenant mix, and
economic viability of the commercial establishment or shopping center.



         d.   Any physical site characteristics or other
restrictions limiting the ability of the commercial establishment or shopping
center to comply with the current standards of the Zoning Ordinance, City
Code, and other regulatory provisions.



         e.   The proposed improvements and renovations and new
uses proposed to be added to the commercial establishment or shopping center
under the CRPUD Option and the extent, if any, that the proposed renovations
and changes in occupancy in the commercial establishment or shopping center
will bring the commercial establishment or shopping center into greater
conformance with the Master Land Use Plan, Zoning Ordinance and benefit the
city at large.



         f.   The extent, if any, to which the enhancement and
redevelopment of the commercial establishment or shopping center incorporates
unique uses and design elements which will promote the long-term viability of
the commercial establishment or shopping center, using either the special
land use or other discretionary land use approval provisions of Article 25,
the planned unit development options of Section 22.03 which shall be
available, or the CRPUD provisions of Section 22.05.



         g.   The extent to which the design elements from the
Simplified Traditional architectural style as set forth in Article 26 and
Section 31.01 will be incorporated into the enhancement or redevelopment of
the commercial establishment or shopping center.



         h.   The overall benefit of the proposed renovations and
changes in occupancy in the commercial establishment or shopping center upon
the public healthy, safety and welfare of the community.



      2.   After the owner or developer meets with the Plan Review
Committee, the Plan Review Committee shall review the pre-preliminary
conceptual site plan, correspondence, narratives, sketches, or other
materials submitted to determine the extent that it meets the criteria and
intent of the CRPUD Option based upon the criteria set forth in section B.1.
above.  If the Plan Review Committee determines that the shopping center
should be eligible for redevelopment and/or reoccupancy under the CRPUD
Option based upon such criteria, the Plan Review Committee shall notify the
applicant and the Office of Planning in writing of its recommendation. 



      3.   If the Plan Review Committee determines that the
commercial establishment or shopping center should not be eligible for
redevelopment and/or reoccupancy based upon the CRPUD Option criteria above,
the Plan Review Committee shall advise the applicant in writing as to the
reasons for such recommendation. An adverse recommendation from the Plan
Review Committee shall not preclude the owner or developer from requesting
qualification from the Planning Commission to redevelop the commercial
establishment or shopping center under the CRPUD Option.



      4.   An owner or developer of a commercial establishment or
shopping center which intends to enhance or redevelop the commercial
establishment or shopping center, or reoccupy the commercial establishment or
shopping center with new uses under the CRPUD Option shall comply with the
recommendations of the Plan Review Committee with respect to improvements.



   C.   General Requirements for CRPUD Option; Approving Authority;
Qualification Under CRPUD Options. 



      1.   The Planning Commission shall be the approving authority
with respect to (a) qualification under the CRPUD Option and (b) approval of
a preliminary site plan for redevelopment or reoccupancy of a commercial
establishment or shopping center under the CRPUD Option.



      2.   After the owner or developer of a commercial
establishment or shopping center meets with the Plan Review Committee and
obtains a recommendation regarding redevelopment and/or reoccupancy under the
CRPUD Option, the owner or developer shall proceed with obtaining review and
qualification by the Planning Commission of the commercial establishment or
shopping center under the CRPUD Option and approval of a preliminary site
plan.  The Planning Commission may approve the CRPUD in accordance with the
procedures set forth in this section after a public hearing held by the
Planning Commission subject to the following:



         a.   The Planning Commission shall not approve
qualification of a commercial establishment or shopping center for
redevelopment or reoccupancy under the CRPUD Option unless it finds that the
following have been satisfied (unless inapplicable) by a simple majority of
the members of the Planning Commission.



         b.   That all applicable provisions of this section have
been met or modified by the Planning Commission.  Insofar as any provision
of this section shall be in conflict with the provisions of any other section
of this code, the provisions of this section shall apply to the lands
embraced within a CRPUD area.



         c.   That adequate areas have been provided for all
utilities, walkways, recreational areas, parking areas and other open spaces,
and areas to be used by the public or by residents of the community.



      3.   The plan provides for an efficient, aesthetic, and
desirable use of the open areas and the plan is in keeping with the physical
character of the city and the area surrounding the development.



      4.   The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to
hear and consider comments relating to the CRPUD proposal.



      5.   Upon finding that the conditions outlined above have been
satisfactorily met, and following the public hearing, the Planning Commission
shall approve the CRPUD with any reasonable conditions.



      6.   Once an area has been included within a plan for a CRPUD
that has been approved by the Planning Commission, no development may take
place in such area nor may any use thereof be made except in accordance with
a Planning Commission approved amendment.



   D.   Specific CRPUD Qualification.



      1.   CRPUDs may be permitted in the C-1 Local Business
District, C-2 Planned Comparison and C-3 General Business Districts only.



      2.   The commercial establishment or shopping center proposed
to be redeveloped or reoccupied under the CRPUD shall consist of contiguous
land.



      3.   The proposed development must be in basic accord with the
intent of the CRPUD Option.



      4.   All uses permitted as principal uses permitted, or
special approval land uses and accessory uses permitted in the C-1, C-2 and
C-3 Districts, mixed uses as provided in subparagraph 5. below and other
discretionary land uses as authorized by section 25.04 of the Zoning
Ordinances.



      5.   A CRPUD may include complementary multiple family
residential uses allowed in the RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple Family Residential
Districts as determined by the Planning Commission.



         a.   The use of creative development concepts including
mixed uses should be used to create commercial nodes and gateways and
facilitate renovation of existing retail centers as opposed to creating strip
commercial centers along major thoroughfares.



         b.   If a CRPUD includes multiple family residential
uses, the housing types may be clustered to preserve common open space, in a
design not feasible under the underlying zoning district regulations.  The
CRPUD may provide a complementary variety of housing types and/or a
complementary mixed-use plan of residential and/or non-residential uses that
is harmonious with adjacent development.



         c.   Setback and other dimensional requirements of uses
proposed to be developed shall be used as guidelines for reviewing a proposed
mixed-use CRPUD.



      6.   Any uses listed as special approval land uses shall be
required to comply with specific conditions relating to such uses, unless
modified by the Planning Commission.



      7.   Elderly housing may be permitted in a mixed-use or
CRPUD.  The permitted dwelling unit density of the elderly housing component
shall be evaluated based upon the type of elderly housing proposed (i.e.
independent, assisted, etc.), the conditions of the site, anticipated traffic
impacts, and character of surrounding uses and the neighborhood.



   E.   Design and layout conditions.  The Planning Commission shall
apply all applicable standards for approval contained in city ordinances
related to land use and any adopted development guidelines and the design
standards set forth below.



      1.   Where a planned or proposed major, secondary, or
collector thoroughfare is included partially or wholly within the project
area of a CRPUD, such portion of the roadway shall be provided as a public
right-of-way with the width standards as stated in the master road plan for
the right-of-way.  The alignment of the roadway shall be in general
conformance to the proposed alignment as shown on the master plan.



      2.   In order to provide an orderly transition of density,
where the project being proposed for use as a CRPUD immediately abuts a
residential district, (not including districts separated by a major
thoroughfare), the City may require that the area immediately abutting the
district shall be developed with a like development or landscaped open space.



      3.   Site design standards should include frontage
beautification, buffering devices, landscaping, walkway linkages, controlled
vehicular access, and attractive signage.



      4.   All yards, height, bulk, minimum floor area, and lot
coverage requirements for the uses proposed shall apply unless otherwise
modified by the Planning Commission as part of the approved development plan.



   F.   Submittal procedures and conditions.  Three distinct steps are
required to develop a parcel of land or site under the CRPUD Option:  (i)
meeting with the Plan Review Committee, (ii) obtaining approval of the CRPUD
Qualification and preliminary site plan from the Planning Commission and
(iii) obtaining final site plan from the Office of Planning.  Any person
owning or controlling land may make application to the Planning Commission
for consideration of a CRPUD. In order to adequately review the preliminary
site plan, the applicant shall be required to submit the following materials
to the Planning Commission.  The proposed CRPUD preliminary site plan
concept plan shall contain at least the following:



      1.   Application form and required fee.



      2.   A narrative indicating the period of time within which it
is contemplated the project will be completed.



      3.   A site plan with four-sided elevations showing a layout
of the uses and structures in the CRPUD and their locations including:



         a.   Zoning of the property, and of the boundaries of
each area if there is more than one zoning.



         b.   Layout of proposed land uses, acreage allotted to
each use, density of multiple family residential areas,  and by underlying
zoning district, and generalized building footprints;



         c.   Roads, parking areas, drives, driveways, and
pedestrian paths;



         d.   Building setbacks and spacing;



         e.   General location and type of landscaping proposed;



         f.   Any significant woodlands that will be preserved;



         g.   Identification of each phase, if a multi-phase
development is proposed.



      4.   Any additional graphics or written materials reasonably
requested by the Planning Commission to assist in determining the impacts of
the proposed site plan, including, but not limited to, economic or market
studies; impact on public primary and secondary schools and utilities;
traffic impacts; impact on significant natural, historical, and architectural
features and drainage; impact on the general area and adjacent property; and
estimated construction costs.



   G.   Site plan review. Upon approval of the CRPUD preliminary site
plan  by the Planning Commission, final site plan review and approval are
required in accordance with Article 26 Site Plan Review Requirements and
Procedures prior to the issuance of building or zoning compliance permits. 
Site plans submitted for final site plan approval shall also contain the
following:



      1.   Structural outline (building envelope) of all structures
proposed on the site;



      2.   Architectural renderings of building facade elevations,
typical floor plans and topography shall be drawn at a two-foot contour
interval.  Elevation drawing shall be drawn to scale.  Where more than one
type of structure or design is intended, the sample elevation and
corresponding floor plans of each type shall be submitted;



      3.   A plan identifying the areas to be dedicated as open
space and recreational use showing access, location and any improvements. 
To assure the permanence of the open space and its continued maintenance, the
developer shall provide a proposed open space agreement for review and
approval by the City Attorney.  The open space agreement must be in a form
satisfactory to the city and shall include the following:



         a.   The proposed manner of holding title to any
preserved open space;



         b.   The proposed manner of payment of taxes;



         c.   The proposed method of regulating the use of open
space;



         d.   The proposed method of maintenance of the open
space area and the financing thereof;



         e.   Any other facts relating to the legal or practical
problems of ownership and maintenance of the open space;



      4.   The location of access drives, streets, off-street
parking areas, and sidewalks;



      5.   A landscape plan showing location, extent and type of
plantings and screening in accordance with the environmental provisions of
Article 24.



The owner or developer must receive final site plan approval for the proposed
development within 12 months of approval of the preliminary site plan, obtain
a building permit within 18 months of preliminary site plan approval, and
complete development of the CRPUD within 30 months of preliminary site plan
approval.  This time limitation may be extended by the Planning Commission
in response to a request from the owner.



   H.   Regulatory flexibility.



      1.   The Planning Commission may modify by a simple majority
of the members of the Planning Commission present the current standards
within the Zoning Ordinance for CRPUD including, but not limited to use,
density, intensity, setbacks, building heights, parking, design standards,
and landscape standards provided the modification is found to improve the
quality of the development above and beyond what could be developed under the
conventional zoning above, or results in a higher level of public benefit,
and to achieve the purpose of this article.



      2.   The use of creative development concepts including mixed
uses should be used to create commercial nodes and gateways and facilitate
renovation of existing commercial establishments and retail centers as
opposed to creating strip commercial centers along major thoroughfares.



      3.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have no authority with
respect to CRPUD Option developments.



      4.   The Plan Review Committee and Planning Commission shall
use any applicable standards for approval contained in city ordinances
related to land use and any adopted development guidelines.



(Ord. No. 278-SS, § 1, 7-17-12)



ARTICLE 23.  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REQUIREMENTS



SECTION 23.00.  INTENT.



   The off-street parking and loading requirements of this ordinance are
established to prevent congestion on public streets by providing clearly
defined parking areas that are separated from roadways; to remove the hazard
to pedestrians of emerging between parked vehicles onto a public street; to
facilitate proper stormwater runoff; to prevent the generation of dust into
the area; and to make clear the availability and arrangement of spaces to all
users.



SECTION 23.01.  GENERAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS.



   It shall be the duty of both the owner and occupant of any premises to
provide off-street parking spaces as required in this article. Such
off-street parking areas shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in
accordance with the following standards and regulations.



   A.   Whenever a use or an activity requiring off street parking is
created, enlarged or increased in activity or intensity, off-street parking
spaces shall be provided on site and maintained as required by this ordinance.



   B.   The amount of required off-street parking for new uses of
buildings, additions to existing buildings, new uses of land and accessory
buildings shall be determined in accordance with the regulations in effect at
the time the new use or addition was proposed, and the space so required
shall be shown on the site plan and shall be irrevocably reserved for such
use. No such designated parking area shall be changed to any other use unless
and until equal facilities are provided elsewhere on the site.



   C.   Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this
ordinance in conjunction with the operation of an existing building or use
shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a
similar new building or new use.



   D.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the
collective provisions of off-street parking facilities for two or more
buildings or uses on separate sites, provided that, collectively, such
parking shall not be less than the sum of requirements for the various uses
computed separately. The provisions for shared parking shall not be construed
to allow for development without parking located reasonably proximate to the
development it is intended to serve. Parking shall be reasonably distributed
to fulfill the parking needs of each use being served.



   E.   The Planning Department may permit a reduction of the
requirement for shared parking for developments in the O-3 or C-4 districts
mixed-use which exceed 50,000 square feet of floor area by an amount not to
exceed 10%, subject to the following conditions and findings:



      1.   A study performed by a recognized traffic engineer shall
be provided in support of the request;



      2.   The Planning Department may reduce the required parking
under this section only if the site or sites contain two or more separate and
distinct uses which, by their nature, can use shared parking without having
an adverse impact on traffic circulation or without impairing the overall
functioning of the site or sites. In the event that there is a change of uses
that no longer meets the criteria established for shared parking, the
required number of spaces as provided below shall be installed;



      3.   An overflow or reserve area capable of accommodating the
required number of parking spaces shall be specified on the site plan that
could accommodate an expansion of the existing parking facilities, should
that be required. The developer shall execute an agreement, in a form
satisfactory to the city, that will obligate the property owners to install
additional parking at the city’s request if the need arises;



      4.   Any such provisions for collective parking for two or
more buildings or uses on the same site or on separate sites shall be set
forth in a recordable instrument recorded at the office of the Macomb County
Register of Deeds, describing the lands affected by this agreement.



   F.   Where the owners of two buildings, whose operating hours do not
overlap, desire to utilize common off-street parking facilities, the Planning
Department may permit such dual function, provided that the following
conditions have been met:



      1.   The normal business hours of the two buildings or uses in
no way overlap, except for custodial personnel. In the event that there is a
change of uses that no longer meets the criteria established for shared
parking, the required number of spaces as provided below shall be installed;



      2.   The common parking lot meets the off-street parking
requirements of the larger building or more intensive use, plus 15%;



      3.   The common parking lot meets all of the locational
requirements of this ordinance with respect to each building or use;



      4.   The site plan shall indicate a reserve area that is
capable of accommodating the required number of parking spaces, if necessary.
The developer shall execute an agreement, in a form satisfactory to the city,
that will obligate the property owners to install additional parking at the
city’s request if the need arises.



   G.   Off-street parking facilities required herein shall be located
within 300 feet of the permitted use it is intended to serve, such distance
to be measured along lines of public access to the property between the
nearest point of the parking facility and the building to be served, provided
that the said off-street parking facility shall not be separated from the
building to be served by any major or secondary thoroughfare so designed by
the City of Sterling Heights Master Road Plan, drain or physical barrier or
public improvement.



   H.   For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for
off-street parking facilities shall be in accord with a use which is most
similar in type as determined by the Zoning Official.



   I.   When units or measurements determining the number of required
parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction
shall require one parking space.



   J.   Residential off street parking spaces for single and two family
uses shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage or combination
thereof and shall be located on the premises they are designated to serve.
Parking shall be restricted to paved areas and shall exclude lawn, patio and
patio block areas. Paved parking areas shall not be permitted in any front
yard unless a part of a side entrance garage, driveway, a horseshoe driveway
or a driveway providing access to a detached garage.



   K.   For the purpose of determining off-street parking requirements
for all uses, floor area shall mean 90% of the gross floor area used or
intended to be used for services to the public as customers, patrons,
clients, patients, employees or tenants, including areas occupied for storage
and fixtures and equipment used for the display or sale of merchandise,
unless otherwise specified. For those buildings which feature unique interior
natural features, such as atriums and landscaped areas, the floor area
occupied by such areas may be deducted from the gross floor area used to
calculate parking requirements.



   L.   Whenever drive-through or vehicle stacking lanes are provided,
such lanes shall be so located so as not to impede pedestrian or vehicular
circulation on the site or on abutting sites, nor shall any drive-through
lane cross a vehicle maneuvering lane or aisle. Drive-through lanes shall be
a minimum of eight feet wide.



   M.   Parking shall not be permitted within any required front yard
setback, except as otherwise permitted.



   N.   Reserved Parking Areas.



      1.   A developer or owner may request that a certain number of
parking spaces be reserved for possible future installation if required. The
proposed reserved parking spaces must be shown and labeled on the proposed
site plan. The Planning Department (or the Planning Commission if preliminary
site plan review is required under the Zoning Ordinance to be performed by
the Planning Commission) may approve one or more areas of reserved parking
spaces where (a) the developer or owner shows that the specific proposed use
requires a fewer number of parking spaces than typically required by
ordinance based on (a) a smaller total usable floor area, (b) a substantially
smaller total number of employees than typically anticipated for such uses,
(c)  the existence of a combination of uses which share parking facilities,
or (d) the proposed use has peak hours of operation which vary from typical
business hours making the required parking excessive,  provided the proposed
reserve parking for the development can be serviced safely and will not
result in undue stacking of vehicles, and traffic flow throughout the parking
lot can be maintained in a safe manner.



      2.   If the Planning Department (or the Planning Commission if
preliminary site plan review is required under the Zoning Ordinance to be
performed by the Planning Commission) determines that the development cannot
be serviced safely, that excessive stacking is likely to occur, or that
traffic flow cannot likely be maintained in a safe manner if reserved parking
is permitted, the Planning Department (or Planning Commission as the case may
be) shall not approve the developer or owner's request for reserved parking.



      3.   If the Planning Department (or the Planning Commission as
the case may be) approves the  request of the developer or owner for
reserved parking, the site plan shall depict (i) the location and number of
parking spaces required to be installed currently, (ii) the location and
number of all of reserved parking spaces which may be required to be
installed in the future identified as "Reserved Future Parking Area", and
(iii) the total number of parking spaces which may be required if the
reserved parking spaces are required to be installed in the future. The site
plan shall contain a notation in each Reserved Future Parking Area that
states "No buildings, structures or improvements shall be constructed in the
Reserved Future Parking Area". 



      4.   The owner of the site with one or more approved Reserved
Future Parking Areas shall execute and deliver to the city a reserved parking
agreement satisfactory to the City Planner and City Attorney in recordable
form which makes the reserved future parking area arrangement a matter of
record so that future owners of the property will be on notice of the
reserved parking arrangement and restriction on future development in the
Reserved Future Parking Area, and the possible requirement for future
installation of additional parking spaces as may be required by the city. 



      5.   If the Planning Department (or the Planning Commission as
the case may be) determines that traffic patterns, a change in use or an
increase in intensity of the use on the property, either as a result of an
increase in the number of employees or hours of operation, a decrease in
approved storage area, etc. or any other factor requires the installation of
some or all of the reserved parking spaces, the Planning Department may
require additional parking spaces, as determined by the Planning Department,
to be constructed in the Reserved Future Parking Area(s) shown on the site
plan within six months of notice of such additional parking being required.



(Ord. No. 278-9, §§ 1, 2, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-R, § 12, 8-20-96; Ord. No.
278-X, § 10, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-YY, § 1, 10-4-16)



SECTION 23.02.  MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES.



   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces by type of use shall be
determined in accordance with the following schedule.



Please click to view a PDF of this table



 



Use
 
Required Parking Spaces


   A.   Residential:
 
 


      1.     One and two family units
 
Two for each dwelling unit.


      2.     Multiple family
 
Two for each one bedroom dwelling unit. For each additional bedroom, one-half
additional parking space shall be provided.


      3.     Housing for the elderly
 
Two for each three units, plus one space per employee. Should the elderly
units convert to general occupancy, then two spaces per unit shall be
provided and shown on the site plan to accommodate such a requirement.


      4.     Mobile homes
 
Two spaces per unit, plus one space for every three mobile home sites for
visitor parking.


      5.     Boarding houses
 
One and one-half per bedroom


   B.   Institutional:
 
 


      1.     Churches or temples
 
One for each three seats or six feet of pew in the main worship area, plus
spaces for any residential uses as determined in accordance with the parking
requirement established for residential uses. Additional spaces for ancillary
facilities, such as social halls, schools, etc., may be required by the
Planning Department.


      2.     Hospitals
 
One per bed; plus one space per employee and doctor on peak employment shift.
Additional spaces shall be required for ancillary medical office buildings
based on their individual requirements. Parking for emergency facilities
shall be provided on the basis of one space per 100 square feet of floor area
of the emergency room waiting area and patient treatment areas.


      3.     Full assisted housing
 
One space for each three members allowed within the maximum occupancy load,
as determined by the Fire Marshal or his or her official designate, plus one
per employee.


      4.     Private clubs and lodges
 
One space for each three members allowed within the maximum occupancy load,
as determined by the Fire Marshal or his or her official designate, plus one
per employee.


      5.     Elementary and junior high schools
 
Ten, plus one for each employee (including teachers and administrators) in
addition to the requirements of the auditorium. Additional spaces for
ancillary facilities and activities may be required by the Planning
Department.


      6.    Senior high schools and colleges
 
One for each employee (including teachers and administrators), plus one for
each three students, plus the requirements of the auditorium. Additional
spaces for ancillary facilities and activities may be required by the
Planning Department.


      7.     Auditoriums (incidental to churches, schools and
hospitals)
 
One for each three seats.


      8.     Nursery schools, day nurseries or child care facilities
 
One space for each employee, plus one space for each ten students on the
premises at one time. Adequate, but not fewer than five stacking spaces shall
be provided for pickup and dropoff.


   C.   Recreational:
 
 


      1.    Private golf, swimming or tennis clubs and similar uses
 
One for each two member families, plus one per employee. If club houses are
provided, one additional space shall be provided for each three persons
allowed within the maximum occupancy load as determined by the Fire Marshal
or his or her official designate.


      2.     Public golf courses (not including miniature golf,
driving ranges or par 3 courses)
 
Six for each golf hole, plus one per employee, plus spaces required for any
ancillary use such as restaurant or bar as determined in accordance with the
requirements of this section.


      3.    Stadiums and sports arenas or similar places of assembly
 
One space for each three seats or six feet of benches.


      4.     Racquet/tennis and exercise clubs
 
One space for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy as
determined by the Fire Marshal or his or her official designate, plus spaces
required for any ancillary uses as determined in accordance with the
requirements of this section.


      5.     Riding stables
 
One space per horse that could be kept at the stable when occupied at maximum
capacity.


      6.     Miniature golf, par 3 courses and driving ranges
 
Three spaces for each miniature golf or par 3 golf hole, one space for each
driving range tee, plus one space per employee, plus spaces required for any
ancillary uses as determined in accordance with the requirements of this
section.


      7.     Dance halls, roller rinks, amusement device centers,
ice amusement device centers, ice skating rinks, indoor shooting ranges,
archery ranges and exhibition halls
 
One per three persons allowed at maximum occupancy determined by the Fire
Marshal or his or her official designate


      8.     Bowling alleys
 
Five per lane, plus parking required for ancillary uses such as restaurants
or lounges, as determined in accordance with the requirements of this section.


   D.   Offices:
 
 


      1.     Banks
 
One for each 150 square feet of floor area. Banks with drive-through
facilities shall also provide vehicle stacking spaces based on the following
scale:


 
 
Drive-through tellers - 5 spaces for each drive-through lane


 
 
Automated Teller Machine - 4 spaces for each drive- through ATM lane


      2.     Business or professional offices, except as indicated
below
 
One for each 200 square feet of floor area.


      3.     Professional offices of doctors, dentists or similar
professions
 
One for each 100 square feet of floor area.


      4.     Medical clinics
 
One for each employee, plus one for each 75 square feet of floor area.


   E.   Commercial:
 
 


      1.     Auto wash, hand- or coin-operated
 
Four exterior waiting spaces at entry, plus two exterior drying spaces at
exit shall be for each bay, plus one space for each employee.


      2.     Enclosed self-service two-door
 
Where all washing, drying and vacuuming operations are time-charge car wash
designed to take place within the building, four waiting spaces shall be
provided for each bay, plus one space for each employee. A properly drained
50 foot long drying lane shall also be provided at the exit of each washing
lane or stall in order to prevent undue amounts of water from collecting on
the public street and thereby creating a traffic hazard.


      3.     Auto wash, high-speed
 
One space for each employee, plus 20 exterior waiting spaces


commercial at entry.
 
A properly drained 50 foot long drying lane shall also be provided at the
exit of each washing lane or stall in order to prevent undue amounts of water
from collecting on the public street and thereby creating a traffic hazard.


      4.     Auto service stations (gasoline and repair) and auto
repair services, excluding heavy and major repair
 
Four spaces per bay for the first four bays, and two spaces for each
additional and bay over four, plus one per employee on the peak shift, plus
one per 200 square feet of retail floor area.


      5.     Heavy and major auto repairs
 
Three spaces for each service bay, plus one per employee on the peak shift.


      6.     Self-service gasoline stations (gasoline and
convenience retail-no repair)
 
One space for each 200 square feet of floor, plus one per employee at the
peak shift.


      7.     Quick oil change
 
Two per bay, plus one per employee at the peak shift; one per 200 square feet
of floor area used for retail sales.


      8.   New vehicle sales establishments
 
One for each 300 square feet of sales area, one for each 200 square feet of
office area and three for each service bay, subject to the requirements of
section 23.03(L).


      9.     Beauty parlors, barber shops and beauty schools
 
One per 100 square feet of  floor area.


      10.     Furniture, appliance and carpet sales
 
One space for each 200 square feet of showroom floor area.  (For that floor
area being used in processing or storage, one space shall be provided for
each 1,000 square feet.)


      11.     Showrooms for plumbers, cabinet makers, electricians
and similar professions
 
One space for each 300 square feet of showroom area. (For that area being
used in processing or storage, one additional space shall be provided for
each 1,000 square feet.)


      12.     Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners
 
One space for each two machines.


      13.     Dry cleaners
 
One for each one employee, with a minimum of five spaces.


      14.     Mortuaries
 
One space for each 25 square feet of assembly room floor space, parlors and
slumber rooms.


      15.     Motels/hotels/inns
 
One for each unit, plus one for each employee. Spaces required for ancillary
uses such as lounges, restaurants or conference areas shall be determined on
the basis of the individual requirements in accordance with the requirements
of this section.


      16.     Open-air business or portions of businesses
 
One for each 300 square feet of lot area used for retail sales area and uses.


      17.     Motion picture theaters
 
One for each three seats, plus one per each employee at the maximum shift.


      18.     Theaters with live entertainment
 
One per each three seats, plus one per each employee at the maximum shift.


      19.     Retail stores, except as otherwise provided herein
 
With floor area of less than 75,000 square feet of floor area, one per 200
square feet of area. With floor area of between 75,000 and 200,000 square
feet, one per 225 square feet of area. With floor area over 200,000 square
feet, one per 250 square feet of area.


      20.     Restaurants (excluding drive-through)
 
One per 90 square feet of floor area.


      21.     Fast food restaurants
 
One per 75 square feet of floor area. Stacking spaces for ten cars shall be
provided for each drive-through lane or window.


      22.     Carry-out restaurants
 
One per 200 square feet of floor area. Stacking spaces for ten cars shall be
provided for each drive-through lane or window.


      23.     Banquet and/or catering halls
 
One per 45 square feet of floor area for meeting or assembly rooms, one per
200 square feet of floor area for offices and one per employee at the peak
shift.


   F.   Industrial:
 
 


      1.     Manufacturing establishments
 
One per each 500 square feet of manufacturing floor area. Those portions of
buildings used for administrative offices shall have their parking
requirements based on the standard specified in section 23.02(D)(2).


      2.     Wholesale or warehouse establishments
 
One per 1,500 square feet of floor area. Those portions of the building used
for administrative offices shall have their parking requirements based on the
standard specified in section 23.02(D)(2).


      3.     Office research
 
One per 200 square feet of floor area.


      4.     Mini-warehouses or self-storage units
 
Two for the residential caretaker's unit, plus one per 200  square feet of
floor area used for office purposes.


      5.     Lighted commercial sports centers
 
75  for each of the first four baseball diamonds, plus 50  for each
additional baseball diamond. Parking for other uses on the site shall be
determined on the basis of the individual requirements of each use.




 



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 38-41, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-F, § 11, 8-8-90; Ord. No.
278-Q, §§ 3, 4, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-T, § 11, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-X,
§§ 11, 12, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 31-33, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-DD,
§§ 3, 4, 5, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 278-JJ, § 6, 3-4-08)



SECTION 23.03.  OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE LAYOUT STANDARDS, CONSTRUCTION AND
MAINTENANCE.



   Wherever the off-street parking requirements in section 23.02 above
requires the construction of an off-street parking facility, such off-street
parking lot shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following standards and regulations.



   A.   No parking lot shall be constructed unless and until a permit
therefor is issued by the Building Department. Applications for a permit
shall be submitted as per the requirements of site plan review (section
26.02).



   B.   Plans for the layout of an off-street parking lot shall have
dimensions consistent with the following standards.



      1.   Ninety degree pattern. Parking spaces and maneuvering
lanes shall be provided based on one of the following alternatives:



 

Space Width
 
Space Length
 
Maneuvering Width
 
Two Tier of Parking and One Maneuvering Lane


9.0 and 9.5 feet
 
20 feet
 
22 feet
 
62 feet


10 feet
 
20 feet
 
20 feet
 
60 feet



 



      2.   Sixty degree pattern. 58 feet for two tiers of spaces and
one aisle/maneuvering lane with minimum aisle width being 20 feet in width.



      3.   Forty five degree pattern. 56 feet with two tiers of
parking spaces, plus one aisle/maneuvering lane of at least 20 feet in width.



      4.   Drive or maneuvering lanes.  A drive or maneuvering lane
shall not be less than 20 feet wide to permit two-way traffic.



      5.   Stalls. All parking lot stalls shall be striped and
maintained.



   C.   Handicapped spaces shall be furnished as required by state law.



   D.   Parallel parking shall not be permitted.



   E.   All parking spaces shall be provided with adequate access by
means of maneuvering lanes. Spaces shall not be designed to permit backing
directly into a street.



   F.   The entire parking area, including parking spaces, maneuvering
lanes and drives required under this section, shall be provided with
asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications of the
Engineering Department of the City of Sterling Heights. Contractor storage
yards in the M-1 (Light Industrial) or M-2 (Heavy Industrial) need not be
paved but must meet all applicable standards of the office of engineering.
Unless a waiver is granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals for a specified
period of time, the parking area shall be surfaced prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy for the building or buildings which it serves or
a cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit acceptable to the City of
Sterling Heights shall be made in an amount equal to 110% of the estimated
cost of the improvement. Any improvements for which a letter of credit or
cash deposit has been posted shall be installed by the end of the
construction season following the posting.



   G.   Off-street parking areas shall be drained to dispose of all
surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to prevent
drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings and drainage
plans shall meet the specifications of the Engineering Department.



   H.   In any area where front-end parking abuts a curbed landscaped
area at least five feet in width, or a raised sidewalk having a minimum width
of at least seven feet, the minimum parking stall depth of 20 feet (as
otherwise specified herein) may be decreased by up to two feet in depth in
order to allow for a vehicle to overhang such landscaped area or such
sidewalk. In no case shall the parking stall depth be decreased to allow a
vehicle to overhang into a required front yard setback.



   I.   Ingress and egress to a parking lot for nonresidential purposes
shall not be provided across land zoned for single family or two family
residential purposes. All such entrances and exits shall also be located at
least 25 feet from any property zoned for one family residential use.



   J.   Parking lot lighting shall meet the requirements of section
24.06.



   K.   The surface of the parking lot area shall be maintained and
kept free from weeds, rubbish, refuse and debris.



   L.   All parking serving other than one or two family dwellings
shall be side-by-side. Tandem parking shall be prohibited. Tandem parking to
a depth of three cars may be permitted in vehicle storage and inventory
areas, provided such areas are under the control of employees and are not
accessible by the general public. Any parking or vehicle circulation areas
accessible to the public shall meet the size standards specified in section
23.03.



   M.   Except as otherwise provided in this article, required
off-street parking spaces shall be for the use of occupants, employees,
visitors, customers, clients and patrons. Off-street parking shall not be
used for other than parking purposes or allowed to become unusable except for
temporary repairs. The storage of vehicles or merchandise, except as
permitted in conjunction with the principal or accessory use and sale of
motor vehicles in any off street parking space is prohibited.



   N.   The Planning Department may require an access easement to
provide for vehicular access to existing or contemplated adjacent parking
lots to minimize the need for driveways to each facility and thereby
decreasing hazards to vehicular traffic.



   O.   Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of
clearly limited and defined paved drives shall be provided for all vehicles.
All parking areas shall be provided with an entrance and exit from the
abutting public thoroughfare. Such entrance and exit shall conform to
Engineering Department design standards and follow the most direct route
through the front yard setback. The number, size and location of driveways
permitted for each site shall be determined by the Planning Department as
part of site plan review.



   In making this determination, consideration shall be given to the
following factors: the location of driveways on adjacent sites and across the
street, turning movements, traffic volumes, landscaping, signage, etc. The
location of each such entrance and exit shall be submitted for approval of
the Macomb County Road Commission or the Michigan Department of
Transportation, as the case may be, and the City of Sterling Heights. Tapers
and bypass lanes shall be required as determined by the appropriate agency.



   P.   Curbs, meeting the construction standards of the Engineering
Department, shall be required. The use of bumper blocks is prohibited.



(Ord. No. 278-G, § 14, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 34, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 23.04.  PARKING STRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.



   It is intended that the provision of parking within structures or
buildings shall serve to increase the value and convenience of related
development and to enhance rather than detract from the appearance of the
overall development. It is further intended that the provisions of such
facilities shall not negatively impact the safety and security of the public.
The following standards, referenced standards or modifications of standards
contained elsewhere in this section shall thus apply to parking structures or
garages and developments including such facilities:



   A.   Parking structures shall be physically integrated into the
overall design and functioning of the site. The exterior treatment of the
parking structure element of a building complex shall be substantially the
same in appearance to that of the main building element and shall further be
designed so that all architectural and vehicular lighting is shielded or
screened from view from adjacent properties;



   B.   The development of parking structures shall be in accordance
with safety and security requirements established by the city.



SECTION 23.05.  OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.



   The number, size and location of off-street loading and unloading area
shall be provided whenever it is determined by the Planning Department that
the nature of the building or use is such that loading areas would be
necessary.



   A.   All loading or unloading areas shall provide a minimum height
clearance of 14 feet.



   B.   Every use involving the receipt or delivery of materials shall
provide space for vehicle standing, so loading or unloading will not take
place in any public street, alley or right-of-way. Loading and unloading
shall be provided in such a manner that backing from a public street with a
right-of-way of 86 feet or greater will not be facilitated. Loading and
unloading docks and truck wells are prohibited in required front yards along
major thoroughfares and/or existing or proposed rights-of-way of 120 feet or
greater. Along thoroughfares or rights-of-way of less than 120 feet, below
grade loading shall be permitted in the required front yard. In no instance
shall above grade or elevated loading be permitted in the required front yard.



   C.   No area allocated to loading and unloading facilities may be
used to satisfy the area requirements for off-street parking, nor shall any
portion of any off-street parking area be used to satisfy the area
requirements for loading and unloading facilities, except as specifically
authorized by this ordinance.



   D.   Unless otherwise specified, loading and unloading areas shall
be provided only in rear yards. Side yard loading may be permitted by the
Planning Department when it is determined that such space and loading
facilities would not interfere with parking and circulation, either vehicular
or pedestrian, or with abutting uses.



   E.   All loading and unloading areas shall be surfaced, drained and
otherwise developed in accordance with the provisions applicable to
off-street parking areas (section 23.03).



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 2, 8-8-90)



ARTICLE 24.  ENVIRONMENTAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 24.00.  INTENT.



   The intent of the requirements included in this article is to improve
the quality of the city’s environment by regulating man-made development
and by preserving the city’s natural resources. These requirements seek to
improve the environment resulting from development by requiring or limiting
certain constructed features. The requirement also strives to preserve and
enhance the environment by requiring the replacement of destroyed or altered
natural features and preserving those already in place.



   The landscaping requirements included herein are intended to accomplish
the following:



      Maintain and enhance the visual character of the city;



      Screen and buffer objectional views and uses within and between
uses;



      Define exterior site functions and areas;



      Reduce glare into and from the site;



      Reduce dust and other pollutants suspended in the air;



      Control noise and provide acoustical modification into and from
the site;



      Contain odors and minimize their passage into and from the site;



      Control the direction and velocity of surface water runoff and
minimize soil erosion;



      Moderate interior and exterior temperatures by controlling solar
radiation on buildings and paved surfaces; and



      Maintain aesthetic quality of property and enhance its value.



SECTION 24.01.  SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.



   Screening shall be required between different zoning districts and
classifications of uses according to the requirements of this section. The
type of screening needed between uses is related to the classification of use
and the location of different functional site development areas relative to
adjoining uses and districts.



   For the purpose of determining the type of screening required in
various situations, the following four levels of impact have been identified:



      No impact (identified by "blank space" on the preceding Table of
Screening Requirements)



      Minor impact (identified by "1" on the preceding Table of
Screening Requirements)



      Moderate impact (identified by "2" on the preceding Table of
Screening Requirements)



      Major impact (identified by "3" on the preceding Table of
Screening Requirements)



   For each level of impact, a different type of screening (or authorized
alternative screening) is required, as set forth in section 24.01A.



   Where screening is required, only one of the adjoining uses shall be
responsible for installing the screening. This use shall be referred to as
the "use providing screening." The other use shall be the "protected" use. To
determine those instances where screening is required, locate the specific
adjoining uses on the following table. The level of screening between various
site functions is indicated in that space on the table where both uses
intersect.



Please click to view a PDF of this table



 



TABLE OF SCREENING REQUIREMENTS


Use Providing Screening
 
Protected Use


Zoning District
 
Development Features
 
All R
 
RM/ MHP
 
O-1
 
O-2
 
O-3
 
C-1
 
C-2
 
C-3
 
C-4
 
P-1
 
O-R
 
M-1
 
M-2
 
PCD


R-60, 70, 80, 90, 100
 
Building
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



RM-1, RM-2, RM-3/ MHP
 
Building
 
3
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



O-1
 
Building
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



O-2
 
Building
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



O-3
 
Building
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Loading
 
3
 
3
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



C-1
 
Building
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Loading
 
3
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



C-2
 
Building
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Loading/ outdoor activities
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



C-3
 
Building
 
3
 
3
 
1
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
3
 
1
 
1
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Loading/ storing
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



C-4
 
All site features
 
See District Requirements


P-1
 
Circulation/ parking
 
2
 
2
 
1
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



O-R/ TRO
 
Building
 
3
 
3
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
3
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



M-1
 
Building
 
3
 
3
 
1
 
1
 
1
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
3
 
1
 
1
 
1
 

 

 

 
2
 

 
2
 

 

 
2


Loading/ storage
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 
2
 

 
2
 

 

 
2


M-2
 
Building
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 
2
 

 
2
 

 

 
2


Circulation/ parking
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 
2
 

 
2
 

 

 
2


Loading/ storage
 
3
 
3
 
2
 
2
 
2
 

 

 

 
2
 

 
2
 

 

 
2


PCD
 
All site features
 
See District Requirements


  LEGEND:  (Blank) = None1 = Minor2 = Moderate    3 = Major




 



   A.   Screening alternatives for each intensity/impact
classification.  Screening based upon the anticipated impact as designated
in the Table of Screening Requirements above shall be provided and maintained
in accordance with the following requirements by the use providing the
screening to reduce the effect of the more intense use upon the protected use:



      1.   No impact.  Where there is no anticipated impact on the
protected use, no screening or buffering is required between adjoining uses.



      2.   Minor impact.  Where there is a minor impact, there is a
need to soften the impact of one land use on another, which can be
accomplished with a broken screen, which creates an impression of space
separation without necessarily eliminating visual contact. Screening intended
to satisfy these objectives shall conform to the following standards:



         a.   Ten foot wide greenbelt;



         b.   Six foot high evergreens and/or three inch caliper
deciduous trees shall be planted at average intervals not exceeding 20 feet
on center;



         c.   Shrubs and ground cover or mulches so as to cover
the ground upon planting.  All such plantings shall meet the height and
spacing requirements specified herein.



      3.   Moderate impact. Where there is a moderate impact, there
is a need to provide a better separation and buffering of land uses and to
minimize the impact of the more intense use on the protected use. Screening
provided in these instances shall conform to the following standards:



         a.   15 foot wide greenbelt.  Six foot high evergreens
or three inch caliper deciduous trees shall be planted at average intervals
not exceeding ten feet on center. Not more than 50% of planting shall consist
of deciduous trees.  Shrubs, a minimum of 18 inches in height, and other
ground cover or mulches shall be planted to cover the ground upon planting.



         b.   A four foot high decorative masonry wall.  The
wall shall be placed on the property line and shall not extend into any
required front yard setback.  Where a four foot high wall abuts a six foot
trash receptacle screening wall, the four foot wall shall be increased to six
feet to provide a continuous uniform wall profile along the property line.



         c.   A four foot high landscaped earthen berm. A berm
may be constructed in place of either the wall or greenbelt.  Said berm
shall meet the requirements of this section.



         d.   Whenever the layout of the site places vehicular
parking areas adjacent to a residential district, a four foot high decorative
masonry wall shall be required in place of the greenbelt requirement. The
wall shall be placed on the property line and shall not extend into any
required front yard setback.



      4.   Majorimpact.  Where there is an anticipated major
impact, there is a need to block the view of obtrusive or undesirable visual
elements and exclude all contact between such uses by creating a strong
impression of special separation.  Screening in these situations shall
conform to the following standards:



         a.   Six foot high decorative masonry wall. The wall
shall be placed on the property line with a ten foot wide landscaped
greenbelt provided between the wall and the building, parking lot or loading
area and shall not extend into any required front yard setback.  One 3-inch
caliper deciduous tree shall be planted on the greenbelt for each 30 feet of
wall length, with one additional 3-inch caliper deciduous tree required if
the length of the wall is between 30 foot multiples.  The remainder of the
greenbelt shall be planted with grass, ground cover or other acceptable
landscape materials as determined to be appropriate by the Planning Office. 
The ten foot wide landscape greenbelt is not required for O-1 and O-2 zoned
properties.



         b.   A six foot high landscaped earthen berm.  In lieu
of the wall, the Planning Department may allow the development of a six foot
high landscaped earthen berm meeting the requirements of this section or a 20
foot wide greenbelt with a three foot high landscaped earthen berm planted
with two staggered rows of six foot high evergreens planted at intervals not
exceeding ten feet on center.  Shrubs, a minimum of 30 inches in height, or
other ground cover and mulches so as to cover the ground upon planting shall
be required.



         c.   In order to increase compatibility with previously
developed adjacent property, the Planning Department may reduce the minimum
wall height to conform to a previously established wall profile pattern on
adjacent properties.  The Planning Department in such instances may require
additional screening in order to provide the appropriate buffer between the
adjoining uses.



   B.   Other screening specifications.



      1.   Walls. Whenever a wall is used in conjunction with, or in
lieu of, the previously mentioned screening requirements, it shall be
constructed according to the following specifications:



         a.   Walls shall be constructed of protective face
brick, decorative poured concrete, precast panels, fluted block (both sides)
or similar decorative building material determined to be acceptable by the
Planning and Building Departments. The color of brick or facing shall be
compatible with brick used on the site and shall be durable,
weather-resistant, rustproof and easy to maintain;



         b.   Walls shall be placed on the lot line and shall
have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except as otherwise
provided in this ordinance and except such openings, and the arrangement of
such, as may be approved by the Planning Department for the purposes of
public safety. Where walls are pierced, the openings shall not reduce the
minimum height requirement;



         c.   The foundation of any wall shall be constructed as
per the requirements of the Building Department;



         d.   No such wall shall be constructed of exposed
concrete block, cinder block or wood products. Painted walls shall be
prohibited, except this prohibition shall not prevent required maintenance of
a wall previously allowed under a prior zoning ordinance;



         e.   Unless otherwise expressly directed by the
provisions of this ordinance, all protective walls or greenbelts shall be
provided when required along, and immediately joining, the zoning district
boundary line and shall be installed so as to lie wholly on the land of the
applicant seeking site plan approval;



         f.   All walls or greenbelts required by this ordinance
shall be completely installed prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit
for the use of the premises, except as provided hereinafter;



         g.   In any case where the development of the land
and/or buildings has been fully completed and an occupancy permit would
otherwise be issued, and the completed installation of the wall, greenbelt
and/or landscaping required is prevented by inclement weather or acts of
nature beyond the control of the owner, the owner may receive an extension of
no more than six months, subject to the requirements of section 29.03 and
29.04 of this ordinance;



         h.   Maintenance wall, or any other substituted
screening device, shall be the responsibility of the property owner on whose
property the wall is located;



         i.   Wall height shall be measured from the grade at the
property line of the property required to provide the wall.



      2.   Berms.



         a.   Berms shall be designed to be consistent with
architectural character of the building(s) to be located on the site and
shall consist of landscaped earth mounds possessing a maximum slope ratio of
three feet horizontal to one foot vertical, except where retaining walls are
used. Said slopes shall be designed and planted with sod or hydro-seeded to
prevent erosion.



         b.   In those instances where a berm is included as part
of a greenbelt, a detailed drawing and cross-section of the proposed berm
shall be provided as part of the landscape plan.



      3.   Special requirements; uses abutting nonresidential use in
residential district. If a development abuts a nonresidential type use
located in an R district (such as a church, school or public institutional
facility) the screening required by the table may be modified by the City
Planner to a minor intensity impact, unless more protective screening is
required by the specific standards for the particular abutting uses.



      4.   One family development masonry walls. A decorative
masonry wall located along the outside perimeter of a one family residential
development (including masonry wall screening integrated with other berms and
landscaping) which screens the development from major or secondary
thoroughfares may be constructed with a maximum height of six feet (except
for columns, corner posts and other decorative architectural features which
may have a maximum height of ten feet). Columns, corner posts and other
decorative architectural features exceeding six feet in height shall be in
scale with the adjoining landscape treatment and shall be spaced so that the
wall height is predominantly six feet or less. The Planning Commission may
permit walls of different materials or of different heights as a special land
use, provided the requirements of Article 25 are met. No wall permitted under
this paragraph shall be constructed of exposed concrete block, precast
concrete panels or poured concrete. All such structures shall comply with all
applicable ordinances of the city, including corner clearance requirements. 
Signage meeting the requirements of section 28.13 paragraph E.14. may be
included as part of any wall located at the entrance to the development.



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 42, 43, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-B, § 1, 5-15-90; Ord.
No. 278-C, § 1, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 278-E, § 10, 7-3-90; Ord. No. 278-L, §
1, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 278-Q, §§ 5-7, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-U, §§ 11, 12,
1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-X, §§ 13, 14, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 35, 5-16-00;
Ord. No. 278-DD, § 7, 7-6-04)



SECTION 24.02.  SITE LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   General requirements.



      1.   Whenever any yard (front, side or rear) and road
right-of-way areas are not designated or used for building, off-street
parking, loading and unloading, storage, vehicular traffic or other purpose
within the terms and requirements of a given zoning district, it shall be
sodded, irrigated and landscaped with either approved natural materials or
living plant materials which shall be maintained in an aesthetically pleasing
condition.



      2.   Whenever, in this ordinance, a landscape treatment is
required, it shall be in accordance with the specific use as mentioned in
this section.  All landscaping shall consist of approved natural materials
or living plant materials.  Such landscaping shall hereafter be maintained
in a presentable condition and shall be kept free from refuse and debris;
provided, further, that all plant materials shall be continuously maintained
in a sound, weed-free, healthy and vigorous growing condition and shall be
kept free of plant diseases and insect pests.  All landscaping shall have an
irrigation (water sprinkler) system installed and maintained in good
operating condition to ensure the maintenance of all landscaping in a
healthy, thriving condition.  The Planning Department may modify or waive
the irrigation system requirements for natural vegetation areas of the site,
where an alternative method of irrigation is provided, or where installation
of an irrigation system is impractical or unfeasible due to the
unavailability of a proximate water supply or other existing site conditions.



      3.   A detailed landscape plan for all yard areas shall be
submitted to the Planning Department showing the names (common and
botanical), location, spacing, starting size and planting and stalking
details of all plantings to be installed and the location and types of all
natural materials proposed to be included in the landscape treatment of the
yard areas. This provision shall apply to all landscape yards, including
those expanded beyond the minimum setback requirements of this ordinance.
This landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Department
which must approve the plan prior to granting final site plan approval. In
the case of commercial developments exceeding 75,000 square feet, the
landscape plan shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission
prior to final site plan approval.



      4.   Existing significant trees, tree stands, natural
vegetation and wildlife habitat shall be integrated into the site landscape
plan to the maximum extent possible.



      5.   Undeveloped portions and subsequent phases of the site
shall be seeded, mowed and maintained.



      6.   The Planning Department may approve other materials such
as masonry walls or brick, stone and cobblestone pavement upon a showing by
the applicant that general plantings will not prosper at the intended
location.



   B.   Design objectives.



      1.   The following general design objectives and criteria
shall be considered in the evaluation of landscape plans:



         a.   Ample variety and quantity of ornamental plants,
trees and shrubs should be provided. A few dominant types are usually chosen
with subordinate types interspersed for accent. Repeating some types creates
unity, but no types should be overused. Variety should be achieved with
respect to seasonable changes, species selected, texture, color and size at
maturity;



         b.   Landscaping should be encouraged that will serve
the functions of enhancing the visual environment, ensuring public safety,
moderating the microclimate and minimizing nuisances;



         c.   Landscaping should serve to integrate the project
with the site, with a particular sensitivity to the natural topography and
existing native vegetation. It should enhance the architecture of surrounding
structures, when possible, by being of similar scale;



         d.   Preservation of the existing landscape materials
and landforms is usually desirable, particularly where mature trees are a
part of the site;



         e.   Visual variety should be the aim of landscaping
treatment. Landscaping should be used to break up large expanses of pavement;



         f.   Local soil, water and other climatic conditions
should be considered when choosing landscape materials to create optimum
conditions for their survival and to ensure that they will thrive with a
minimum amount of maintenance;



         g.   Landscaping should be protected from vehicular and
pedestrian encroachment. Raised planting surfaces and the use of curbs are
ways of achieving this objective;



         h.   Species that are a public nuisance or that cause
litter should be avoided. When landscaping is to be installed in areas that
children will frequent, trees and bushes with sharp needles shall be
prohibited;



         i.   The aesthetic and functional aspects of the
proposed landscaping, both at installation and at maturity, should be
considered.



      2.   In addition to the site landscaping requirements of this
section 24.02, sites located within a Development Areas shall comply with the
requirements of article 22, section 22.04.



   C.   Plants and materials.



      1.   All plant materials used shall be placed in fertile soil
with good surface drainage and shall be given reasonable maintenance
necessary to ensure their healthy existence and survival. All natural
materials shall be maintained, refurbished or replaced as necessary to ensure
a positive aesthetic quality.



      2.   All proposed landscaped plantings shall meet the minimum
size requirements specified in the following table. Minimum tree height is
measured from the established grade.



   D.   Prohibitions. Where a landscape plan is required, the following
plant materials are specifically prohibited:



      1.   Boxelder;



      2.   Soft maple (red silver);



      3.   Elm;



      4.   Poplar;



      5.   Willow;



      6.   Horse chestnut (nut bearing);



      7.   Tree of heaven;



      8.   Catalpa;



      9.   Fruit-bearing trees;



      10.   All thorned trees and shrubs;



      11.   Ribes (gooseberry);



      12.   Cottonwood.



Please click to view a PDF of this table



 




PLANT MATERIAL SIZE




 
Minimum Size Allowable


6'
 
Height
 
18"-2'
 
Caliper
 
18"-2'  Spread
 
2" Peat Pot
 
2 Gal. Container


3'-4'
 
2'-3'
 
2½”
 
3


Evergreens:

 

Fir

 

Spruce

 

Pine

 

Hemlock

 

Douglas fir
 


 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Narrow Evergreen Trees:

 

Red cedar

 

Arborvitae

 

Juniper (selected varieties)
 


 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



Large Deciduous Trees:

 

Oak

 

Maple

 

Beech

 

Linden

 

Ash

 

Ginko (male only)

 

Honeylocust (seedless, thornless)

 

Birch

 

Sycamore
 

 

 

 

 

 


 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

 

 

x

 

x
 

 

 



Small Deciduous Trees (Ornamental):

 

Flowering dogwood (disease resistant)

 

Flowering cherry, plum, pear

 

Hawthorn (thornless)

 

Redbud

 

Magnolia

 

Flowering crabapple

 

Mountain ash

 

Hornbeam

 

Russian olive
 


 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

x

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 

 

 



Large Evergreen Shrubs:

 

Irish yew

 

Hicks yew

 

Upright yew

 

Spreading yew

 

Pfitzer juniper

 

Savin juniper

 

Mugho pine
 

 

 


 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 



Small Evergreen Shrubs:

 

Brown’s Wards’ sebion yews

 

Dwarf spreading juniper

 

Dwarf mugho pine

 

Euonymous varieties
 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 



Large Deciduous Shrubs:

 

Honeysuckle

 

Lilac

 

Border privet (hedge plantings)

 

Sumac

 

Buckthorn

 

Pyrancantha

 

Weigela

 

Flowering quince

 

Barberry

 

Cotoneaster (Peking and spreading)

 

Sargent crablapple

 

Dogwood (Red osier and grey)

 

Euonymous varieties

 

Viburnum varieties

 

Tail hedge (hedge planting)
 

 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

 

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 


 

x

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

x
 

 


 

 

 

x
 


 

 

 

 

 

x
 

 

 



Small Deciduous Shrubs:

 

Dwarf winged

 

Red privet

 

Fragrant sumac

 

Japanese quince

 

Cotoneaster (rockspray, cranberry)
 

 

 

 


 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 

 

 

 

 



Ground Cover:

 

Periwinkle

 

Baltic ivy

 

Euonymous varieties

 

Hall honeysuckle

 

Pachysandra
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x

 

x
 



Vines:

 

Euonymous varieties

 

Virginia creeper

 

Baltic ivy

 

Wisteria
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


 

 

 

 

 

x
 


 

x

 

x

 

 

 

x




 



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 13, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-X, § 15, 4-6-99; Ord. No.
278-Y, § 36, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-DD, § 8, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 278-JJ, § 7,
3-4-08; Ord. No. 278-II, § 2, 3-19-08; Ord. No. 278-YY, § 2, 10-4-16 )



SECTION 24.03.  PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.



   The intent of these requirements is to enhance the visual environment
of the city; to promote public safety; to moderate heat, wind and other local
climatic effects produced by parking lots; and to minimize nuisances,
particularly noise and glare.



   A.   Interior parking lot landscaping.



      1.   All off-street surface parking areas required under the
Zoning Ordinance shall incorporate and provide curbed landscaped islands at
the end of each parking row.  The Planning Department or Planning Commission
(as the case may be) may modify the requirement for curbed landscape islands
in instances where the installation of curbed landscaped islands would impair
the use of the site or otherwise be impractical, based upon the size,
configuration or anticipated traffic generation on the site.



         a.   Curbed landscaped islands shall be a minimum of 150
square feet in area.



         b.   The curbed landscaped islands shall be planted with
shrubs or other flowering plants that provide coverage of at least 50% of the
area of the island. 



         c.   Interior parking lot trees shall be provided at a
rate of one tree for each five parking spaces and shall be planted in curbed
landscaped islands or adjacent to an off-street parking area. (See
illustration below)



   Curbed Landscaped Area at End of Parking Row







         d.   The minimum size of all parking lot trees shall be
three inch caliper at the time of planting. The following types of trees or
similar types are considered to be suitable for off-street parking areas:



            i.   White fir;



            ii.   Norway maple;



            iii.   Tulip tree (magnolia);



            iv.   Austrian and red pine;



            v.   Moraine, skyline, majestic and sunburst
locusts.



         e.   All trees, shrubs and other landscaping planted in
or adjacent to an off-street parking lot shall be installed in a location and
pruned and maintained in a manner to maintain clear vision for vehicles,
bicyclists and pedestrians in the vicinity of the trees, shrubs, or other
landscaping.



   B.   Frontage landscaping.



      1.    A minimum of one frontage tree shall be provided for
each 750 square feet of frontage greenbelt.  Frontage trees shall include
trees such as Honey Locust, River Birch, Spruce, Chanticleer Pear, Cleveland
Select Pear, Basswood, Hackberry, Linden, Oak, Ginkgo, Maple, etc.  Frontage
trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper at the time of planting.



      2.   In addition to the frontage trees required above, one
plant/shrub shall be provided for each 300 square feet of frontage
greenbelt.  Frontage plants/shrubs shall include but are not limited to:
Knock Out roses, nearly wild roses, dwarf lilacs, hydrangeas, maiden grasses,
large hostas, sedums, densi yews, Carpet roses, Russian sage, etc.  Plants
or shrubs shall be a minimum size of two gallon size at planting.



      3.   In addition to the plantings above, supplemental
perennial grasses and flowers shall also be provided.  Perennial grasses and
flowers may include black-eyed Susans, fescue grass, oat grass, day lilies,
Indian grass, dropseed, blue stem, etc.



      4.   Wherever a parking lot or vehicle parking space is
located within 50 feet of a public street, right-of-way or private street,
the perimeter landscaping shall also include a landscape hedge of deciduous
or upright evergreen shrubs.  The number of required shrubs shall be
equivalent to one shrub for each 30 inches of parking or maneuvering lane
along the roadway or right-of-way, unless appropriate planting practices
otherwise dictate. Plantings may be planted in either a formal hedge or in
natural groupings. The Planning Department may approve other plant materials
or configurations that the Planning Department determines provide the
equivalent of the required frontage landscape. 



      5.   The types of trees and shrubs planted as a result of this
section shall be diverse in nature.  No one specific species of tree shall
account for more than 50% of the total number of trees or shrubs.



      6.    All plantings shall conform to the required corner
clearance requirements of Section 28.03.



      7.   Properties that have frontage on Van Dyke Road between 14
Mile Road and 18 Mile Road shall incorporate landscape materials and plant
types listed in the 2016 LDFA/Smart Zone Enhancement Report.  A mixture of
shade trees, ornamental trees, perennials and grasses shall be utilized from
the list and planted in a manner consistent with the overall conceptual
rendering for the corridor. 



      8.   The proposed plantings shall provide a continuous
landscaping scheme across the entire road frontage and meet the minimum
planting requirements of Section 24.03.



      9.   Frontage landscaping may be installed in accordance with
any of the following illustrations:



   Permitted Frontage Landscaping on Corner Lots or Corner Parcels







   Permitted Landscaping on Interior Lots or Interior Parcels







   C.   Vision clearance.



      1.   To ensure that landscape materials do not constitute a
driving hazard, clear vision site triangles shall be established at all
street intersections and at the intersection of site driveways and streets.
No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height
of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted within the
triangular area formed at the intersection of any street right-of-way lines
by a straight line drawn between said right-of-way lines at a distance of 25
feet from their point of intersection. In addition, no fence, wall,
shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a height of 30 inches
from the established street grades shall be permitted within ten feet from
any sidewalk. Internal parking lot landscaping improvements should be located
to avoid blocking the vision of drivers within the parking lot.



(Ord. No. 278-D, § 1, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 278-R, § 13, 8-20-96; Ord. No.
278-DD, § 9, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 278-YY, § 3, 4, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.04.  SCREENING OF ROOF-MOUNTED APPLIANCES.



   In all zoning districts, except M-1 and M-2, roof-mounted appliances,
including but not limited to air conditioners, heating apparatus, dust
collectors, filters, transformers and any other such appliance or apparatus,
shall be enclosed on all sides by opaque walls so as not to be visible from
off the site. The design of the screening device shall be compatible with the
architectural design of the building upon which it is located.



SECTION 24.05.  LOCATION AND SCREENING OF TRASH RECEPTACLES.



   A.   The location of trash receptacles and trash compactors shall be
indicated on a site plan. All such trash receptacles or trash compactors
shall be located on the site so as to facilitate collection and minimize any
negative impact on persons occupying the development site, neighboring
properties, site traffic circulations patterns or any public right-of-way.



   B.   All trash receptacles shall be screened on three sides by
decorative masonry walls which are similar to or compatible with the exterior
construction materials used elsewhere on the site. Chain link fencing with
view-obscuring slats or wooden privacy fencing shall be prohibited.  A door
or gate of an enclosure screening trash receptacles or dumpsters shall be
constructed of steel materials with a decorative wood or other decorative
durable face material.  All trash receptacles shall be placed on a concrete
pad of not less than ten feet by ten feet in size with a minimum of six inch
thick concrete. Concrete or metal bollards shall be placed between the trash
receptacle or dumpster and the rear wall of the enclosure.



      1.   For sites that utilize a trash compactor, the trash
compactor shall be appropriately screened with a decorative wall, matching
the heights of the trash compactor and that matches the architecture of the
building. Other suitable screening mechanisms may be approved by the Planning
Department (or the Planning Commission as the case may be), provided the
screening is equivalent to the required wall.



   C.   Any screen around a trash receptacle shall be six feet in
height. The walls shall be maintained so as to remain structurally sound and
neat and clean in appearance. Trash shall not be allowed to overflow from the
receptacle. Trash receptacles shall be so located and arranged to minimize
their visibility from adjacent streets and uses. No trash receptacle in a
multiple family or commercial zoning district shall be placed any closer than
40 feet to any residential zoning district. All trash receptacles shall be
located on the site so as to be as accessible as possible without interfering
with vehicular traffic patterns.



   D.   If usage patterns determine that the number of trash
receptacles provided on site are insufficient to handle the volume of refuse,
additional receptacles may be required by the Department of Public Works. Any
additional trash receptacles so provided shall be located and constructed
according to the standards contained in this section. Site plan review is
also required.



   E.   Trash compactors shall be placed on a minimum six inch thick
concrete pad of at least ten feet in width and of sufficient length to
accommodate all equipment and an approach to allow for service pickups. All
compactors shall be screened with either a six foot masonry wall or with
sight-obscuring landscaping of sufficient height to substantially screen the
compactors from view from a public thoroughfare or any residential district.
The masonry wall shall be constructed of materials similar to or compatible
with the exterior construction materials used elsewhere on the site.



   F.   Recycling bins must be located on a ten foot by ten foot by six
foot concrete pad and enclosed with a six foot high chain link fence. A six
foot masonry wall is required if bins are visible from a public thoroughfare
or any residential district. All bins must have locking lids and be located
and constructed according to the standards of this section.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § F, § 14, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-Q, § 8, 10-3-95; Ord. No.
278-T, § 12, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-YY, § 5, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.06.  EXTERIOR LIGHTING REQUIREMENTS.



   A.    Intent. The regulations in this section are intended to:



      1.   Require sufficient lighting for parking areas, walkways,
driveways, building entrances, loading areas, outdoor task areas, and common
areas to ensure the security of property and safety of persons.



      2.   Prevent the adverse effects of inappropriate lighting,
including glare, light trespass onto adjoining properties, light pollution
and sky glow, and energy waste.



      3.   Permit and encourage the use of lighting that complements
and enhances the aesthetics of the city in general while providing the
above-mentioned benefits.



   B.    Definitions.  The definitions below shall apply to the words
and phrases used in this section 24.06.  Words and phrases not defined in
this section 24.06 paragraph B but defined in article 31 shall be given the
meanings set forth in article 31.  All other words shall be given their
common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise. 



      BULB (OR LAMP).  The source of electric light (to be
distinguished from the whole assembly, which is called the luminaire). 



      DISABILITY GLARE.  An intense light that results in reduced
visual performance and visibility, and is often accompanied by discomfort.



      FILTERED FIXTURE.  Light fixtures having glass, acrylic, or
translucent enclosures to filter the light.



      FIXTURE.  The assembly that holds the lamp in a lighting
system.  The fixture includes the elements designed to give light output
control, such as a reflector (mirror), refractor (lens), the ballast,
housing, and the attachment parts.



      FOOTCANDLE.  Illuminance produced on a surface when a lumen is
distributed into an area of one square foot.



      FULLY SHIELDED AND DOWNWARD DIRECTED FIXTURE. 



         a.   An outdoor lighting fixture that is shielded or
constructed so that (i) no light is projected above the horizontal plane of
the fixture and (ii) all light emitted is projected onto the site and away
from adjoining properties.  The light-emitting surface in a fully shielded
and downward directed fixture is not visible from adjoining properties, and
does not cause glare or light trespass that interferes with the vision of
motorists.



         b.   *Note:  If the lamp, any reflective surface, or
lens cover (clear or prismatic) is visible when viewed from above or directly
from the side, from any angle around the fixture, the fixture is not fully
shielded.



         c.   Lamps in fixtures that are shielded from direct
view when viewed from the side or above but contain or have reflective
surfaces within a fixture or the lens cover that is directly visible from the
side are not fully shielded.



      HIGH PRESSURE SODIUM (HPS) LAMP.  High-intensity discharge lamp
where radiation is produced from sodium vapor at relatively high partial
pressures (100 torr).



      INCANDESCENT LAMP.  A lamp that produces light by a filament
heated to a high temperature by electric current.



      LASER SOURCE LIGHT. An intense beam of light, in which all
photons share the same wavelength.



      LIGHT TRESPASS.  Light falling where it is not wanted or needed
(also called spill light).



      LOW PRESSURE SODIUM (LPS) LAMP. A discharge lamp where the light
is produced by radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively low partial
pressure (about 0.001 torr). A LPS lamp produces monochromatic light.



      LUMEN. Unit of luminous flux; the flux emitted within a unit
solid angle by a point source with a uniform luminous intensity of one
candela.  One footcandle is one lumen per square foot.  One lux is one
lumen per square meter.



      MERCURY VAPOR LAMP. A high-intensity discharge lamp where the
light is produced by radiation from mercury vapor.



      METAL HALIDE LAMP.  A high-intensity discharge mercury lamp
where the light is produced by radiation from metal-halide vapors.



      NON-ESSENTIAL LIGHTING. Outdoor lighting which is not required
for safety or security purposes.



      RECESSED CANOPY FIXTURE.  An outdoor lighting fixture recessed
into the canopy ceiling so that the bottom of the fixture is flush with the
ceiling.



   C.    General Requirements. All lighting shall comply with the
following general requirements:



      1.   In order to prevent sky-glow, exterior lighting
(including wall-pack fixtures) shall be fully shielded and downward
directed.  No light that is emitted from the fixture shall project above a
90-degree horizontal plane running through the bottom of the lowest part of
the fixture.  Exterior mounted incandescent light bulbs 100 watts or less,
and exterior lighting directly illuminating a United States flag in a manner
that does not create disability glare or light trespass to an adjacent
residential area or public/private roadway are exempt from the shielding
requirement.



      2.   In order to prevent disability glare, no light-emitting
surface within a light fixture (e.g. a bulb, lamp, refractor, etc.) shall be
visible from any residential area or public/private roadway, walkway, trail,
or other public way when viewed at ground level.



      3.   Lenses on light fixtures must be flat.  "Sag" or
protruding lens types are prohibited.



      4.   Any canopy structure used at a business location (such as
a gas station pump canopy) must have recessed canopy fixtures with diffusers
that do not extend below the ceiling surface of the canopy.



      5.   The Planning Commission shall review and shall
subsequently approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded
and downward directed fixtures if the applicant demonstrates to the
satisfaction of the Planning Commission that there will be no off-site glare
or light trespass, and that the proposed decorative fixtures will improve the
appearance of the site.



      6.   Non-essential lighting shall be turned off after business
hours, leaving on only lighting which is essential for site security,
provided, however, that motion detectors or other automatic switching systems
shall be used for security lighting wherever practicable.



   D.   Permitted light intensity.  Maximum average lighting intensity
on any particular part of the site shall not exceed the standards set forth
below:



 


Site Area Proposed to be Illuminated

 
Maximum Average Lighting Intensity (measured or calculated in initial
footcandles)




General
 
3


Driveways
 
3


Walkways
 
5


Building Entrances
 
10


Parking Lots
 
5


Security/Protective Areas
 
2


Loading Areas
 
5


Display Areas of Vehicle Dealerships
 
25


Pump Canopy Areas of Gasoline Stations
 
25


Building Facades
 
10


Drive-Through Areas
 
15


Lighting intensities established above are initial footcandles. Lighting
intensity calculated as part of the site lighting plan submittal shall be in
initial footcandles. Luminaire depreciation and lamp lumen depreciation shall
be calculated at 1.0 to determine initial footcandle values. Field
measurements may be taken to verify installation and submitted calculations
will be initial footcandles. All values are in horizontal footcandles.




 



   E.   Light trespass standard.  Light trespass shall not exceed 0.1
footcandles measured or calculated at the ground level of any property line
within or adjacent to all residentially zoned (R-60, R-70, R-80, R-90, R-100,
R-2, MHP, RM-1, RM-2 and RM-3) or residentially used property based upon the
initial footcandle measurement or calculation, or 2 footcandles measured or
calculated at the ground level of any property line separating one commercial
use from a different commercial use (O-1, O-2, O-3, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, P-1,
O-R), one industrial from a different industrial use (TRO, M-1, M-2 and PCD),
or a commercial use from an industrial use as defined in this section.  In
addition, house shields shall be provided on all fixtures located within 75
feet of residentially zoned (R-60, R-70, R-80, R-90, R-100, R-2, MHP, RM-1,
RM-2 and RM-3) or residentially used property to reduce light trespass.



   F.   Maximum light fixture height.   Light fixtures, whether
mounted on a building, a wall or fixture, shall not exceed the height
limitations set forth below, measured from the ground immediately below the
fixture to the top of the fixture:



 


Zoning District

 
Maximum Fixture Height




R-60, R-70, R-80, R-90 and R-100 One Family Residential Districts
 
15 feet


R-2 Two Family Residential District
 
15 feet


MHP Mobile Home Park District
 
15 feet


RM-1 and RM-2 Multiple Family Low Rise Districts
 
15 feet


RM-3 Multiple Family Mid and High Rise Districts
 
22 feet


O-1 Business and Professional Office District
 
22 feet


O-2 Planned Office District
 
22 feet


O-3 High Rise Office Commercial Service District
 
30 feet


C-1 Local Convenience Business District
 
22 feet


C-2 Planned Comparison District
 
30 feet


C-3 General Business District
 



Sites of = to 50 acres
 
30 feet


Sites of < 50 acres
 
22 feet


C-4 Multi Use District
 
30 feet


P-1 Vehicular Parking District
 
22 feet


O-R Office Research District
 
22 feet


TRO Technical Research Office District
 
22 feet


M-1 Light Industrial District
 
30 feet


M-2 Heavy Industrial District
 
30 feet


PCD Planned Center District
 



Sites of = 50 acres
 
30 feet


Sites of < 50 acres
 
22 feet


Fixtures in Other Districts
 
22 feet




 



   The Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the light/fixture height
standards for a commercially zoned (O-1, O-2, O-3, O-4, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4,
P-1, and O-R) property or an industrially zoned (TRO, M-1, M-2, and PCD)
property based upon of the following criteria:



      1.   The height and position of buildings;



      2.   Other structures and trees on the site;



      3.   Potential off-site impact of the lighting;



      4.   The character of the proposed use;



      5.   The character of the surrounding land uses.



   G.   Permitted lighting sources.  Due to their high energy
efficiency, long life, and special characteristics, color indexed, metal
halide lamps are encouraged, but not required.  High pressure sodium lamps
are permitted.



   H.   Prohibited lighting.  The following exterior lighting shall be
specifically prohibited:



      1.   Unshielded illumination of the exterior of a building or
landscaping, except for incandescent fixtures having lamps of 100 watts or
less;



      2.   Mercury vapor light fixtures;



      3.   Moving, flashing, or intermittent lighting, except as
authorized in section 28.13 regulating signs;



      4.   Laser source light or any similar high intensity light
for outdoor advertising or entertainment that projects above the horizontal
plane of the fixture;



      5.   Searchlights for advertising purposes between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and sunrise of the following morning;



      6.   Luminaires with swivel mounting hardware.



   I.   Exceptions. The following sources of light are exempt from the
requirements of this section:



      1.   Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly from
the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels (e.g. gas
lamps);



      2.   Lighting for permitted temporary civic, circus, fair, or
carnival uses;



      3.   Lighting necessary for construction operations, or
emergencies, provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued
immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the
emergency;



      4.   Any lighting required by the FAA for air traffic control,
navigation, or warning purposes;



      5.   Additional exceptions permitted upon a determination by
the Zoning Board of Appeals finding that unique or special conditions on the
site warrant the exception;



      6.   Lighting of public or private outdoor recreational
facilities during a permitted recreational or sporting event that continues
no later than 11:00 p.m.  (Lighting for outdoor recreational fields are
exempt from the light intensity limitations of this section).



   J.   Exterior Lighting in Corridor Improvement Development Areas. 
In addition to the exterior lighting requirements of this section, sites
located within a Development Area shall comply with the requirements of
article 22, section 22.04.



   K.   Site plan submittal requirements.  A lighting plan shall be
submitted when exterior lighting is added or provided.  Partial site
lighting plans will be permitted when exterior lighting is being added to
existing facilities and all of the new illumination falls within the partial
plan submitted.  The lighting site plan or partial lighting site plan shall
include the following:



      1.   The location of all proposed freestanding,
building-mounted, and canopy light fixtures on the site;



      2.   Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan
indicating the proposed light intensity in footcandles measured at ground
level, with footcandles based upon initial footcandles;



      3.   The maximum, average, and minimum illumination levels
proposed in applicable areas on the site, based upon initial footcandle;



      4.   The light trespass level on any boundary line, including
residential and non-residential;



      5.   The zoning classification and current land use of the
site and of any adjacent site;



      6.   The proposed manufacturer and model number of proposed
light fixtures with manufacturer's catalog cut sheets for the proposed
fixtures;



      7.   A statement of the proposed operating hours of luminaires
including notations as to whether photocells, time clocks, motion detectors,
or other automatic switching systems will be used;



      8.   A "to scale" drawing of the site at a scale of 60 to 1 or
larger, with footcandle values shown at 20 foot maximum intervals.



   L.   Application for a permit.  A person applying for a building,
electrical, or sign permit to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall submit
a lighting site plan or partial site lighting plan for review and approval to
insure that the proposed exterior lighting and work comply with the
requirements of this section.



(Ord. No. 278-GG § 4, 12-6-05; Ord. No. 278-II, §§ 3, 4, 3-19-08; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 24.07.  DECORATIVE FENCING FOR NONRESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES AND USES.



   A.   All fences located on nonresidential properties or properties
developed with nonresidential uses which abut a local collector, major, or
regional roadway or a highway or expressway that  are visible from such
roadway, highway, or expressway shall be constructed of durable, decorative 
fencing material such as decorative wrought iron, PVC, etc.  The use of
standard chain link fencing shall be prohibited except in instances where the
Planning Department (or the Planning Commission as the case may be)
determines that the fence will not be visible from an abutting roadway,
highway or expressway. 



   B.   Fencing on a nonresidential property or for a nonresidential
use shall only be permitted when necessary and in conjunction with a
permitted principally permitted, approved special approval land use, or
permitted applicable accessory use within the specific district in which it
is located.



   C.   Fencing shall not be permitted within the required front
yard.  Fencing shall only be permitted within the non-required front yard. 
For those fences located in the non-required front yard, additional
landscaping between the fence and the street right of way may be required by
the Planning Department (or the Planning Commission as the case may be). 
Fencing may be permitted within the required side yard setback and within the
required rear yard setback. 



   D.   The use of slats or other strips of wood, metal, plastic or
other materials inserted into a fence to provide screening or privacy shall
be prohibited.



   E.   The provisions of this Section 24.07 shall not apply in
instances where this ordinance specifically requires fencing within the front
yard or other area of the site.   



   F.   Decorative fencing shall be installed similar to the
illustration below:



   Decorative Fencing







(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 6, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.08.  FOUNDATION PLANTINGS.



   A.   Foundation plantings shall be installed along a minimum of 50%
of the linear footage of each side of an office or commercial building that
is visible from a public thoroughfare.  Buildings located on an outlot of a
shopping center or otherwise built in front of the established front building
line shall be landscaped with foundation plantings on those sides of the
building that are clearly visible to the general public from the parking lot
of the overall shopping center or site.  For industrial sites, the
landscaping requirement shall apply to that area of the industrial building
dedicated to office and administrative use.



   B.   The foundation planting area shall be at least three feet deep
and may include in-ground landscaping, raised landscape beds, decorative
container planters, or a combination of these.  The Planning Department may
approve other alternative landscaping schemes, such as green walls, increased
landscaped island space, etc., consistent with the intent of this section.



   C.   The required landscaping shall be planted within 12 feet of the
exterior building walls.  When a use contains an outdoor dining area or
similar outdoor plaza area along the building frontage, the foundation
planting area may be permitted to extend beyond the 12 foot area to up to 25
feet from the building or to a distance necessary to provide a landscaped
treatment and/or screening along the perimeter sides of the outdoor dining
area or outdoor plaza area which are furthest from the building, whichever is
greater.  (See illustration below).



   Foundation Plantings Surrounding Outdoor Dining or Outdoor Plaza Area







(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 7, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.09.  TRANSFORMER AND OTHER GROUND-MOUNTED APPLIANCE SCREENING.



   The location of any and all ground-mounted transformers, generators,
air conditioning units or other similar appliances or equipment shall be
shown on the site plan.  Screening of the transformer or appliances shall be
provided by the use of appropriate architectural features or landscaping
which consists of plant materials of sufficient size and nature to provide a
year round screen. 



(Ord. 278-YY, § 8, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.10.  PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIONS.



   A pedestrian connection shall be provided between the sidewalk along
the frontage roadway and the entrance to the building.  The pedestrian
connection shall utilize parking islands, landscape areas, etc. to provide
pedestrian protection to the greatest extent possible. The pedestrian
connections shall be a minimum of five feet in width and shall comply with
all necessary accessibility requirements.  Further, the pedestrian
connection shall be integrated into the landscaping design for the entire
site providing landscape materials to provide greater separation between the
pedestrian connection area and any abutting vehicular maneuvering lanes or
parking areas.  (See illustration below).



   Pedestrian Connections







(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 9, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.11.  BICYCLE RACKS.



   A minimum of one bicycle rack with spaces to park at least three
bicycles shall be installed at each commercial building or shopping center
building that contains 5,000 square feet or more of useable space. The
bicycle rack(s) shall be placed in one or more conspicuous location(s) within
50 feet of a building entrance so that pedestrian access to the entrance or
pedestrian movement on the site is not impeded.



(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 10, 10-4-16)



SECTION 24.12.  ENHANCED LANDSCAPING TREATMENTS.



   In order to create a cohesively designed physical land use environment
that portrays a sense of community specific to the City of Sterling Heights
and a dynamic, flexible, and sustainable presence insuring long term value
for both the community and the region, all nonresidential developments within
the city shall provide at least two outdoor enhanced landscaping treatments,
at least one of which shall serve the general public.



   An enhanced landscaping treatment shall include at least two of the
following site elements or amenities listed in the following table, provided
that such spaces are open, inviting, and accessible and total a minimum of 5%
of the gross floor area of all buildings. Two of the same types of elements
may be selected, provided that they are located in two distinct locations of
the site and meet the requirements of this section. All enhanced landscaping
treatments shall be maintained in good condition on a year-round basis.



 


Enhanced Landscaping Treatment

 

Required Element

 

Proximity and Accessibility Requirement



Outdoor dining areas
 
The outdoor dining area shall be an integral element in the overall building
and site design.  If the use of the area ceases for dining purposes, the
area shall be repurposed and maintained appropriately as a plaza area unless
otherwise redeveloped. 
 
Outdoor dining shall be provided in a location that is accessible to patrons
or users as well as accessible for maintenance and upkeep.  Outdoor dining
areas shall also be afforded protection/separation from any abutting
vehicular maneuvering lanes or parking areas.


Pedestrian Pass Through
 
All pedestrian pass through areas shall be at least 18 feet wide. This
requirement may be modified by the Planning Department if it is demonstrated
that the pedestrian pass through is designed with architectural elements that
reinforce an appropriate pedestrian scale.  Pedestrian pass through areas
shall include appropriate architectural and landscape elements which are in
character with the remainder of the building and site.  When uncovered, the
pedestrian pass through shall include enhanced pavement that distinguishes
the pedestrian pass through from adjacent sidewalks.  Whether uncovered or
enclosed, a pass through shall also include elements such as seating areas,
trash receptacles, and pedestrian scaled lighting. A bike rack shall be
within the pedestrian pass through or located within 30 feet of the
pedestrian pass through entrance.
 
A pedestrian pass through area shall serve as a passageway through a building
connecting place of interest or other significant site elements.


Plaza
 
A plaza shall be designed to attract the general public.  It shall include
move-able seating, at least one trash receptacle and one or more of the
following additional items: a garden, landscape containers/planters, and/or
water features such as fountains, reflecting pool, ponds, or waterfalls.
 
A plaza is separated from parking areas by a buffer, or landscape plantings
at least three feet in height.



 



   Alternatives. Alternatives will only be permitted if the Planning
Department finds the proposed alternative(s) is/are in keeping with the
spirit of this section. Any alternatives shall result in engaging,
interesting, attractive, safe, context sensitive, and comfortable places.



(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 11, 10-4-16)



ARTICLE 25.  SPECIAL LAND USE AND OTHER DISCRETIONARY LAND USE APPROVALS



SECTION 25.00.  INTENT.



   The formulation and enactment of this ordinance is based upon the
division of the city into districts, in each of which are permitted specified
uses which are mutually compatible. In addition to such permitted compatible
uses, however, there are certain other uses which may be necessary or
desirable to allow in certain locations in certain districts; but because of
their actual or potential impacts on neighboring uses or public facilities,
there is a need to carefully regulate them with respect to their location for
the protection of the community. These uses, due to their peculiar locational
need or the nature of the service offered may have to be established in a
district where they cannot be reasonably allowed as a permitted use.



SECTION 25.01.  AUTHORITY.



   A.   The City of Sterling Heights Planning Commission shall have the
power to approve or disapprove all special approval land uses, except that
the City Council shall be the approving authority with respect to special
approval land uses which have been approved by the City Council:



      1.   As part of a Planned Center District project under
Article 21;



      2.   As part of a Planned Unit Development project under
Article 22, Section 22.03;



      3.   As a development pursuant to a conditional rezoning
approved by the City Council under Section 32.00 C. 4. and H.; or



      4.   As a development pursuant to a consent judgment approved
by the City Council.



      5.   A discretionary land use in the C-1 (Local Convenience
Business), C-2 (Planned Comparison Business), or C-3 (General Business)
District in accordance with the provisions of Section 25.04 as authorized by
Section 504(1) the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, MCL 125.3504(1).



   B.   In consideration of all applications for special approval land
use except those reviewed and approved by the City Council as provided in the
preceding sentence, the Planning Commission shall review each case
individually as to its appropriateness and consider the following standards
as it relates to the proposed land use. Such uses shall be subject to
conditions, restrictions and safeguards deemed necessary to the interest of
public health, safety and welfare.



   C.   When the City Council is the reviewing authority with respect
to a special approval land use, it shall have the same reviewing authority
and shall consider the same standards as the Planning Commission under the
special approval land use criteria applicable to such use in the particular
zoning district and Article 25.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 37, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04; Ord. No.
278-FF § 2, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 14, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-SS, § 3,
7-17-12)



SECTION 25.02.  GENERAL STANDARDS.



   A.   The proposed special approval land use shall be of such
location, size and character that it will be in harmony with the appropriate
and orderly development of the surrounding neighborhood and/or vicinity and
applicable regulations of the zoning district (including but not limited to
any applicable performance standards) in which it is to be located.



   B.   The proposed use shall be of a nature that will make vehicular
and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district
involved, taking into consideration vehicular turning movements in relations
to routes of traffic flow, proximity and relationship to intersections,
adequacy of sight distances, location and access of off-street parking and
provisions for pedestrian traffic, with particular attention to minimizing
child-vehicle interfacing.



   C.   The proposed use shall be designed as to the location, size,
intensity, site layout and periods of operation of any such proposed use to
eliminate any possible nuisance emanating therefrom which might be noxious to
the occupants of any other nearby permitted uses, whether by reason of dust,
noise, fumes, vibration, smoke or lights.



   D.   The proposed use shall be such that the proposed location and
height of buildings or structures and location, nature and height of walls,
fences and landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate
development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect
their value.



   E.   The proposed use shall relate harmoniously with the physical
and economic aspects of adjacent land uses as regards prevailing shopping
habits, convenience of access by prospective patrons, continuity of
development and need for particular services and facilities in specific areas
of the city.



    F.   The proposed use is so designed, located, planned and to be
operated that the public health, safety and welfare will be protected.



   G.   The proposed use shall not be detrimental or injurious to the
neighborhood within which it is to be located, nor shall such use operate as
a deterrent to future land uses permitted within said zoning district and
shall be in harmony with the general purpose and intent of the zoning
ordinance.



(Ord. No. 2Z8-Y, § 38, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 15, 1-6-09)



SECTION 25.03.  PROCEDURES.



   An application for the approval of a special approval land use shall be
made by an owner, lessee or other person with a legal interest in the
property who has the owner’s consent to file the application. Such
application shall be accompanied by the necessary fees.



   A.   Public hearing.



      1.   The Planning Commission shall investigate the
circumstances of each case and hold a public hearing on each application for
special approval land use in accordance with the requirements as set forth in
Section 28.20 and as established by state law except in cases where City
Council is the reviewing authority under the provisions of this ordinance. An
application for approval of a special approval land use shall not be
processed or placed on an agenda for a public hearing, if a public hearing is
required for approval under the Zoning Ordinance, if the site and/or building
which is the subject of the application is subject to any outstanding,
unresolved Property Maintenance Code violation.  Any outstanding Property
Maintenance Code violation must be first resolved by correcting the violation
or by having the applicant/property owner sign a written code compliance
agreement with the City setting forth a written commitment by the
applicant/property owner to bring the site and/or building into full
compliance with all provisions of the Property Maintenance Code within a
specific time period acceptable to the City Development Director.



      2.   If the City Council is the reviewing authority for a
special approval land use under consideration that is proposed:



         a.   As part of a Planned Center District project under
Article 21,



         b.   As part of a Planned Unit Development project under
Article 22, Section 22.03;



         c.   Within a development proposed to be developed
pursuant to a conditional rezoning approved by the City Council under Section
32.00 C.4. and Section 32.04 H.; or



         d.   Within or as part of a development proposed to be
developed pursuant to a consent judgment (or amendment) approved by City
Council, the City Council shall investigate the circumstances of the case
prior to approving or denying the request.



      3.   The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the
request in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Section 28.20 and
as established by state law unless:



         a.   The Planning Commission has previously held a
public hearing on the request and the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance do not require a separate public hearing to be held by the City
Council; or



         b.   The special approval land use proposed to be
approved is within a development proposed to be developed pursuant to a
consent judgment that is approved by the City Council to resolve pending
litigation with the city.



   B.   Approval.  The following shall apply to approval of a special
approval land use by the Planning Commission, or City Council in instances
where it is the reviewing authority:



      1.   If the particular special approval land use(s) is in
compliance with the standards set forth in Section 25.02, the requirements
specific to the particular zoning district in which the special approval land
use is proposed, the conditions imposed under Section 25.03(D), other
applicable ordinances, and state and federal statutes, it shall be approved.
The decision shall be incorporated in a statement of findings and conclusions
which specifies the basis for the decision and any conditions imposed. Upon
approval of a special approval land use, the applicant shall submit a site
plan to the Planning Department for administrative review as per the
requirements of Section 26.02 (site plan review) unless this ordinance
provides for review and approval of the site plan by the Planning Commission
or City Council. Subsequent amendments to an approved site plan for a special
approval land use shall not require Planning Commission approval (or City
Council if City Council was the approving authority) unless: (a) the
amendments significantly impact factors considered by the Planning Commission
or City Council in approving the special approval land use, as determined by
the Office of the City Planner, or (b) the prior approval required such
subsequent approval by the reviewing authority. Thereafter, the enforcing
officer may issue a building permit in conformity with the particular special
approval land use so approved. If the Planning Commission approves a special
approval land use, the special approval land use shall remain in effect only
so long as the facts and circumstances as presented to the Planning
Commission and upon which the approval was based continue to exist and the
conditions attached to the approval are satisfied and maintained.



      2.   The special approval land use shall lapse unless
application for a building permit, site plan approval, zoning compliance or
other required permits utilizing the approved special approval land use is
made and received by the city not later than one year of the date written
notice of the Planning Commission’s decision is sent to or delivered to the
applicant, or the date the minutes of the Commission are approved relating to
the Planning Commission’s final decision on the special approval land use
request, whichever occurs first, unless the Planning Commission establishes a
different time period, or unless an extension is obtained as authorized in
this paragraph.  If a written request for a time extension based upon good
cause is received prior to the expiration of the specified time period, the
City Planner may grant one extension under such terms and conditions and for
such period of time not exceeding six months as it shall determine to be
necessary and appropriate.



      3.   If the special approval land use has lapsed and the
applicant desires to proceed with establishing the special approval land use
on the property, the applicant must reapply for the special approval land use
and demonstrate that all of the requirements for approval of the special
approval land use have been met, based upon the facts and circumstances in
existence at the time the new request is submitted.  The Planning Commission
shall have the right to deny a special approval land use if the facts and
circumstances pertaining to the request have changed, if the applicant is not
willing to satisfy the conditions attached to the original approval, or if
the applicant has not affirmatively demonstrated that all of the substantive
requirements for the approval of the special approval land use have been
satisfied as of the time the new application for special approval land use is
considered.  No special approval land use shall be effective until a notice
of such approval, including all applicable conditions, are filed with the
Macomb County Register of Deeds. Any subsequent changes to a special land use
shall also be filed with the Macomb County Register of Deeds.



      4.   The concurring vote of five members of the Planning
Commission shall be necessary to approve any special approval land use stated
in Article 25.



   C.   Denial; Reapplication.



      1.   If the Planning Commission (or City Council if it is the
reviewing authority) shall determine that the particular special approval
land use(s) requested does not meet the standards of this ordinance or
otherwise will tend to be injurious to the public health, safety, welfare or
orderly development of the city, it shall deny the application in writing and
incorporate in a statement of findings and conclusions which are the basis
for the decision.



      2.   If a petition for a Special Approval Land Use on a
particular parcel has been denied by a vote of the Planning Commission (or
City Council if it is the reviewing authority), no new petition for a Special
Approval Land Use on that parcel shall be accepted for a period of one year
after such denial unless:



         a.   Changed conditions in the surrounding neighborhood
and/or vicinity are clearly evident;



         b.   The provisions of the zoning ordinance relating to
the matter previously decided by City Council have been amended; or



         c.   The new application is filed by a new property
owner or party with an interest in the property.



   D.   Conditions.  The Planning Commission, before approving a
special approval land use, must determine that the conditions set for the
special approval land use have been satisfied unless a variance for such
conditions has been granted by the  Zoning Board of Appeals. The Planning
Commission may impose such conditions or limitations in granting approval as
may be permitted by state law and this ordinance which it deems necessary to
fulfill the spirit and/or purpose of this ordinance.  The conditions may
include conditions necessary to ensure that public services and facilities
affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating
increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, to
protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, to
ensure compatibility with adjacent uses of land and to promote the use of
land in a socially and economically desirable manner.  Conditions imposed
shall do all the following:



      1.   Be designed to protect natural resources, the health,
safety and welfare, as well as the social and economic well-being of those
who will use the land use or activity under consideration, residents and
landowners immediately adjacent to the proposed land use or activity and the
community as a whole;



      2.   Be related to the valid exercise of the police power and
purposes which are affected by the proposed use or activity;



      3.   Be necessary to meet the intent and purpose of the zoning
regulations, be related to the standards established in this ordinance for
the land use or activity under consideration and be necessary to ensure
compliance with those standards.



   The conditions imposed with respect to the approval of a land use or
activity shall be recorded in the record of the approval action and shall
remain unchanged except upon the mutual consent of the approving authority
and the landowner. The Planning Commission shall maintain a record of changes
granted in conditions.  Any changes in the conditions shall be filed with
the Register of Deeds as provided herein.  Any failure to satisfy a
condition of approval imposed by the Planning Commission shall constitute a
separate violation of the Zoning Ordinance.



   E.   Enforcement of Conditions of Approval.  The following
procedural remedies shall be available to enforce conditions of approval
imposed by the Planning Commission relating to a special approval land use:



      1.   If the City Manager or his/her designate reasonably
believes, based upon available information, that the applicant, property
owner, or occupant for whom a special approval land use has been approved,
has failed to satisfy the conditions of approval imposed by the Planning
Commission, the city may, through the authorized official designated below,
take any of the following actions in order to obtain compliance with the
conditions:



         a.   The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
Fire Marshal, Police Officer, or other city employee authorized to issue
appearance tickets or civil infractions may issue an ordinance complaint or
civil infraction to be prosecuted in the District Court based upon his/her
observations or investigation, or may ask the city attorney to request
issuance of a warrant for an ordinance complaint based upon the information
or evidence presented to him/her that there has been a violation of the City
Code or Zoning Ordinance.



         b.   The City Manager or his/her designate based upon
available information may request the Planning Commission to conduct a
hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in paragraph 2 below to
determine whether the conditions of approval have been satisfied, and if not,
whether or not the special approval land use conditions should be enforced,
or the approval revoked for failing to satisfy the conditions.



         c.   After City Council authorization, the city attorney
may commence litigation in the Circuit Court to require the responsible party
to satisfy the conditions or abate violation of the City Code or Zoning
Ordinance as authorized by law, or request revocation of the approval.



         d.   The city through the appropriate authorized
official may take any other enforcement or remedial action authorized by law.



      2.   If the Planning Commission receives a request from the
City Manager or his/her designate supported by credible information that the
applicant, property owner, or occupant for whom a special approval land use
has been approved has failed to continuously satisfy the conditions of
approval, the Planning Commission may conduct a hearing in accordance with
the following procedure to review whether the applicant, property owner, or
occupant has satisfied the conditions of approval:



         a.   The applicant, property owner, or occupant granted
the special approval land use and other persons entitled to notice of the
original special approval land use hearing shall be advised in writing by the
city administration of the date of the meeting at which the Planning
Commission intends to review whether the conditions of approval have been
continuously satisfied, which notice shall be not less than 30 days before
the scheduled meeting, except in cases where the public health, safety or
welfare is imminently threatened or endangered, in which case a hearing shall
be held no earlier than five days after written notice of the meeting date
has been given.



         b.   The written notice shall specify the condition(s)
of the special approval land use with which the applicant, property owner, or
occupant is alleged to have failed to continuously satisfy.



         c.   At the hearing, the city administration and other
interested parties (or their authorized representatives) shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence or information showing that the conditions of
approval have not been continuously satisfied.



         d.   At the hearing, the applicant, property owner, or
occupant and other interested parties (or their authorized representatives)
shall be given an opportunity to present evidence or information showing
whether the conditions of approval have been continuously satisfied.



         e.   After the Planning Commission concludes the
hearing, the Planning Commission may make its determination as to whether the
applicant, property owner, or occupant has continuously satisfied the
conditions of approval, or whether the applicant, owner or occupant should be
given additional time to satisfy the conditions of approval.  Any conditions
of approval originally imposed may be changed only with the concurrence of
the applicant, property owner or occupant.  The Planning Commission may
determine that the applicant, property owner, or occupant has satisfied the
conditions of approval, has failed to continuously satisfy the conditions, or
if it deems appropriate, grant an additional time period for compliance with
the concurrence of the applicant property owner or occupant.  In addition,
the Planning Commission may revoke the special approval land use or recommend
that the City Council commence an action in Circuit Court to enforce the
conditions of approval or to revoke the special approval land use if the
Planning Commission determines by majority vote of those Commissioners
present that the applicant, property owner, or occupant has not continuously
satisfied one or more of the conditions of approval.  The reasons for the
Commission's action shall be recorded into the record, with a written copy
furnished to the applicant, property owner, or occupant after certification
of the minutes of the meeting at which such action was taken.



   F.     Appeal of Special Approval Land Use Decision.  A person who
is aggrieved by a final decision of the Planning Commission or City Council
(if it is the approving authority), including revocation of a special
approval land use, may appeal the decision of the Planning Commission or City
Council to the Circuit Court within 30 days after the body making a final
decision issues its written decision signed by the chairperson, or signed by
the members of the body if there is no chairperson, or within 21 days after
approval by the body of the minutes of such final decision if the body’s
chairperson (or body’s members where there is no chairperson) do not issue
a written decision. A recommendation of Circuit Court action shall not
constitute a final decision. 



   G.   Recovery of Costs.  If the city prevails in any litigation to
enforce the conditions of approval or to revoke the special approval land
use, or if the Planning Commission revokes the special approval land use as a
result of the applicant, property owner, or occupant failing to continuously
satisfy the conditions of approval, the applicant, property owner, or
occupant shall be required to reimburse the city for any costs incurred in
taking such action, including attorney fees, experts fees, court costs, and
other expenses incurred.  The city may impose a lien against any interest
the applicant, property owner, or occupant has in the property to secure
payment of such reimbursement.



   H.   Effective Date of Administrative Procedure Relating to
Enforcement of Conditions.  The procedures set forth in section 25.03E1b
relating to special approval land uses shall apply only to the approvals
granted by the Planning Commission after the effective date of this amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance. 



   I.   Rules and Regulations.  The City Manager may promulgate
administrative rules and regulations necessary to implement and administer
the enforcement and hearing procedures set forth in section 25.03 of this
ordinance.  All rules and regulations shall be effective 30 days after
promulgation.  Copies of the rules and regulations shall be filed with the
City Clerk as of their effective date and shall be subject to public
inspection or copying during the city's normal business hours.



(Ord. No. 278-G, § 15, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 39, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-DD, § 10, 7-6-04; Ord. No. 278-EE, §§ 1, 7, 8, 10-5-04; Ord. No.
278-NN, §§  16 - 19, 34, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-RR, § 1, 10-18-11)



SECTION 25.04  OTHER DISCRETIONARY USE APPROVALS BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION.



   A.   The Planning Commission may approve any lawful use of land or
building offering retail goods or services not otherwise specifically
permitted as a permitted use or special approval land use or specifically
prohibited under the Zoning Ordinance which is of a nature or on a scale
which could possibly create a nuisance or have an adverse impact on adjacent
uses, other uses in the vicinity, or the community-at-large if located in the
C-1 (Local Convenience Business), C-2 (Planned Comparison Business), or C-3
(General Business) District provided the Planning Commission determines that
(1) the proposed use of land or building otherwise complies with the
regulations of the applicable zoning district, and (2) that the general
discretionary standards of section 25.02 have been met.



   B.   The standards and procedures applicable to Special Approval
Land Uses as set forth in section 25.02 and section 25.03 of the Zoning
Ordinance shall apply to consideration and approval of a discretionary land
use authorized by Section 25.04. Paragraph A.



(Ord. No. 278-SS, § 4, 7-17-12)



ARTICLE 26.  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES



SECTION 26.00.  INTENT.



   The purpose of this article is to provide the city with the opportunity
to review the proposed use of a site in relation to surrounding uses,
accessibility, pedestrian and vehicular circulation, spatial relationships,
off-street parking, public utilities, general drainage, environmental
characteristics, site vegetation, screening and buffering, developmental
characteristics and other site elements which may have an effect upon the
public health, safety and general welfare and its relationship and harmony
with adopted city ordinance and plans. Site improvements and development
shall conform exactly to the approved site plans and supplemental drawings as
approved by the city.



SECTION 26.01.  SITE PLANNING STANDARDS.



   A.   The site plan shall present the proposed use of a site in
relation to surrounding uses, accessibility, pedestrian and vehicular
circulation, spatial relationships, off-street parking, public utilities,
general drainage, environmental characteristics, site vegetation, screening
and buffering, developmental characteristics and other site elements which
may have an effect upon the public health, safety and general welfare and its
relationship and harmony with adopted city ordinances and plans.



   B.   All the development features, including the principal building
or buildings and any accessory buildings or uses, open space and any service
roads, driveways and parking areas, shall be so located and related as to
minimize the possibility of any adverse effects upon adjacent property such
as, but not limited to, channeling excessive traffic onto local residential
streets, lack of adequate screening or buffering or parking or service areas,
the accumulation of litter, production of noise, light, smoke, fumes or the
piling of plowed snow. Building groupings and circulation routes of traffic
shall be located so as not to interfere with police or fire equipment access.
Public streets adjacent or through the proposed development shall be required
when it is essential to promoting and protecting public health, safety and
general welfare and to provide continuity to the public road system.



   C.   Recreation areas and facilities, such as playgrounds, swimming
pools and community buildings, shall be provided to the extent necessary to
meet the anticipated needs of the residents of the project it is designed to
serve. Provision of separate adult and tot-lot recreation areas adequately
landscaped is encouraged. Recreation facilities generally should be provided
in a central location and should be convenient to the project community
center. In larger development, however, recreation facilities can be
decentralized.



   D.   The site plan shall locate proposed buildings, parking areas,
driveways, landscaping and other physical improvements of the site in
relation to existing on-site natural features and vegetation such as trees,
wooded areas and natural groves.



   E.   The Planning Department or Planning Commission may further
require landscaping, fences, walls and berms in pursuance of the objectives
of this ordinance and such improvements shall be provided and maintained as a
condition of the establishment and the continued maintenance of any use to
which they are appurtenant.



   F.   In those instances wherein the Planning Department or Planning
Commission finds that an excessive number of ingress and/or egress points may
occur with relation to major or secondary thoroughfares, thereby diminishing
the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, the Planning Department or
Planning Commission may recommend a reduction in the number of access drives.
For a narrow frontage which will require a single outlet, the Planning
Department or Planning Commission may recommend that money in escrow be
placed with the city so as to provide for a marginal service drive equal in
length to the frontage of the property involved. Occupancy permits shall not
be issued until the marginal service drive is physically provided or monies
have been deposited with the city.



   G.   During development, building, renovating or razing operations,
the developer shall erect and maintain suitable protective barriers around
all trees specified to be maintained so as to prevent damage to said trees
and shall not allow storage of equipment, materials, debris or fill to be
placed in this area except as may be necessary for no more than 30 days, if
no other storage space is elsewhere available. It is suggested that no
developed site have less than ten trees per acre.



   H.   The Planning Department or Planning Commission shall review and
approve exterior elevations. The exterior of all buildings shall be
constructed of aesthetically pleasing brick and/or stone building materials
or other similar durable decorative building materials approved by the
Planning Department or Planning Commission. At least 50% of the exterior
elevation(s) fronting on a public street and 50% of the total area of all
other exterior elevations of the building shall be constructed of brick.
Approval shall be based on the quality of its design, relationship to
surroundings, sensitive integration of form, textures and colors with the
particular landscape and setting, including but not limited to the following:



      1.   Commercial buildings, including franchise and chain
stores, shall use design elements from the Simplified Traditional
architectural style as defined and depicted in Section 31.01. The Planning
Department or Planning Commission may modify the application of the design
elements in the following situations:



         a.   Where the building is part of a newly proposed
comparison shopping center, planned unit development, or planned commercial
district development which incorporates an attractive architectural style
other than Simplified Traditional which will be required to be used
throughout the commercial development pursuant to recorded development
restrictions.



         b.   Where the building is part of a development
district, corridor, zone, or improvement area established or designated by
the city pursuant to Michigan law or the City Code to encourage redevelopment
or revitalization of businesses using an attractive architectural style other
than Simplified Traditional approved by the city which will be required to be
used throughout the development district, corridor, zone, or area.



         c.   Where the area in which the building proposed to be
constructed is a commercially thriving area that is developed with
attractive, well-maintained buildings containing design elements that are not
predominantly those included in the Simplified Traditional architectural
style.



         d.   Where the building is part of a commercially
thriving, attractive, well-maintained comparison shopping center, regional
shopping center, planned unit development, or planned commercial district
development which does not incorporate design elements which are part of the
Simplified Traditional architectural style.



         e.   Where the Zoning Board of Appeals has granted a
variance or other administrative relief from the requirement that commercial
buildings must be constructed with the design elements of the Simplified
Traditional architectural style.



      2.   Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted
walls or roof planes. Building wall offsets shall be used in order to add
architectural interest and variety and to relieve the visual effect of a
simple, long wall;



      3.   Roof types should be appropriate to the building's
architecture. Roof line offsets or other architectural features shall be
provided in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the
massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single long roof.
Asphalt shingles, standing metal seamed material or other compatible
materials shall be required on pitched roofs. Other roof materials may be
appropriate on flat roofs that are not visible to the public;



      4.   Buildings with more than one façade facing a public
street shall be required to provide similar front façade treatments on each
street. All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Elevations
visible from public view shall not use blank walls or other monotonous
façades;



      5.   The brick façade requirements set forth in this
paragraph H may be modified by the Planning Department on buildings that are
designed with less brick, stone or other durable materials in order to
qualify for LEED certification in the design review stage, or when
incorporated into a building with an attractive, alternative architectural
style that predominantly uses materials or a method of construction other
than brick, stone or other durable materials and traditional brick or stone
masonry construction but which meet the spirit and intent of this section. 
Such alternative materials and methods of construction may be approved if the
Planning Department finds that the proposed building materials and/or method
of construction are aesthetically compatible with other neighboring buildings
put to similar use, and are equivalent with respect to quality, strength,
effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety to that required by
this section and the Michigan Building Code.



   H.   The Planning Department or Planning Commission shall review and
approve exterior elevations. The exterior of all buildings shall be
constructed of aesthetically pleasing brick and/or stone building materials
or other similar durable decorative building materials approved by the
Planning Department or Planning Commission. Approval shall be based on the
quality of its design, relationship to surroundings, sensitive integration of
form, textures and colors with the particular landscape and setting,
including but not limited to the following: The Planning Department or
Planning Commission shall review and approve exterior elevations.  The
exterior of all buildings shall be constructed of aesthetically pleasing
brick and/or stone building materials or other similar durable decorative
building materials approved by the Planning Department or Planning
Commission.  At least 50% of the exterior elevation(s) fronting on a public
street and 50% of the total area of all other exterior elevations of the
building shall be constructed of brick.  Approval shall be based on the
quality of its design, relationship to surroundings, sensitive integration of
form, textures and colors with the particular landscape and setting,
including but not limited to the following:



      1.   Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous, uninterrupted
walls or roof planes. Building wall offsets shall be used in order to add
architectural interest and variety and to relieve the visual effect of a
simple, long wall;



      2.   Roof types should be appropriate to the building's
architecture. Roof line offsets or other architectural features shall be
provided in order to provide architectural interest and variety to the
massing of a building and to relieve the effect of a single long roof.
Asphalt shingles, standing metal seamed material or other compatible
materials shall be required on pitched roofs. Other roof materials may be
appropriate on flat roofs that are not visible to the public;



      3.   Buildings with more than one facade facing a public
street shall be required to provide similar front facade treatments on each
street. All sides of a building shall be architecturally designed to be
consistent with regard to style, materials, colors and details. Elevations
visible from public view shall not use blank walls or other monotonous
facades.



(Ord. No. 278-P, § 5, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 40, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-FF, § 3, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-JJ, § 8, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 278-KK, § 1,
4-15-08; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 13, 8-5-09)



SECTION 26.02.  SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   A site plan shall be submitted and approved whenever a building
permit is required for the erection or structural alteration of a building
(other than single family dwellings or buildings accessory thereto) or when
there is a change in proposed use of the land and/or any of the structures
located thereon. In addition, whenever a parking or storage area is to be
used or constructed, a site plan shall be required and approved in the same
manner before construction may begin, or if no construction is to be
undertaken, used for such purpose. A required site plan shall consist of the
following and shall include the entire site proposed for improvement under
the particular ownership with no unplanned areas on the particular site.



      1.   The site plan shall be prepared by and carry the seal of
the registered architect, landscape architect, professional community
planner, land surveyor or professional engineer who prepared it and shall
consist of the site plan review application and one or more sheets necessary
to provide the required data.



      2.   The site plan shall contain the legal description,
proposed address and zoning of the particular site which is proposed for
structural alterations, development or whatever may be the required purpose.



      3.   The site plan shall include the locations of the existing
and proposed structures and improvements, including yards, drives, screening
areas, walls, parking areas, hard-surfaced areas, signs, utilities, park
areas and dimensions of all such items and areas, including the site so that
the requirements of the zoning ordinance as to such items will be apparent.
The site plan shall show the locations and dimensions of individual sites for
proposed structures, including parking sites for mobile homes and other
vehicles.



      4.   The site plan shall be drawn to a minimum scale of one
inch equals 50 feet and shall contain scale, north point and size in acres. A
general location map at a scale of four inches equals one mile giving site
location is also required on the site plan. The site plan shall show the
proposed and existing right-of-way of county and state highways which adjoin
the site, together with the proposed zoning, existing buildings or
improvements on all land adjacent to the site within 200 feet shall be shown.
Front, side and rear elevations and typical floor plan(s) or proposed
buildings and dimensions shall accompany the site plan for determination of
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance.



      5.   Existing and proposed topography, drawn to at least
two-foot contour intervals, shall be shown on the site plan. Benchmarks for
the elevations shown on the drawing shall be properly indicated. Indication
of where trees and shrubs exist, or where such vegetation will be planted
prior to occupancy, shall be shown. All groups of trees and shrubs shall be
labeled as to size and whether existing or proposed. Whenever a group of
trees of three-inch caliper or greater is to be removed as part of the
planned improvements their location shall be shown on the site plan in dotted
outline and noted "to be removed."



      6.   Statistical data shall be furnished, including number of
dwelling units, size of dwelling units (i.e. one bedroom, two bedroom and
three bedroom), if any, and the total gross acreage involved. In the case of
mobile home parks, the size and location of each mobile home site shall be
shown. In cases where any exterior large equipment or machinery is to be
installed as part of the development, the location, type, horsepower, fuel,
dimensions and other data of all such equipment and/or machinery shall be
indicated.



      7.   In addition to the above requirements, all site plans
shall contain the following information, if applicable:



         a.   Gross and net acreage figures;



         b.   Designation of units by type of buildings;



         c.   Interior sidewalks and sidewalks within
rights-of-way;



         d.   Typical floor plans;



         e.   Building elevations (front, side and rear views);



         f.   Hydrant locations;



         g.   Exterior lighting locations, intensity, type and
method of shielding;



         h.   Trash receptacle location and method of screening;



         i.   Transformer pad location and method of screening;



         j.   Front, side and rear yard dimensions;



         k.   Building length dimensions;



         l.   Parking spaces, including handicapped parking
requirements;



         m.   Greenbelt, obscuring wall or berm locations and
cross-sections, where appropriate;



         n.   Landscape plan;



         o.   Dedicated road or service drive lengths;



         p.   For residential uses (multiple family, mobile home
parks and cluster developments), indicate the following additional
information:



            (1)   Density calculations;



            (2)   Carport locations and details;



            (3)   Community building details and method of
fencing and swimming pool, if applicable, and phasing of improvements;



         q.   In the case of nonresidential uses (i.e.
commercial, industrial, special land use, floodplain and office development),
the following additional information shall be required:



            (1)   Loading and unloading area;



            (2)   Total and usable floor area;



            (3)   Designation of fire lanes;



            (4)   Where large shipment or machinery is to be
installed as part of the development, the location, type, horsepower, fuel,
dimension and other data of all such equipment and/or machinery shall be
indicated;



         r.   Location of storage, use and disposal areas, if
any, for hazardous substances;



         s.   List of hazardous substances used, stored or
generated at the proposed facility, in accordance with the procedures
approved by the City of Sterling Heights;



         t.   Existing easements.



      8.   Separate drawings of the proposed sign(s) to be erected
on the site may be submitted at the time of site plan review or at a later
date. However, the location of all signs shall be shown on the site plan.
Sign permits shall be required.



   B.   The Planning Commission shall be responsible for the
preliminary site plan review and approval for all multiple family projects,
all industrial, commercial and office developments when such property abuts
any one family residential district, and all CRPUD Option projects unless the
proposed project or development has been previously reviewed and approved by
the Planning Commission as a special approval land use.



      1.   The Planning Commission shall not grant preliminary site
plan approval, unless the following requirements have been satisfied:



         a.   All requirements of the zoning ordinance and any
other applicable city ordinances, standards, specifications and regulations
shall have been met;



         b.   The location and design of driveways providing
vehicular ingress to and egress from the site are found to promote safety and
convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and
to access streets;



         c.   The traffic circulation within the site and the
location of automobile parking areas are designed to avoid common traffic
problems and promote public safety;



         d.   A harmonious relationship exists between the
development on the site and the existing and prospective development of
contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods;



         e.   The proposed development does not have any
unreasonably detrimental, nor an injurious effect upon the natural
characteristics and features of the parcel being developed and the larger
area of which the parcel is a part;



      2.   The Planning Commission may require the applicant to
provide such additional information as it deems necessary to determine
whether these requirements are satisfied.



      3.   An application for approval of a site plan shall not be
processed or placed on an agenda for a public hearing, if a public hearing is
required for approval under the Zoning Ordinance, if the site and/or building
which is the subject of the application is subject to any outstanding,
unresolved Property Maintenance Code violation.  Any outstanding Property
Maintenance Code violation must be first resolved by correcting the violation
or by having the applicant/property owner sign a written code compliance
agreement with the City setting forth a written commitment by the
applicant/property owner to bring the site and/or building into full
compliance with all provisions of the Property Maintenance Code within a
specific time period acceptable to the City Development Director.



(Ord. No. 278-P, § 6, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-U, § 13, 1-6-98; Ord. No.
278-FF § 3, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-RR, § 2, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 278-SS, § 5,
7-17-12)



SECTION 26.03.  PROCESSING REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   An applicant may request (but shall not be required to obtain)
a pre-preliminary review of the site plan. Applicants are encouraged to
obtain such review to be apprized of any significant problem areas and
specific revisions or actions necessary to bring the site plan into general
compliance. Four copies of the proposed pre-preliminary site plan shall be
submitted to the Planning Department.



   B.   If preliminary site plan review and approval by the Planning
Commission is required by this ordinance, then the applicant shall submit 12
copies along with 12 copies of the application for site plan approval and the
appropriate review fee. The site plan shall be presented to the Planning
Commission for their review and approval. Once the Planning Commission grants
preliminary site plan approval, the applicant shall proceed with the site
plan review procedures set forth in paragraph C of this section.



   C.   If the preliminary site plan review and approval by the
Planning Commission is not required by this ordinance, the applicant shall
submit to the Planning Department 16 copies of the proposed plan, together
with two copies of the application for site plan review along with the
appropriate fees. The Planning Department shall review the site plans to
determine compliance with the ordinances. The Planning Department shall
distribute copies to the Assessing, Building, Fire, Police, Public Works and
Engineering Departments and the zoning division of the Building Department.



   D.   Preliminary site plan approval by the Planning Commission under
paragraph B or by the Planning Department under paragraph C shall be
effective for a period of one year. If final site plan approval is not
obtained within that period of time, preliminary site plan approval shall
lapse. However, the Planning Department may grant one six month extension if
good cause for the delay is demonstrated.



   E.   After preliminary site plan approval has been granted by either
the Planning Commission or the Planning Department, the Engineering
Department shall determine whether or not all current engineering standards
have been met. The Engineering Department shall also forward the site plan to
all agencies having jurisdiction over requirements relating to the proposed
development for their review.



   F.   Upon determination that the Engineering Department standards
have been met, along with the requirements of the Assessing, Building, Fire,
Police and Public Works Departments and the Zoning Division, the site plan
shall be returned to the Planning Department for final site plan review and
approval.



   G.   No final site plan approval shall be granted until all of the
requirements of the Zoning Ordinance, engineering standards, other applicable
ordinances, and state and federal statutes have been satisfied.



   H.   Final site plan approval is effective for a period of one year.
If a building permit is not secured within that period of time or if
construction is not commenced within six months after the issuance of the
building permit, the site plan approval shall lapse. If a building permit is
not required, then a zoning compliance certificate for the land use which has
been given site plan approval must be issued within that one year period of
time or the site plan approval shall lapse.



   I.   No building permit shall be issued until final site plan
approval is obtained.



   J.   Any proposed change, determined by the Planning Department to
be a material change to that site plan following final site plan approval,
must be resubmitted by the applicant for review and approval by the various
city departments. Any changes made to an approved site plan by the Planning
Commission involving alterations, modifications, improvements and additions
to existing structures or developments shall not require Planning Commission
review and approval unless, as determined by the Planning Department, such
change significantly impacts any of the factors considered by the Planning
Commission in approving the site plan.



(Ord. No. 278-P, § 7, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 20, 1-6-09)



SECTION 26.04.  SITE PLAN REVIEW FEES.



   The City Council may establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees for
site plan review which may be amended as deemed necessary by the Council and
which must be paid at the time the application for site plan approval is
filed.



ARTICLE 27.  NONCONFORMING USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES



SECTION 27.00.  INTENT.



   Within the districts established by this ordinance there may exist
lots, uses of land and structures and characteristics of uses which were
lawful before this ordinance was adopted or amended, but which would be
prohibited or regulated under the term of this ordinance or future
amendments. It is the intent of this ordinance to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival. With the knowledge that some nonconforming uses, buildings or
structures will not disappear, it is necessary and desirable in pursuit of
the public interest to distinguish between nonconforming uses, buildings or
structures which should be eliminated as rapidly as possible and
nonconforming uses, buildings or structures which ought to be given separate
treatment.



   In recognition of this fact, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the
authority to permit some expansion or changes to lawfully existing
nonconforming uses based upon the standards set forth in this article.



   Those alleged nonconforming uses or structures, or uses and structures
in combination, which cannot be proved conclusively to have been lawfully
existing prior to the enactment or amendment of this ordinance shall be
declared illegal uses and shall be discontinued.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 27.01.  NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.



   Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance, lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the
terms of this ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so
long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:



   A.   No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or
extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance;



   B.   No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to
any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective
date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance;



   C.   If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a
period of more than one year, any subsequent use of such land shall conform
to the regulations specified by this ordinance for the district in which such
land is located.



SECTION 27.02.  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.



   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards,
type of structure or other restrictions of the structure or its location on
the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise
lawful, subject to the following provisions:



   A.   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in any way which
increases its nonconformity;



   B.   Should such structure or nonconforming portion of the structure
be destroyed by any means to an extent of more than 50% of its replacement
cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in
conformity with the provisions of this ordinance;



   C.   Should such structure be removed for any reason or moved any
distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located after it is removed or relocated.



   D.   For purposes of determining whether the nonconformity of a
nonconforming structure is increased under this section, an enlargement of a
nonconforming structure into a required side or rear yard area shall be
permitted without obtaining approval from the Zoning Board of Appeals under
section 27.05 if the proposed enlargement of the structure will not reduce
the side or rear yard setback between the structure and the lot line in the
area where the setback is nonconforming, and the enlargement of the structure
complies with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 278-Q, § 9, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-CC, § 12, 6-3-03; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 27.03.  NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES AND LAND.



   If a lawful use of a structure, or of structure and land in
combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this
ordinance that would not be allowed in the district under the terms of this
ordinance, such use may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:



   A.   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
ordinance in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged, extended,
constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered, except in changing
the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in which it is
located;



   B.   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
the building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use and
which existed at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, but no
such use shall be extended to occupy any land outside such building;



   C.   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a nonconforming use is superseded in whole or in part by a permitted
use shall thereafter conform to all regulations for the district in which
such structure is located, and the nonconforming use may not thereafter be
resumed;



   D.   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or ceases to exist for one year or
for 12 months during any three year period or otherwise sooner abandoned, the
structure, or structure and premises in combination, shall not thereafter be
used, except in conformance with the regulations of the district in which it
is located. Structures occupied by seasonal uses shall be excepted from this
provision.



   E.   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure and
premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall
eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.



SECTION 27.04.  CHANGE OF USE.



   A.   Any nonconforming use of a building, structure or land may be
changed to another nonconforming use upon written findings of the Zoning
Board of Appeals that the proposed use meets the following standards:



      1.   There is no increase in the intensity of the use of the
land, building or structure involved;



      2.   Such change in use will have an equal or less detrimental
effect or negative impact on neighboring property than the existing
nonconforming use it is replacing; and



      3.   The proposed use is more appropriate to the zoning
district than the existing nonconforming use and is desirable and useful in
the pursuit of the public interest.



   B.   In permitting such a change in use, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose
and intent of this ordinance, including the upgrading of the premises to
comply as nearly as is practicable with requirements of this ordinance.
Notice of approval of the change in nonconforming use (including any
conditions) shall be recorded with the Macomb County Register of Deeds prior
to the issuance of any permit or certificate of occupancy.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 27.05.  EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USES OR STRUCTURES.



   A.   The Zoning Board of Appeals may permit the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure upon written findings that the following
standards have been met:



      1.   Continuance thereof would not be contrary to the public
health, safety or welfare or the spirit and intent of this ordinance;



      2.   That the use, building or structure does not, and is not
likely to, significantly depress the value of nearby properties;



      3.   That the use, building or structure was lawful at the
time of its inception;



      4.   That no useful purpose would be served by strict
application of the provisions or requirements of this ordinance with which
the use, building or structure does not conform; and



      5.   Expansion will not have an adverse impact on adjoining
property.



   B.   In permitting such an expansion of a nonconforming building or
use, the Zoning Board of Appeals may require appropriate conditions and
safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance, including
upgrading the premises to comply as nearly as is practicable with
requirements of this ordinance. Notice of approval, including any conditions
attached, shall be recorded with the Macomb County Register of Deeds prior to
the issuance of any permit or certificate of occupancy.  Any failure to
satisfy a condition of approval shall constitute a separate violation of the
Zoning Ordinance.



   C.   The following procedural remedies shall be available to enforce
conditions of approval imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals relating to an
approval of an expansion of a non-conforming use:



      1.   If the City Manager or his/her designate reasonably
believes, based upon available information, that the applicant, property
owner, or occupant for whom an expansion of a non-conforming use has been
approved has failed to satisfy the conditions of approval, the city may,
through the authorized official designated below, take any of the following
actions in order to obtain compliance:



         a.   The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
Fire Marshal, Police Officer, or other city employee authorized to issue
appearance tickets or civil infractions may issue an ordinance complaint or
civil infraction to be prosecuted in the District Court based upon his/her
observations or investigation, or may ask the city attorney to request
issuance of a warrant for an ordinance complaint based upon the information
or evidence presented to him/her that there has been a violation of the City
Code or Zoning Ordinance.



         b.   The City Manager or his/her designate based upon
available information or evidence may request the Zoning Board of Appeals to
conduct a hearing in accordance with the procedure set forth in paragraph 2
below to determine whether the conditions of approval have been satisfied,
and if not, whether the conditions imposed upon the expansion of a
non-conforming use should be enforced, or the approval revoked for failing to
satisfy the conditions.



         c.   After City Council authorization, the city attorney
may commence litigation in the Circuit Court to require the responsible party
to satisfy the conditions, abate violation of the City Code or Zoning
Ordinance as authorized by law, or request revocation of the approval.



         d.   The City through the appropriate authorized
official may take any other enforcement or remedial action authorized by law.



      2.   If the Zoning Board of Appeals receives a request from
the City Manager or his/her designate supported by credible information that
the applicant, property owner, or occupant for whom an approval of expansion
of a non-conforming use has been granted has failed to continuously satisfy
the conditions of approval, the  Zoning Board of Appeals may conduct a
hearing in accordance with the following procedure to review whether the
conditions of approval have been continuously satisfied:



         a.   The applicant, property owner, or occupant granted
approval of the expansion of a non-conforming use and other persons entitled
to notice of the original hearing on the non-conforming use expansion
request, shall be advised in writing by the city administration of the date
of the meeting at which the Zoning Board of Appeals intends to review whether
the conditions of approval have been continuously satisfied, which notice
shall be not less than 30 days before the scheduled meeting, except in cases
where the public health, safety or welfare is imminently threatened or
endangered, in which case a hearing shall be held no earlier than five days
after written notice of the meeting date has been given.



         b.   The written notice shall specify the condition(s)
of approval relating to the expansion of a non-conforming use with which the
applicant, property owner, or occupant is alleged to have failed to
continuously satisfy.



         c.   At the hearing, the city administration and other
interested parties (or their authorized representatives) shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence or information showing that the conditions of
approval have not been continuously satisfied.



         d.   At the Zoning Board of Appeals hearing, the
applicant, property owner, or occupant and other interested parties (or their
authorized representatives) shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
or information showing whether the conditions of approval have been
continuously satisfied.



         e.   After the Zoning Board of Appeals concludes the
hearing, the Board may make its determination as to whether the applicant,
property owner, or occupant has continuously satisfied the conditions of
approval, whether the applicant, owner or occupant should be given additional
time to satisfy the conditions of approval, or whether the conditions of
approval should be changed.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may determine that
the applicant has satisfied the conditions, has failed to satisfy the
conditions, or if it deems appropriate, grant an additional time period for
compliance or change the conditions of approval.  In addition, the Zoning
Board of Appeals may revoke the approval of expansion of a non-conforming use
or recommend that the City Council commence an action in Circuit Court to
enforce the conditions, of approval or to revoke the approval of the
expansion of the non-conforming use if the Zoning Board of Appeals determines
by majority vote of those members present that the applicant, property owner,
or occupant has failed to satisfy one or more of the conditions of
approval.  The reasons for the Board's action shall be recorded into the
record, with a written copy furnished to the applicant, property owner, or
occupant after approval certification of the minutes of the meeting at which
such action was taken.



         f.   The applicant, property owner, or occupant, or any
person who has an interest affected by the Zoning Ordinance who is aggrieved
by a final decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals relating to expansion of a
non-conforming use, including revocation of an approval, may appeal the
decision to the Circuit Court within the time period prescribed by law.  A
recommendation of Circuit Court action shall not constitute a final
decision.  The appeal period shall commence on the date the minutes of the
Zoning Board of Appeals are certified relating to the Board's decision. 



         g.   If the city prevails in any litigation to enforce
the conditions of approval relating to expansion of a non-conforming use or
to revoke the approval of the expansion, or if the Zoning Board of Appeals
revokes approval of the expansion of a non-conforming use as a result of the
applicant, property owner, or occupant failing to satisfy the conditions of
approval, the applicant, property owner, or occupant shall be required to
reimburse the city for any costs incurred in taking such action, including
attorney fees, experts fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred.  The
city may impose a lien against any interest the applicant, property owner, or
occupant has in the property to secure payment of such reimbursement.



      3.   The procedures set forth in Section 27.05C1b relating to
approvals of expansion of non-conforming uses shall apply only to approvals
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals after the effective date of this
amendment to the Zoning Ordinance.



      4.   The City Manager may promulgate administrative rules and
regulations necessary to implement and administer the enforcement and hearing
procedures set forth in section 27.05 of this ordinance.  All rules and
regulations shall be effective 30 days after promulgation.  Copies of the
rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk as of their
effective date and shall be subject to public inspection or copying during
the city's normal business hours.



(Ord. No. 278-CC, § 13, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-EE, §§ 2, 3, 10-5-04; Ord.
No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 27.06.  REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.



   This section applies to all nonconforming structures and uses, except
those which have been granted the right to expand by the Zoning Board of
Appeals, as noted in the above section 27.05.



   On any structure or building devoted in whole or in part to any
nonconforming use, work may be done in any period of 12 consecutive months on
ordinary repairs or on repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures,
wiring or plumbing to an extent not exceeding 50% of the assessed value of
the building, provided that the cubic content of the building or structure or
area of the use or other improvements as it existed at the time of passage or
amendment of this ordinance shall not be increased. Nothing in this ordinance
shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition
of any building or structure or nonconforming use or part thereof declared to
be unsafe by any official charged with protecting the public safety, upon
order of such official.



   Whenever the owner of property upon which a nonconforming use or
structure exists desires to modify or alter the site without increasing the
nonconformity of the use or structure, the site shall be brought into
compliance with the ordinance to the maximum extent possible.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 27.07.  CHANGE OF TENANCY OR OWNERSHIP.



   There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of any
existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises, provided there
is no change in the nature or character of such nonconforming uses, except to
bring the use into greater conformity.



SECTION 27.08.  USES SUBJECT TO SPECIAL LAND USE APPROVAL NOT NONCONFORMING
USES.



   Any use for which a special land use approval is required is permitted
as provided in this ordinance and shall not be deemed a nonconforming use,
but shall without further action be deemed a conforming use in the district.
Such use shall remain subject to all of the provisions of the special land
use section of this ordinance for use, enlargement, change or addition of
activities.



SECTION 27.09.  NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



   A.   In any district in which single family dwellings are permitted,
a single family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this ordinance; provided that yard setback dimensions and all other
requirements not involving area or width, or both, shall conform to the
regulations for the district in which such lot is located. Variance to yard
requirements may be obtained through approval of the Zoning Board of Appeals.



   B.   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of
lots with a continuous frontage and single ownership are of record at the
time of passage or amendment of this ordinance or any time thereafter, and if
all or part of the lots do not meet the requirements for lot width or area as
established by this ordinance, the lands involved shall be considered an
undivided parcel for the purpose of this ordinance, and no portion of said
parcels shall be used or occupied which does not meet lot width and area
requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of the
parcel be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the
requirement stated in this ordinance.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)




[Click here to view Nonconforming Uses image.]




ARTICLE 28.  GENERAL PROVISIONS



SECTION 28.00.  ACCESSORY BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.



   Accessory buildings and structures, except as otherwise permitted in
this ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations:



   A.   Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a
principal building, except as provided in section 28.10, it shall conform to
all regulations of this ordinance applicable to the principal building.



   B.   A detached accessory building or structure shall not be located
in the front or the required side yards except as provided in this
division.  No detached accessory building (excluding pools) shall be located
closer than ten feet to any principal building or deck.  Detached accessory
buildings are permitted to be located in the required rear yard provided they
are not closer than three feet to any lot line.  In the case of a through
lot, a detached accessory building or structure shall not be located in any
required rear yard that abuts the front yard of an adjacent lot.  In the
case of a corner lot, accessory buildings (excluding swimming pools and
sheds) shall not be located in either required front yard.  Swimming pools,
and sheds not exceeding 200 square feet, when located on a corner lot, may
extend ten feet into the side street front yard setback, provided there is no
paved access to the property line or curb cut. Sheds not exceeding 200 square
feet, when located on a corner lot which has a six feet sight-obscuring
privacy fence or six feet high sight-obscuring landscaping along the front
setback line of the side street front yard, may extend 27 feet into the side
street front yard setback of the corner lot, or 37 feet into the side street
front yard setback of a corner lot if on a major thoroughfare, provided there
is no paved access to the property line or curb cut. If a shed is installed
at a location which is more than 10 feet into the front yard setback of the
side street front yard of the corner lot as a result of the existence of a 6'
sight-obscuring privacy fence or six feet high sight-obscuring landscaping, a
six feet sight-obscuring privacy fence or six feet high sight-obscuring
landscaping shall be maintained at all times.  A notice of this condition
shall be recorded against the property at the time the permit is issued for
the shed encroaching into the front yard setback whenever the sight-obscuring
fence or landscaping is required due to the placement of the shed within the
required yard.  In no instance shall an accessory structure be located
within a dedicated easement.



   C.   Accessory buildings and structures shall not exceed one story,
or 15 feet in height, in any residential or commercial zoning district.
Accessory buildings with a floor area over 50 square feet shall be installed
upon a concrete slab floor that is at least 3½ inches thick and in
compliance with all applicable requirements of the Michigan Building Code or
Michigan Residential Building Code.  Sheds shall not exceed ten feet in
height on a lot of one-fourth acre or less located in any residential zoning
district. Sheds shall not have openings or doors exceeding six feet in width.



   D.   No accessory building shall be constructed prior to the
construction of the principal building, unless specifically approved by the 
Zoning Board of Appeals.



   E.   The following requirements shall apply to accessory buildings
located on one family zoned parcels of one quarter an acre or less:



      1.   One garage, either attached or detached, is permitted;



      2.   For parcels with an attached garage, one shed, not
exceeding 200 square feet in area, shall be permitted;



      3.   The total square footage of a detached accessory building
shall not exceed 700 square feet.



   F.   The following requirements shall apply to accessory buildings
located on one family zoned parcels of more than one-quarter acre and less
than one-half acre:



      1.   Freestanding accessory buildings including but not more
than two garages may be permitted;



      2.   For parcels with an attached garage, one accessory
building is permitted;



      3.   The total square footage of all detached accessory
buildings shall not exceed 1,000 square feet;



      4.   The minimum rear and side yard setbacks of accessory
buildings exceeding 900 square feet in size shall be 20 feet.



   G.   The following requirements shall apply to accessory buildings
located on one family zoned parcels that exceed one-half acre in total area:



      1.   For each additional one-quarter acre or portion thereof
over one-half acre, an additional 200 square feet of accessory buildings
shall be permitted. The total square footage of all detached accessory
buildings shall not exceed 2,000 square feet;



      2.   The minimum rear and side yard setbacks of accessory
buildings exceeding 900 square feet in size shall be 20 feet.



   H.   Satellite dish antennas and other television and radio
antennas/receivers may be permitted as accessory structures in any zoning
district, subject to the following provisions:



      1.   A satellite dish antenna that is designed to receive
direct satellite service, including direct-to-home satellite service, that is
one meter or less in diameter shall be permitted without a zoning compliance
permit, unless it is attached to a mast of greater than 12 feet in height. If
the mast to which it is attached exceeds 12 feet in height, then special
approval land use by the Planning Commission under Article 25 shall be
required;



      2.   A satellite dish antenna that is designed to receive
video programming services via multi- point distribution services, including
multichannel multi-point distribution services, instruction television fixed
services and local multipoint services and that is one meter or less in
diameter or diagonal measurement shall be permitted without a zoning
compliance permit, unless it is attached to a mast of greater than 12 feet in
height. If the mast to which it is attached exceeds 12 feet in height, then
special approval land use by the Planning Commission under Article 25 shall
be required;



      3.   A conforming commercial earth station shall be permitted
without a zoning compliance permit;



      4.   An antenna that is designed to receive private radio or
television broadcast signals which is less than 12 feet in height when
installed shall be permitted without a zoning compliance permit. If the
antenna exceeds 12 feet in height, then special approval land use by the
Planning Commission under Article 25 shall be required. Such a structure
shall not, however, be erected so as to injure the roof covering, and when
removed from the roof, the roof covering shall be repaired to maintain
weather and water tightness. The installation of any antenna structure
mounted on the roof of a building shall not be erected nearer to the lot line
than the total height of the antenna structure above the roof, nor shall such
antenna structure be erected near electric power lines or encroach upon any
street or other public space;



      5.   Satellite earth stations more than one meter in diameter
located in a residential district shall require special land use approval by
the Planning Commission under Article 25;



      6.   Satellite earth stations more than two meters in diameter
located in an area where commercial or industrial uses are generally
permitted shall require special approval land use by the Planning Commission
under Article 25;



      7.   An antenna that is designed to receive private radio or
television broadcast signals shall require a special approval land use by the
Planning Commission under Article 25 if the height exceeds 12 feet;



      8.   An antenna of any type or size which is to be erected on
a structure that is located in a district that is listed or eligible to be
listed in the National Register of Historic Places shall require special
approval land use by the Planning Commission under Article 25;



      9.   Any approved structure shall be subject to compliance
with all applicable regulations, including but not limited to the
requirements under the BOCA Building Code;



      10.   The  Zoning Board of Appeals may modify the
requirements of this section as authorized in section 30.02C5.



   The application for a special approval land use or variance shall
include construction drawings showing the proposed method of installation,
including details on foundations and anchoring, and a site plan or plot plan
showing the proposed location. Any structure covered by this section shall
not be located in any front or required side yard setback.



   I.   In nonresidential zoning districts, accessory buildings may
occupy any of the ground area which the principal building is permitted to
cover. Accessory buildings in nonresidential zoning districts that abut
nonresidential zoned properties shall be regulated according to the
provisions of section 28.00, A-G. Minor accessory buildings, such as
buildings for guard shelters and gate houses, may be located in the front or
side yard in nonresidential districts, upon site plan approval. All such
buildings or structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible
with the principal building. All such devices shall be located and landscaped
to reduce the visual impact from surrounding properties and from public
streets.



(Ord. No. 278-G, §§ 16-19, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-Q, § 10, 10-3-95; Ord.
No. 278-R, § 14, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-U, § 14, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-X,
§§ 16-19, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 10, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 278-DD, § 11,
7-6-04; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 8, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 278-MM, § 4, 10-21-08;
Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-RR, § 7, 10-18-11)



SECTION 28.01.  AMUSEMENT DEVICES AS AN ACCESSORY USE.



   Amusement devices are permitted as accessory uses in all zoning
districts, subject to the following:



   A.   An amusement device license must first be received from the
City Clerk's office in accordance with the requirements set forth in the City
Code. Amusement devices are not permitted as an accessory use without an
amusement device license.



   B.   The maintenance and use of amusement devices as an accessory
use shall be in accordance with all applicable regulatory provisions in the
City Code.



(Ord. No. 278-X, § 20, 4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 41, 5-16-00; Ord. No.
278-AA, § 1, 5-3-17)



SECTION 28.02.  CANOPIES.



   Canopies over driveways shall be a minimum of 14 feet in height, or
such canopies shall be located in such manner that a driveway of no less than
20 feet in width unobstructed by such a canopy shall be provided to assure
emergency vehicle access. A canopy in any district less than 14 feet in
height shall have the height permanently and conspicuously posted on both
sides of the canopy.



SECTION 28.03.  CORNER CLEARANCE.



   No fence, wall, shrubbery, sign or other obstruction to vision above a
height of 30 inches from the established street grades shall be permitted
within the triangular area formed at the intersection of any street
right-of-way lines or private driveways by a straight line drawn between said
right-of-way lines or private streets or driveways at a distance along each
line of 25 feet from their point of intersection.



(Ord. No. 278-Q, § 11, 10-3-95)



SECTION 28.04.  ESSENTIAL SERVICES.



   Essential services, as defined by this ordinance, shall be permitted as
authorized under any franchise or other applicable laws, it being the
intention, hereof, to exempt such essential services from the application of
this ordinance. Other public or private utilities or services shall be
regulated according to the provisions of section 3.02I.



SECTION 28.05.  HEIGHT LIMITATIONS AND EXCEPTIONS.



   The height limitations of this ordinance may be modified by the Zoning
Board of Appeals in their application to church spires, chimneys, flagpoles,
belfries, cupolas, domes, water towers, power transmission lines and towers,
radio and television towers, masts and aerials, smokestacks, ventilators,
satellite dishes, derricks, cooling towers and other similar and necessary
mechanical appurtenances pertaining to and necessary to the permitted uses of
the zoning districts in which they are located.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 28.06.  LOCATION OF STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS IN A PUBLIC EASEMENT.



   No structure or building other than a fence or wall may be erected in a
public easement.



SECTION 28.07.  LOT LIMITATIONS.



   On all lands used for single family and two family residences, only one
principal building shall be placed on a parcel or a lot of record. This
regulation shall not apply to condominiums approved pursuant to the
Condominiums Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. No building shall be
erected on lands divided in violation of the Subdivision Control Act, Public
Act 288 of 1967, as amended, or in violation of any city ordinance.



SECTION 28.08.  ONE AND TWO FAMILY DWELLING STANDARDS.



   A.   A building permit issued by the City of Sterling Heights shall
be required before any dwelling unit is constructed, relocated or moved into
the city. All dwelling units and additions thereto shall meet or exceed the
applicable construction standards of the city.



   Plans for modulars, prefabricated units and similarly constructed units
shall be approved by the State of Michigan Construction Code Commission as
meeting the State Construction Code (Public Act 230 of 1972 and Public Act
371 of 1980) prior to the issuance of a building or occupancy permit. Mobile
homes or trailers shall meet or exceed the requirements imposed by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development Mobile Home Construction
and Safety Standards (24 CFR 3280, and as, from time to time, such standards
may be amended). The Building Official shall be furnished a certificate
stating that such dwelling meets the minimum Building Code requirements
applicable to such structure. Any addition to such mobile home must be
designed and constructed by the manufacturer of such mobile home, or must be
based upon an architectural plan deemed compatible with the overall design of
the mobile home and approved by the Building Official.



   B.   All construction shall meet the minimum lot size, yard spaces,
setbacks, parking and all other minimum site requirements applicable to
residential dwellings within the zoning district in which the use will be
located.



   C.   All dwelling units shall meet the minimum living area standards
for one family residential dwellings of the zoning district in which said
home is to be located.



   D.   All one family dwelling units shall have a minimum width across
any front, side or rear elevation of 24 feet.



   E.   All dwelling units shall be attached to a permanent foundation
constructed on the site in accordance with the Building Code and shall have a
wall of the same perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and additions thereto
and constructed of such materials and type as required in the Building Code.
In the event that the dwelling is a mobile home, as defined herein, such
dwelling shall also be installed pursuant to the manufacturer’s setup
instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or
device complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Mobile Home
Commission and shall have a continuous perimeter wall as required above.



   F.   Single family dwellings shall be aesthetically compatible in
design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity, with either a
roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides, or alternatively with
roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along
the sides of the dwelling; has not less than two exterior doors, with the
second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling; and contain
steps connected to said exterior doors areas or to porches connected to said
door areas where a difference in elevation requires the same. In making such
determination of compatibility, the City Building Official, prior to issuance
of a building permit, may consider the following factors: total square
footage; length to depth proportions; value and quality of construction;
exterior building materials; architectural style and design and roof line; as
well as the character, design and appearance of a majority of the residential
dwellings (excluding mobile home parks) within 2,000 feet of the subject
dwelling. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design
concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour or
relief from the common or standard design home.



   G.   Each dwelling shall be connected to a public sewer and water
supply or to private facilities approved by the local health department.



   H.   The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home
located in a licensed mobile home park, except to the extent required by
state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in the zoning
ordinance of the city pertaining to such parks.



(Ord. No. 278-Q, § 12, 10-3-95)



SECTION 28.09.  PERMITTED USES.



   No building or structure shall be erected, converted, enlarged,
reconstructed or structurally altered, nor shall any building or land be used
for any purpose other than that permitted in that zoning district, except as
otherwise provided herein.



SECTION 28.10.  PERMITTED PROJECTIONS INTO REQUIRED OPEN SPACE.



   A.   Certain architectural features, such as cornices, eaves and
gutters, bay windows and chimneys may project three feet into the required
front yard or open space, five feet into the required rear yard or open space
and two feet into the required side yard or open space, except for bay
windows. Wing walls, archways or extensions of the front facade of a single
family dwelling unit shall be permitted under the following conditions:



      1.   The maximum height of wing walls or extensions of the
front facade without an archway for clearance shall be six feet. If an
archway is provided with minimum clearance of seven feet, the maximum height
shall be eight feet;



      2.   On interior lots, wing walls or archways may extend along
the front building line to any interior side lot line;



      3.   On corner lots, wing walls or archways may extend to the
interior side lot line and six feet into the required front yard, which would
be a side yard if it were an interior lot;



      4.   In all cases where a wing wall, archway or extension of
the front facade is installed, access to the rear yard for pedestrians shall
be provided.



   B.   An unenclosed balcony, porch, terrace or an awning may project
into the required front yard or open space for a distance not to exceed ten
feet or into the required rear yard or open space for a distance not to
exceed 15 feet. Seasonal enclosures, such as glass enclosed or screened-in
porches, patios, terraces or decks, not exceeding one story, or fifteen feet
in height, may project into the required rear yard or open space for a
distance not to exceed ten feet. No more than 25% of each elevation of the
seasonal enclosure (as measured from the finished floor) shall be constructed
of wood, aluminum, vinyl, brick, stone or other opaque building material. The
remaining area shall be screen, glass or other approved transparent materials.



   C.   A decorative deck shall be permitted to project not more than
15 feet into the required rear yard or open space, provided the following
conditions are met:



      1.   The deck does not encroach into any easement;



      2.   The deck conforms with applicable side yard setback
requirements;



      3.   The deck is located not less than ten feet from any
detached accessory building; (This separation shall not apply to any
accessory structure.)



      4.   Any additional structure attached to the deck, such as a
gazebo or sauna, shall be located at least ten feet from the principal
residential structure;



      5.   The deck and all other appurtenant facilities shall
conform with any applicable codes and ordinances.



   D.   A building or structure that has been constructed which does
not exceed the square footage of the building or structure as shown on the
approved plot plan or site plan may project not more than six inches into the
required yard area without obtaining a variance to the minimum setback.  The
preceding sentence shall not apply if a variance has been approved to allow a
reduced setback in the area of the projection of the building or structure,
or if the building or structure as actually constructed exceeds the square
footage of the building  or structure shown on the approved plot plan or
site plan.  In all instances where (i) a variance to the required setback
standard in the area of the projection has previously been approved, (ii) the
projection into the setback area exceeds six inches, or (iii) the square
footage of the building or structure as actually constructed exceeds that
shown on the approved plot plan or site plan, a variance must be secured from
the Zoning Board of Appeals in order to permit the building or structure to
remain in the required minimum setback area.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 15, 8-8-90; Ord. No. 278-R, § 15, 8-20-96; Ord. No.
278-AA, §§ 11, 12, 3-20-01; Ord. No. 278-CC, § 14, 6-3-03; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 28.11.  PUBLIC UTILITY ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT ENCLOSURES.



   A.   There shall be no more than one structure for each zoning lot,
which shall be freestanding with a maximum floor area of 264 square feet
devoted to such use.



   B.   The structure shall be located in the rear yard in accordance
with the standards applicable to accessory structures where a principal
building or use already exists on the property. Where such facility is the
only principal use upon the site, the facility shall meet the setback
requirements applicable to principal structures.



   C.   On sites already developed with a single family residence, such
a facility shall be permitted only if the lot exceeds one-third acre or
14,520 square feet.



   D.   The maximum height of the structure shall be 15 feet.



   E.   Outdoor storage shall be prohibited.



   F.   No monopole, lattice or similarly designed freestanding tower
or antenna shall be permitted.



   G.   All driveways or maneuvering areas servicing the facility shall
be hard surfaced, installed and maintained by the public utility in
accordance with all applicable city standards.



   H.   The parking of vehicles pertaining to said use shall be limited
to the use of such vehicles in the performance of ongoing service work or
repairs to the facility for the period of time necessary to complete such
service or repairs.



   I.   The structure shall be maintained against deterioration and/or
damage from the elements or from any other cause by prompt and appropriate
repairs, painting and other protective measures.



(Ord. No. 278-T, § 13, 6-3-97)



SECTION 28.12.  RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY.



   A decorative masonry entranceway structure (including signage meeting
the requirements of section 28.13 paragraph E.14.) shall be permitted to be
located either within a boulevard of a street leading into the residential
development or upon a private easement granted to a subdivision association
(or similar perpetual entity) pertaining to property near the entrance to the
development. The subdivision association (or similar entity) shall have the
responsibility for maintaining the entranceway structure. Such structure
shall comply with applicable corner clearance requirements and, if located
within a boulevard, shall be set back at least 12 feet measured from the
extended right-of-way line of the street perpendicular to the boulevard and
shall not exceed six feet in height without approval of the Planning
Commission as a special approval land use meeting the requirements of Article
25. Columns, corner posts and other architectural details of an entranceway
structure shall not exceed ten feet in height without approval of the
Planning Commission as a special land use. An agreement providing for the
maintenance of the structure in recordable form satisfactory to the city
shall be furnished to the city prior to erection of the structure.



(Ord. No. 278-L, § 2, 6-9-92; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 7, 10-5-04)



SECTION 28.13.  SIGNS.



   A.   Findings.  The City Council finds:



      1.   Signs are a separate and distinct use of the property
upon which they are located and affect the uses and users of adjacent
streets, sidewalks, and other areas open to the public.



      2.   Signs are also an important means of communication for
businesses, organizations, individuals, and government.



      3.   Depending on their size, numbers, and character, signs
may attract or repel visitors, affect the visual quality enjoyed daily by
residents, affect the safety of vehicular travel and pedestrians, and define
the character of the community. 



      4.   Aesthetic considerations impact economic values as well
as public health, safety, and welfare. 



      5.   Signs also take up space and may obstruct views, distract
motorists, displace alternative uses for land, and pose other problems that
legitimately call for regulation.



      6.   The unregulated installation and display of signs
constitutes a public nuisance detrimental to the public health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare.



      7.   Therefore, the purpose of this section is to establish
reasonable regulations pertaining to the time, place, and manner in which
outdoor signs and window signs may be installed and maintained in order to
achieve the following purposes:



         a.   Promotion of the general health, safety, and
welfare, including the creation of an attractive and harmonious environment;



         b.   Maintenance and enhancement of the visual quality
(aesthetics) of the community;



         c.   Improvement of pedestrian and motorist safety by
avoiding saturation and confusion in the field of vision, by directing and
controlling  pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and by minimizing
distractions and obstacles to clear views of the road and of directional or
warning signs;



         d.   Protection and enhancement of economic viability by
assuring that the City of Sterling Heights will be a visually pleasant place
to visit or live;



         e.   Protection of property values and private/public
investments in property;



         f.   Protection of views of the natural landscape and
sky;



         g.   Protection of the public investment in the
creation, maintenance, safety, and appearance of the city's streets,
highways, and other areas open to the public;



         h.   Protection and enhancement of the city's
attractiveness as a place for economic development and growth;



         i.   Avoidance of personal injury and property damage
from structurally unsafe signs;



         j.   Provision of effective and efficient opportunities
for business identification by reducing competing demands for visual
attention;



         k.   Allow for expression by signage subject to
reasonable regulation.



   B.   Intent.  The intent of this section is to regulate signage
within the City of Sterling Heights in order to preserve the city's tradition
and reputation as a community with a rich mix of land uses that blend into a
landscape of high aesthetic quality.  The regulation of signage is further
intended to enhance the physical appearance of the city so that it remains an
appealing and desirable place to live, work, and visit.  The provisions of
this section are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve the
purposes set forth herein and to preserve the scenic and natural beauty of
designated areas, make the city a more enjoyable and pleasing community, and
create a more attractive economic and business climate, while at the same
time reducing signage distractions, eliminating hazards caused by signs, and
minimizing confusion caused by conflicting adjacent and/or clustered signs.



   C.   Scope.  The City Council further finds that many of the signs
allowed in this section are situational, and the likelihood of multiple
simultaneous situations arising on a lot at any particular time is remote. 
Therefore, the number of signs allowed on a lot is reasonable and allows
alternative channels of communication as situations arise without adversely
impacting the purposes of this section.



   D.   Definitions.  In addition to the general definitions set forth
in this zoning ordinance, the following definitions shall apply to the
regulations set forth in this section.



      ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW BOARD.  A board comprised of the Building
Official, City Engineer, and City Development Director to hear requests for
administrative modification or administrative appeals permitted by this
section.



      AGRICULTURAL SALES SIGN.  An accessory sign relating to the land
use function of selling agricultural, dairy, livestock, or poultry products
raised or produced at the location where the sign is installed.



      DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign directing vehicular or pedestrian
traffic to parking areas, loading areas, or to portions of a building or site.



      ELECTRONIC MESSAGE BOARD.  A freestanding sign that uses light
emitting diodes (LED) to electronically change the image or message displayed
on the message board.



      FESTOON SIGN.  Light bulbs, ribbons, streamers, or pinwheels, or
light strips, banners, pennants, balloons, search lights, or similar objects
and features, which are not an integral physical part of the building or
structure they are intended to serve and which are hung or strung for the
purpose of drawing attention.



      FLASHING, ANIMATED, OR MOVING SIGN.  A sign that intermittently
reflects lights from either an artificial source or from the sun; a sign
which has movement of any illumination such as intermittent, flashing, or
varying intensity or a sign that has any visible portions in motion, either
constantly or at intervals, which motion may be caused either by artificial
or natural sources.  An electronic message board that otherwise meets the
requirements of this section is not a flashing, animated, or moving sign.



      FREESTANDING SIGN.  A sign located in or upon the ground or
attached to something requiring location on the ground, such as a
freestanding frame, mast, or pole, which is not attached to any principal or
accessory structure.



      IDENTIFICATION SIGN OR NAMEPLATE.  A wall sign stating the name
of a person or firm, or stating the name or description of the permitted use
of the premises.



      MAXIMUM SIZE (OF A SIGN).  The total area of a sign included
within the rectangle, triangle, or circle caused by encompassing the
outermost portions of the sign or around the outermost edges of a sign formed
of letters or symbols only.  On signs with more than one side, this
measurement shall be determined with reference to the area contained on one
side of the sign, including all openings.



      MONUMENT SIGN.  A freestanding sign attached to a permanent
foundation with decorative base located on the ground with no exposed poles
or other supporting devices.



      OFF-PREMISES SIGN.  A sign that communicates messages relating
to any activity or use not related to the permitted use of the premises upon
which the sign is installed.



      PORTABLE SIGN.  A sign without a permanent foundation and not
permanently attached to a fixed location which can be carried, towed, hauled,
or driven and is primarily designed or installed to be mobile rather than be
limited to a fixed location regardless of modifications that limit its
mobility, such as, but not limited to, vehicles, trailers, "A" frame,
"T"-shaped, or inverted "T"-shaped sign structures.



      PROJECTING SIGN.  A sign which is affixed to or supported by any
building or structure, or part thereof, which extends beyond the plane of the
building wall, or part thereof, or structure, by more than 12 inches.



      PUBLIC SIGN.  A sign installed or required by any governmental
entity to provide information to the public.



      REAL ESTATE DEVELOPMENT SIGN.  A temporary sign permitted for
real estate development projects that have received site plan approval and
are placed on the premises of a real estate development to indicate a
proposed start date or to provide information regarding available properties
or tenant spaces within the development.



      RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN.  A permanent sign
installed to exhibit the name of the residential development within which it
is installed.



      ROOF SIGN.  A sign located on or above the roof of any building
and which projects above or beyond the eave, roof, or parapet, or which is
attached to a mansard type roof.



      SIGN.  The use of any words, numerals, figures, devices,
inflatable moving advertising products, designs, logos, or trademarks which
direct attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution, message,
or business, or by which anything is made known to the general public, and
which is visible and discernible off the lot or from any public right-of-way.



      SIGN AREA.  Unless otherwise noted, the total area within any
circle, triangle, rectangle, or other geometric shape or envelope enclosing
the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any similar figure
or element of the sign.  The area of a double-faced sign shall be computed
using only one face of the sign, provided that the outline and dimensions of
both faces are identical and that the faces are back-to-back so that only one
face is visible at any location.  The sign area shall not include any
supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such feature
otherwise complies with the requirements of this section and is clearly
incidental to the sign itself.  References in this section to the square
footage of signs are references to the measurement of the sign area unless
otherwise specified.







      SIGN HEIGHT.  Measured as the vertical distance from the normal
grade directly below the sign to the highest point of the sign or sign
structure, whichever is higher, and shall include the sign base.  References
to maximum height and height limitations in this section are references to
this definition unless otherwise specified.











      SUPER REGIONAL MALL.  A shopping mall with over 800,000 square
feet of gross leasable area which serves as the dominant shopping venue for
the region in which it is located.



      SUPER REGIONAL MALL BOULEVARD ENTRANCE SIGN.  A sign identifying
a super regional mall that is located upon the median of each boulevard
leading directly into a super regional mall development.



      SUPER REGIONAL MALL DIRECTIONAL SIGN.  A sign directing
vehicular and pedestrian traffic to particular businesses within a super
regional mall that is located upon a private easement of a lot or parcel
adjacent to the ring road of the super regional mall or the boulevard leading
directly into the super regional mall development from a major thoroughfare
as identified on the Master Road Plan.



      SUPER REGIONAL MALL FESTOON SIGN.  A banner style sign attached
to a parking lot light pole located upon a lot or parcel abutting a ring road
of a super regional mall development.  Such signs must be double-sided pole
pocket style.



      SUPER REGIONAL MALL PRIMARY ENTRANCE SIGN.  A sign identifying a
super regional mall and its major tenants, and promoting events and
activities taking place at the super regional mall that is located upon a
private easement of a lot or parcel adjoining a major thoroughfare as set
forth on the Master Road Plan.



      TEMPORARY SIGN.  A sign not permanently attached to the ground,
a structure, or a building and not supported by a permanent frame.



         a.   A long-term temporary sign is a temporary sign
constructed of durable, weather-resistant, wind-resistant materials
equivalent or substantially as durable as vinyl, fabric, wind mesh, acrylic,
polycarbonate, treated wood, aluminum, and aluminum composite, and affixed to
a durable, weather-resistant, wind-resistant frame.



         b.   A short-term temporary sign is a temporary sign
constructed of less durable non-rigid or semi-rigid materials, such as paper,
cardboard, polystyrene, foam PVC, foam board, and untreated wood, and affixed
to a frame not designed for long-term outdoor sustainability, such as thin
wire frames, hollow or lightweight plastic frames, and frames consisting of
non-rigid or semi-rigid materials. 



         c.   A flag is a short-term temporary sign made of
cloth, fabric, bunting, nylon, or similar flexible material.



      WALL SIGN.  A sign attached to, placed flat against, or
otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall or surface of any building, confined
within the limits thereof, and no portion of which projects more than 12
inches beyond the wall, but which may or may not project above the roof or
parapet.



      WARNING SIGN.  A sign that provides a warning or a notice to
persons on, or entering upon, the premises on which the sign is located
including, but not limited to, signs that guide vehicular or pedestrian
traffic within, but not at the entrance of, a development, identify hazards
and possibly dangerous conditions, ensure public safety, or are required by
law to be installed.



      WINDOW SIGN.  A sign consisting of words, numerals, or
trademarks displayed in, attached to, or painted on a window.



   E.   General conditions. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
following regulations shall apply to all signs installed or located in any
use district:



      1.   All signs shall conform to all ordinances and regulations
of the City of Sterling Heights, including, but not limited to, other
sections of this zoning ordinance, the City's Code of Ordinances, and any
other codes or regulations governing signage.



      2.   Signs shall not be placed in, project into, or overhang
any public right-of-way or dedicated public easement, existing or proposed,
unless placed or approved for placement by the city or applicable
governmental entity or agency.



      3.   Signs shall not be placed on city property unless placed
or approved for placement by the city.



      4.   Signs shall not be placed on utility poles, utility
boxes, traffic control devices, telecommunications towers, sidewalks, lamp
posts, hydrants, bridges, public property, public ways, easements, or trees
unless placed or approved for placement by a governmental entity as public
signs or warning signs.



      5.   Permanent signs shall not be placed in a required side
yard setback or within 12 feet of a public right-of-way.



      6.   Signs shall not be placed in a manner that obstructs or
diminishes sight lines for vehicular travel, obstructs driver vision, or
creates potential hazards to pedestrian safety.  All signs shall comply with
the corner clearance requirements set forth in Section 28.03.



      7.   Signs must have a minimum clearance of eight feet six
inches above a non-public sidewalk and provide appropriate emergency vehicle
clearance above driveways and maneuvering lanes.



      8.   Applications for approval of a sign permit will not be
processed or placed on an agenda for any public hearing, nor will a sign
permit be issued, on properties with outstanding and unresolved code
violations, including but not limited to violations of the International
Property Maintenance Code as adopted and locally amended by the city, unless
the property owners and occupants have executed a code compliance agreement
with the city setting forth a written commitment by, and contractual
obligation of, the applicant and property owner to bring the site and/or
building into full compliance with all provisions of the applicable code
within a specific time period acceptable to the City Development Director.



      9.   Signs shall not have more than two sides.



      10.   No sign shall be painted directly onto the wall of a
building. 



      11.   Signs shall not be equipped with audio capabilities and
sound shall not be projected from any sign, except that menu boards approved
as part of a drive through facility or signage designed for purposes of
complying with laws enacted for the protection of persons with disabilities
shall not be restricted by this provision.



      12.   Signs may not project images beyond the face of the sign
and may not emit any odors or visible matter such as smoke or steam.



      13.   No person, entity, owner, business, or tenant shall
allow an obsolete sign to be maintained on property for more than 30 days
after same has become obsolete because of discontinuance of the business,
service, or activity which the sign advertises, relocation to another site,
or for any other reason.  The fact that the obsolete sign is nonconforming
shall not be construed as modifying any of the requirements of this section. 



      14.   Every sign, including the sign structure, shall be
maintained in a safe structural condition and in a neat, clean, secure, and
attractive condition, with upright, secure supports.  All sign materials
shall be kept free of defective or missing parts, peeling, corrosion, or
other surface or support deterioration, and in compliance with the current
provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code, with local
amendments as adopted by the city.  All sign copy shall be maintained
intact, free of defacement, and free of missing characters.  If the sign is
illuminated, all lighting fixtures and sources of illumination shall be
maintained in a manner that renders them safe and in proper working order. 



         a.   Violation of these provisions shall subject the
responsible party to the remedial and enforcement provisions set forth
elsewhere in this section and in Section 11-141 of the City Code.



      15.   For all signs other than a sign within a public
right-of-way, the sign setback shall be measured from the property line or,
in the case of an access easement, from the edge of the easement, to the
closest point of the sign. 







   F.   Signs authorized in every zoning district.



      1.   Public signs.



      2.   Traffic control devices on private or public property,
installed and maintained to comply with the Michigan Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices and, if not covered, with the Manual on Uniform
Traffic Control Devices adopted by the Federal Highway Administration.



      3.   Numerals that identify the address of the property in
accordance with applicable laws, codes, and regulations, so that public
safety responders can easily identify the address from the public street.



         a.   Unless an alternative requirement is adopted in the
City Code or as part of a technical code adopted by the city, address numbers
for all commercial buildings shall be displayed on the facade of the building
adjacent to a public entrance to the building and each tenant space with its
own address, and on a freestanding sign at the front of the site.  For
multiple tenant buildings, the freestanding sign shall include the address
range of all addresses contained within the building.  Further, numerals
shall also be displayed at the rear entrance of the building/tenant space if
there is access to a hard-surfaced area upon which vehicular traffic may
maneuver.  All address numbers shall be at least 4 inches in height.  The
color of the required numbers shall starkly contrast the background to which
they are affixed.  Because the required numbers are for emergency
responders, they shall be excluded from any calculations of the property's
total permitted signage.



      4.   Required government signs that warn of a danger or
prohibit access to the property either generally or specifically.



      5.   Signs installed by MISS DIG, utility companies, lawn
treatment companies, and similar signs intended to warn of a danger or alert
the reader to a potentially dangerous condition or the existence of utility
pipes or lines on the property.



      6.   In addition to one United States flag and one official
flag of the State of Michigan displayed on a permitted flag pole or on a flag
staff affixed to the house on a single-family residential property, up to two
additional flags may be displayed on a permitted flag pole or on a staff
affixed to the house without being counted against the individual sign
limitations or the total square footage allowed under this section for
temporary signage.



   G.   Prohibited signs.



      1.   Signs that violate any federal, state, or local law,
code, or regulation.



      2.   Signs that violate zoning regulations governing home
occupations as an accessory use.



      3.   Festoon signs.



      4.   Projecting signs.



      5.   Signs whose construction, design, location, or other
physical characteristics are determined by any code official or law
enforcement official to create a safety hazard or to be anathema to the
general welfare, including but not limited to:



         a.   Signs of a size, location, movement, coloring, or
manner of illumination which may be confused with or construed as, or which
may conflict with, a traffic control device, or which hide from view any
traffic or street sign or signal.



         b.   Signs consisting of moored balloons or other type
of tethered floating signs unless approved by the City Planner in conjunction
with an approved temporary use and if tethered to the ground.



         c.   Banners, posters, pennants, ribbons, streamers, LED
lights, strings of light bulbs, spinners, or other similarly moving devices
or signs which may move or swing as a result of wind pressure or other power
source, unless approved by the City Planner in conjunction with approval of a
temporary use for a special event of limited duration, permitted as holiday
decorations, or otherwise permitted elsewhere in this section. 



         d.   Signs which have blinking, flashing, or fluttering
lights or other illuminating devices which exhibit movement.



         e.   Roof signs.



         f.   Signs that consist of or include a searchlight,
beacon, strobe light, or similar form of illumination.



         g.   Signs that contain or consist of strings of light
bulbs.



         h.   Portable signs kept in a stationary location and
visible from a public way. 



            1.   Exception:  Operable vehicles that are
properly licensed and plated and which are adorned or embedded with permanent
graphics, information, and/or messages that are visible to passersby shall
only be parked on a property owned or operated by the vehicle owner or
pertaining to an activity underway on the property where it is parked and
shall be kept in a lawful vehicular parking or storage location a minimum of
30 feet from any public right-of-way.



   H.   Illumination.



      1.   No sign shall include or use flashing or intermittent
illumination.



      2.   Flashing, animated, and/or moving signs are prohibited.



      3.   Illumination of signs shall be directed or shaded so as
not to interfere with the vision of persons on the adjacent roadway or with
adjacent property owners. 



      4.   No illuminated sign shall be installed if it creates a
distracting or hazardous condition to a motorist, pedestrian, or the general
public, or which adversely impacts neighboring or nearby properties or uses.



      5.   No exposed reflective type bulb, par spot, or
incandescent lamp which exceeds 25 watts shall be exposed to direct view from
a public street or highway, but may be used for indirect light illumination
of the display surface of a sign.



      6.   Electronic message boards:



         a.   Studies show that there is a correlation between
electronic changeable copy signage and the distraction of drivers, who may be
distracted not only by a changing message, but also by knowing that the sign
has a changing message and waiting for the next change to occur.  Despite
these public safety concerns, however, there is also merit in allowing new
technologies to easily update signage messages, to minimize the proliferation
of signage by allowing multiple messages on a single sign, and to facilitate
expression with messages that are easily discernible, so long as restrictions
are in place to minimize the potential for driver distraction and to minimize
negative impact to residential districts where signs can adversely impact the
residential character of the area.  Therefore, the following regulations
shall apply to electronic message board signage:



            (1)   Display only static messages and/or images
that remain constant in illumination intensity and do not have movement or
the appearance or optical illusion of movement;



            (2)   The image or message of the sign does not
flash or scroll (vertically or horizontally);



            (3)   Not operate at an intensity level of more
than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light as measured at a distance of 150
feet;



            (4)   Be equipped with a fully operational light
sensor that automatically adjusts the intensity of the electronic message
board according to the amount of ambient light;



            (5)   Change from one message to another message
no more frequently than once every ten seconds and the actual change process
is accomplished instantly with no effects;



            (6)   Electronic message boards may operate only
when the nonresidential use to which they belong is open or between the hours
of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., whichever time period is shorter, if installed
on a property located adjacent to a residential property use, except that
noncommercial uses may also operate an approved electronic message board
until and during an event that is open to the public and held after 10:00
p.m.;



            (7)   Be designed to either display a full black
screen or turn off in the event of a malfunction;



            (8)   Not be authorized until the Building
Official is provided evidence that best industry practices for eliminating or
reducing uplight and light trespass were considered and built into the
electronic message board; and



            (9)   The area of an electronic message board may
not exceed 1/3 of the entire area of the freestanding sign.



         b.   The owner of an electronic message board shall
allow the city to use the electronic message board to communicate emergency
public service information approved by the City Community Relations
Director.  The operational restrictions on electronic message boards set
forth in this subsection shall not apply during any time that the electronic
message board is used to communicate authorized emergency public service
information for the city.



         c.   The owner agrees to (i) update with an approved
emergency public service information communication, or (ii) discontinue the
emergency public service message as soon as possible after receiving a
request from the City Community Relations Director.  The owner shall file
and keep current at all times with the Office of Community Relations the
name, email address, phone number, cell phone number, pager and other
available emergency contact information of the employee(s) or
representative(s) of the owner who has been authorized and designated by the
owner to communicate the approved emergency public service message using the
electronic message board.



      7.   Internally illuminated signs are not permitted on
properties utilized for residential purposes, with the exception of internal
illumination for the address of the property if the address is affixed to a
home, garage, or mailbox on the property.



   I.   Enforcement.



      1.   The city may remove any non-temporary sign which violates
any provisions of this section if the owner upon whose property the sign is
located fails to make the sign conform to the provisions of this section
within 48 hours of issuance of written notice of the violation. 



      2.   With respect to temporary or portable signs, in the
absence of prior permission having been granted by the property owner for the
immediate removal of signs in violation, the city may remove any such sign
which violates any provisions of this section if the owner upon whose
property the sign is located fails to make the sign conform to the provisions
of this ordinance within four hours of personal notice as defined below, or
within 48 hours of issuance of notice as defined below.  City officials may
mark offending signs in a manner reasonably required for future
identification.  In the event that a marked sign is moved to another
location, and such move does not cure the violation, the city shall not be
required to give any additional notice before impounding the sign as a
nuisance pursuant to the terms of this article. 



      3.   In the case of any sign which is located in, projects
into, or overhangs a public right-of-way or public easement in violation of
this section, the city may remove said sign without notice.



      4.   Signs impounded under this subsection will be logged and
stored by the city for retrieval by its owner.  Before any removed sign is
returned to its owner, a fee as determined by the city shall be paid for the
removal, storage, and reclamation.  Any sign which is removed in accordance
with this section shall be deemed abandoned if its owner or the person
responsible for the sign does not reclaim it within ten days of the date of
its removal, after which the city may dispose of the sign without any further
notice.



      5.   For purposes of this subsection, "issuance of notice" is
defined to include any of the following:



         a.   Facsimile, electronic mail, or first class mail
transmission of notice of a violation to either a person or committee
mentioned on the sign or to the person responsible for placing the sign or to
the property owner;



         b.   Posting of notice of a violation on or reasonably
near the sign which is in violation, so long as the posting is conspicuous
from the distance at which the sign in generally readable;



         c.   Posting of notice of a violation on or reasonably
near one or more entrances of a habitable building on the same property as
the sign, so long as the posting is conspicuous;



         d.   Transmission of a telephonic message which
indicates that a violation exists, and which offers a brief explanation of
the nature of the violation, recorded on an answering system of either a
person or committee mentioned on the sign or to the person responsible for
placing the sign or to the property owner.



      6.   For purposes of this subsection, "personal notice" means
personal contact by a Code Enforcement Officer, or other duly authorized
agent of the city, with either a person mentioned on the sign, the person
responsible for placing the sign, the property owner, or the property owner's
authorized representative or resident agent. "Personal contact" means that
the officer or agent initiated a person-to-person conversation, or some other
real-time communication via electronic means, whereby the officer or agent
communicated the existence of the violation and a brief explanation of its
nature.



      7.   For purposes of this subsection, the phrase "person
responsible" for a temporary sign is the person who places the sign, unless
the person first notifies the City Clerk's office in writing of another
person who is responsible.  Persons responsible for political campaign signs
also include the candidate for the political office advertised on the sign,
unless the candidate first notifies the City Clerk's office in writing of
another person who is responsible and the property owner.  In a campaign
regarding a ballot measure, the president or chair of the committee
supporting or opposing the ballot measure, as well as the property owner,
shall be deemed the responsible person, unless the City Clerk's office is
notified in writing of another person who is responsible.  The person who
places the sign, the candidate or the president as applicable must provide
the name, address, telephone number and signed consent of the other
responsible person. Persons residing or located outside of Michigan may not
be designated as responsible persons. The person placing the sign, or in the
case of political campaign signs, the candidate, or in the case of a ballot
measure, the committee president or chair, or in each of these cases the
other responsible person if so designated, shall be liable to pay any fees or
costs incurred for the removal and storage of illegal signs upon retrieval.
This subsection shall not be construed to place responsibility upon
responsible persons for civil infraction or misdemeanor violations of the
City Code.



      8.   Any company or individual which files a false affidavit
or application for any reason relating to signage under this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor punishable in accordance with the penalties
applicable to misdemeanors set forth in Section 1-9 of the City Code.



      9.   Owners, lessors, and lessees may all be held equally
responsible for violations of this section. 



   J.   Nonconformity and modification.



      1.   Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 27, signs
lawfully in existence on the date the provisions of the ordinance enacting
this section were first advertised, which do not conform to the provisions of
this section, but which were in compliance with the applicable regulations at
the time they were constructed, erected, installed, affixed, or maintained,
shall be regarded as nonconforming.  However, a sign installed during the
period of time following the day on which the United States Supreme Court
released its opinion in Reed v Town of Gilbert (June 18, 2015) and the date
the provisions of this section were first advertised for adoption shall not
be considered a nonconforming sign unless it conformed to the regulations in
effect on the day immediately preceding the release of the decision in Reed v
Town of Gilbert.



      2.   A nonconforming sign shall not be enlarged or extended.



      3.   A nonconforming sign shall not be moved to another
location on the same lot or to any other lot.



      4.   A nonconforming sign that is destroyed or damaged as a
result of factors beyond the control of the owner of the sign and the owner
of the premises on which the sign is located, to an extent the destruction or
damage exceeds 50% of its appraised value, shall not be replaced or restored
unless it complies with this section.



      5.   A nonconforming sign that is destroyed or damaged as a
result of factors beyond the control of the owner of the sign and the owner
of the premises on which the sign is located, to an extent the destruction or
damage is 50% or less of the appraised value, may be replaced or restored
provided that the replacement or restoration is completed within six months
after the date of the destruction or damage, and the sign is not enlarged or
extended.  The time for replacement or restoration may be extended for one
additional six month period if the Building Department verifies that the
replacement and/or restoration process is underway, is being pursued in good
faith, and delays in the process are reasonably related to insurance or other
financing delays beyond the control of the owner of the sign.



      6.   A nonconforming sign declared to be unsafe by a code
official because of the physical condition of the sign, including an unsafe
physical condition arising from the failure of the sign to be maintained,
shall be removed.



      7.   The owner of any premises on which there is installed a
nonconforming sign shall, upon notice from the City Planner, submit
verification within 60 days that the sign was lawfully in existence at the
time of adoption of these sign regulations. The City Planner shall maintain a
registry of such nonconforming signs.



   K.   Additional requirements.  In addition to the provisions set
forth above, the following requirements shall apply to various types of
signs, based on construction, design, or function, located in various use
districts as set forth in the following Sign Regulation Table.  However, the
Table is only intended as an easy reference chart, and the regulations set
forth following the Table are controlling if applicable to any particular
sign or situation, regardless of whether the Table omits a reference to the
regulation in any cell, row, or column.



 




SIGN REGULATION TABLE




Type of sign

 

Use Districts




One and two family residential

 

Multiple family & mobile home

 

Commercial

 

Office including office research

 

Industrial

 

Parking district



Agricultural Sales Sign
 

A, D, L

 

A, D, L

 

A, D

 

A, D

 

A, D

 

None



Billboard
 

B

 

B

 

B

 

B

 

B

 

None



Directional Sign
 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C

 

C



Freestanding Signs
 

D, L

 

D, L

 

D

 

D

 

D

 

D



Identification and Name Plate Signage
 

None

 

None

 

E

 

E

 

E

 

None



Real Estate Development Identification
 

F

 

F

 

F

 

F

 

F

 

None



Residential Subdivision Identification
 

G

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None

 

None



Super Regional Mall Signs
 

None

 

None

 

H, I, J, K

 

None

 

None

 

None



Temporary Signs
 

L

 

L

 

L

 

L

 

L

 

L



Wall Signs
 

M, N

 

M, N

 

N

 

N

 

N

 

None



Window Signs
 

None

 

None

 

O

 

O

 

O

 

None





 



Sign Table References:



   A.   Temporary agricultural sales signs shall be permitted only on
parcels at which the City Planner has verified the existence of lawful
agricultural sales activity.  Permanent agricultural signs are only
permitted in nonresidential zones, except that permanent agricultural signs
will be permitted in nonresidential zones for properties that do not have a
residential use as their principal use if the City Planner has verified the
principal use of the property as agricultural.



   B.   Billboards:



      1.   Billboards are freestanding off-premises signs. 



      2.   The City Council has determined that signs and billboards
located on premises to which they do not specifically relate, and which are
designed to capture the attention of motorists and others utilizing public
ways, create a danger to public safety by distracting the attention of
drivers from the roadway, who in some instances may focus on the message
being conveyed, the anticipated message to follow, and/or other function of a
billboard visible while operating a motor vehicle.  A number of national and
international studies during the period 2013 to 2016 have observed that
"driving irrelevant" material may make it difficult to extract information
that is necessary for safe driving; advertising signs affect driver attention
to the extent that road safety is compromised; clear evidence of impaired
driving performance became evident as drivers passed billboards at higher
speeds; and drivers glance more at the time of a switch to a new message
display than when a billboard is simply visible and stable. 



      3.   Further, the United States Supreme Court has recognized
that it is not speculative to recognize that billboards, by their very
nature, wherever located and however constructed, can be perceived as an
aesthetic harm.  An unmarred landscape promotes tourism and levels the
playing field between local businesses and national chains. 



      4.   Several states have completely banned billboards, and at
least two other states have banned the construction of any new billboards. 



      5.   Therefore, because billboards are only one form of
expression for messages that can be communicated in many other reasonable and
alternative ways, billboards are not permitted in the City of Sterling
Heights, except as may be permitted by any governmental entity not subject to
city regulation or control, in which instances all city regulations not
otherwise preempted shall still apply, and if not preempted such billboards
shall not exceed 25 feet in height or 150 square feet in area and shall be
subject to the city's sign permitting process. 



      6.   Nonconforming billboards in existence on the date this
subsection was adopted may be maintained and repaired so as to continue the
useful life of the sign.  However, no features or characteristics of
nonconforming billboards may be expanded, enlarged, or extended, and all of
the regulations in this section and in other sections of the City Code and
applicable technical codes shall apply to nonconforming and exempt billboards
in order to minimize their negative secondary effects, preserve the character
and repose of adjacent areas, protect property values, and reduce traffic and
similar hazards caused by undue distractions. 



   C.   Directional sign regulations and distinctions were recognized
by Reed v Gilbert (2015) as protecting vehicular and pedestrian safety, and
therefore they serve a compelling governmental interest. 



      1.   Directional signs shall be considered incidental, shall
be limited to one sign at each entrance, and shall not exceed four square
feet and four feet in height.  Directional signs set at an entrance point
may be located within a required yard subject to the sight line and clearance
distance restrictions set forth in this section. 



      2.   Directional, informational, and traffic control signs
placed by government entities are permitted in all zoning districts and shall
be installed, to the extent applicable, in accordance with the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 



   D.   Freestanding signs:



      1.   In all developments that require site plan approval
pursuant to Article 26, one permanent freestanding sign shall be permitted,
except as otherwise provided herein.



      2.   Permanent freestanding signs shall not exceed 15 feet in
height as measured from the approved grade. 



      3.   No sign shall be installed within the required corner
clearance area established in Section 28.03 nor within the corner clearance
area created by the two lines of the existing or proposed (whichever is
greater) right-of-way lines of exterior streets and the curb line of a
nonresidential entranceway, and the straight line connecting them at points
ten feet distant from where the right-of-way lines intersect.







         a.    Exception:  The sight distance triangle may be
extended by the city to conform to minimum Michigan Department of
Transportation sight distance standards or in situations when the City
Planner determines that an extension is required for public safety due to
topography, road alignment, or other physical conditions of the area.



      4.   Freestanding signs shall be designed to be compatible
with the architecture and approved masonry materials used on the principal
building.  All permanent freestanding signs shall be monument style with a
brick and/or decorative stone base with no exposed poles which is a minimum
of two feet or 20% of the total height of the sign and base, whichever is
greater.  The height of the base for permanent freestanding signs shall not
exceed 1½ times the width of the sign.



      5.   Up to 1/3 of a permitted freestanding sign may consist of
an electronic message board or changeable copy area.



      6.   For developments having more than one frontage on a major
or secondary thoroughfare having a right-of-way of at least 86 feet or
greater, one freestanding sign shall be permitted to be located on each
frontage, provided the distance between the two signs is not less than 500
feet measured along the abutting right-of-way line.



      7.   Permanent freestanding signs are not permitted on
single-family residential properties, with the exception of residential
subdivision identification signs as permitted in this section. 



      8.   Off-premises signs are prohibited.  Freestanding signs
on nonresidential properties must relate to the business, activity, or
service conducted on the premises upon which the sign is placed. 



         Exception:



         a.   Freestanding off-premises signs for business
tenants, if part of a unified development where separate parcels exist, so
long as no other freestanding sign already exists on the parcel where the
freestanding off-premises sign is proposed. 



         b.   Public signs, warning signs, and permitted
directional signs.



      9.   The maximum size of a freestanding monument sign may be
increased by 20% up to a maximum of 16 square feet provided the owner of the
property agrees in a recorded document to irrevocably dedicate that
additional dedicated square footage of the monument sign to solely advertise
that space is available for rent, lease, occupancy, or sale.



      10.   Permanent freestanding signs may be located in the
required front yard if they are at least 12 feet from the existing or planned
public right-of-way (whichever is greater) as shown in the Master Road Plan
or at least five feet back from the curb or pavement of any private street. 
Permanent freestanding signs shall not be located in a required side yard or
required rear yard.  Temporary freestanding signs may be located in the
required front yard if they are at least five feet from the public
right-of-way as shown on the Master Road Plan or at least five feet back from
the curb or pavement of any private street.



      11.   A permanent freestanding sign shall not be closer than
100 feet from any adjacent single or two family zoning district or 50 feet
from any off-site sign.



      12.   The maximum size of a freestanding sign in C-1, C-2,
C-3, C-4, O-1, O-2, O-3, OR, TRO, PCD, M-1, and M-2 Districts (and on
properties used for purposes that are only permitted in those districts)
shall not exceed one square foot for each two linear feet of street frontage
to which that sign is oriented.  In no instance shall the frontage of two or
more streets be combined in computing the maximum size permitted.  The
maximum size of any freestanding sign shall be 150 square feet.  A
freestanding sign may include an electronic message board provided the
requirements set forth in this section for electronic message boards are met.



   E.   An identification (nameplate) sign shall be considered
incidental, and one sign, not exceeding six square feet, may be installed by
each tenant.  In addition to the identification signs for occupants, the
rental and/or management office of the development may have one
identification sign not to exceed four square feet in size.



   F.   Real estate development signage is permitted as follows:



      1.   One two-sided sign or two one-sided signs shall be
permitted to be located at each entrance to the development which is located
on a major or secondary thoroughfare as identified upon the Master Road
Plan.  In addition, one two-sided sign shall be permitted to be located upon
a boulevard median of a collector, local, or private street leading directly
into the development.



      2.   Signs permitted under this subsection may not exceed a
maximum size of 25 square feet. 



      3.   All other provisions of Section 28.13 not in conflict
with this subsection shall apply.



   G.   Residential subdivision identification signs: 



      1.   Shall not exceed a maximum size of 25 square feet per
sign.



      2.   Shall be permitted to be located either upon masonry
walls along the perimeter of the development meeting the requirements of
Section 24.01 or upon a masonry entranceway structure meeting the
requirements of Section 28.12. 



      3.   One two-sided sign or two one-sided signs shall be
permitted to be located at each entrance to the development which is located
on a major or secondary thoroughfare as identified upon the Master Road
Plan.  In addition, one two-sided sign shall be permitted to be located upon
a boulevard median of a collector, local, or private street leading directly
into the development. 



      4.   The residential subdivision identification sign structure
shall be in scale with any adjoining landscape treatment. 



      5.   No entranceway sign structure permitted under this
subsection shall be constructed of exposed concrete block, cinder block,
precast concrete panels, or poured concrete. 



      6.   Any permitted residential subdivision identification sign
shall be located in either a common area of the development or upon property
for which a private easement has been granted to a subdivision association
(or similar entity) which shall have the responsibility for maintaining the
sign and any appurtenant structures.  An agreement providing for the
maintenance of the sign(s) or structure(s) in recordable form satisfactory to
the city shall be furnished to the city prior to installation of the sign(s)
or structure(s).



      7.   To the extent that any of the provisions of this section
are in conflict, mobile home park identification signage shall instead meet
the applicable requirements of Section 5.01.



   H.   One super regional mall boulevard entrance sign shall be
permitted to be located upon each boulevard leading from a major thoroughfare
to a super regional mall.  A super regional mall boulevard entrance sign
shall not exceed 48 square feet in area and six feet in height.



   I.   One super regional mall directional sign shall be permitted to
be located adjacent to the intersection of each entrance road and the ring
road of a super regional mall development upon either the property of the
super regional mall provided a satisfactory easement has been granted, or
within the city right of way of the boulevard leading from a major
thoroughfare to the super regional mall.  A super regional mall directional
sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.



   J.   One banner style Super regional mall festoon sign shall be
permitted to be attached to each parking lot pole located on a lot or parcel
abutting the interior roadway (or similar access system) of the super
regional mall shopping center development.  Such signs shall not exceed 54
inches in height and 30 inches in width and shall be hung vertically.  Such
signs shall be made of durable double sewn reinforced fabric of 16 ounce
weight or more.  Such signs shall contain the approved design logo of the
super regional mall district which shall comprise not less than 25% of the
area of the signs.



   K.   One super regional mall primary entrance sign shall be
permitted to be located adjacent to a major thoroughfare under the Master
Road Plan which abuts a super regional mall.  The super regional mall
primary entrance sign shall not exceed 300 square feet in area and 25 feet in
height.



   L.   Temporary signs:



      1.   Shall be maintained free of rust, corrosion, peeling,
breakage, graffiti, obfuscation, and all other damage or defacement.



      2.   All temporary signs shall be aesthetically pleasing and
designed and constructed of durable materials installed in conformance with
the current provisions of the Michigan Building Code, as amended, and
maintained in accordance with the provisions of the International Property
Maintenance Code, with local amendments, as adopted by the city. 



      3.   Shall not be installed in such a manner that it
interferes with, or might reasonably be expected to interfere with, vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.



      4.   Shall not be installed within any dedicated right-of-way.



      5.   Shall only be located on property with the approval of
the person or entity with authority to approve it.



      6.   Must be placed a minimum of five feet from any side
property line.



      7.   All temporary signs shall be removed within seven days
after they are no longer necessary for, or capable of, fulfilling their
intended purpose.



      8.   For long-term temporary signs, all ground-mounted support
posts shall be constructed of four-inch by four-inch pressure-treated posts
with decorative post caps.  All support posts and decorative post caps, and
other supporting framework, shall be painted a uniform color.



      9.   A temporary sign that is not permanently affixed to the
ground or to a permanent structure, or a sign that is mobile and can be moved
to another location, shall be stabilized so as not to pose a danger to public
safety.  Prior to the sign being installed, the Building Department shall
approve the method of stabilization.



      10.   On properties utilized as single-family residential:



         a.   Short-term temporary signs shall not exceed three
square feet.



         b.   Long-term temporary signs shall not exceed six
square feet.



         c.   Total square footage for all temporary signage
shall not exceed nine square feet.



         d.   The length shall not exceed the width of the sign
by more than a three-to-one ratio.



         e.   The height shall not exceed five feet from top to
ground.



      11.   On properties that are not utilized as single-family
residential:



         a.   Because non-residential uses are afforded a variety
of unique options for expression of commercial and site-usage messages based
on the inherent distinctions between residential and non-residential property
uses, including but not limited to freestanding signage, wall signage, window
signage, and identification signage, the city deems the societal interests in
limiting the proliferation of blight and reducing driver distraction and
vision obstructions to be paramount over the ability to communicate
additional commercial messages through signage.  Therefore, temporary signs
relating to the commercial use of the property are not permitted unless
approved as an integral but incidental part of a temporary use permit, the
process for which is set forth elsewhere in the city's zoning ordinance. 
The term "commercial use of the property" means any activity on the site that
is related to, or which promotes, the use(s) for which a certificate of
occupancy has been granted by the city, or for which any use variance or
special approval land use has been approved.



         b.   For all temporary signage not relating to the
commercial use of the property:



            (1)   Short-term temporary signs shall not exceed
12 square feet.



            (2)   Long-term temporary signs shall not exceed
16 square feet.



            (3)   Total square footage for all temporary
signage shall not exceed 40 square feet.



            (4)   The length shall not exceed the width of the
sign by more than a six-to-one ratio.



            (5)   The height shall not exceed five feet from
top to ground.



            (6)   No temporary signs are permitted until
unused space on any building or monument sign is filled, unless an
administrative modification is granted by the Administrative Review Board, or
a variance is approved by the Zoning Board of Appeals.  If a temporary sign
is placed and thereafter 16 or more square feet of unused space on the
existing monument sign becomes available, the temporary sign shall be removed
within 60 days.



            (7)   Standards for an administrative modification
from the Administrative Review Board:



               (a)   The property owner has less than 16
square feet of unused space on the existing monument sign available; or



               (b)   The property owner has less than 16
square feet of usable contiguous space on the existing monument sign
available, even if there is more than 16 square feet of unused space on the
existing monument sign.



            (8)   Standards for a variance requested from the
Zoning Board of Appeals:



               (a)   The property owner demonstrates an
unfair or undue hardship or practical difficulty in complying with one or
more of the provisions of this subsection relating to temporary signs.



               (b)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may
consider the additional factors set forth elsewhere in the zoning ordinance
for granting a variance, but may relax or waive those considerations due to
the temporary nature of the variance, which shall expire as proscribed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals.



               (c)   The Zoning Board of Appeals may impose
conditions deemed reasonable under the circumstances underlying the variance
request in order to protect the character of the surrounding area, honor the
spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance and the regulations governing
signage, and do substantial justice to the applicant and nearby property
owners.



            (9)   A property owner aggrieved by a decision of
the Administrative Review Board may appeal that decision to the Zoning Board
of Appeals, which shall determine whether there is competent, substantial,
and material evidence to support the decision of the Administrative Review
Board.  The Zoning Board of Appeals may affirm, modify, or reverse the
decision of the Administrative Review Board.  The Zoning Board of Appeals
may impose new conditions if it modifies the decision of the Administrative
Review Board or grants approval of the property owner's request for relief.



      12.   A cold air balloon may be permitted in conjunction with
a temporary use permit for a period not exceeding five days in any calendar
year, provided that it is safely secured to the ground as determined by the
Building Department. 



      13.   Registration requirements.  Every temporary sign in a
non-residential zoning district or installed on any vacant parcel within the
city shall be registered prior to installation.  A permit is not required.



         a.   Any sign still installed after the expiration of
its registration shall be subject to removal by the city.



         b.   Registration may be submitted through an online
portal on the city's website or by using a form provided by the City Clerk.



         c.   The registration shall include the following
information in order for the registration to be deemed effective:



            (1)   The address of the location for the
temporary sign.



            (2)   A description of the sign (or image) with
the sign's dimensions;



            (3)   The first and last name of the registrant;



            (4)   Whether the sign is a short-term or
long-term temporary sign;



            (5)   If the registrant is not the owner or a
person with authority over the use of the location, the name, telephone
number or e-mail address for the individual who provided permission for
installation of the sign;



            (6)   A mailing address, telephone number, and
e-mail address for the registrant to which the City Clerk will provide
confirmation of the registration or any deficiencies in the registration
information; and



            (7)   A certification that the registrant has
permission or authority from the property owner or person with authority over
the property for installation of the sign.



         d.   If the registrant does not specify a start date for
the sign to be displayed, registration of the sign shall be effective upon
written confirmation by the city that all information required by this
subsection has been accurately provided.



         e.   No fee shall be charged for registering any
temporary signs.



         f.   Registration of a short-term temporary sign is
valid for 90 days.  Registration of any long-term temporary sign is valid
for one year.  One renewal for an additional 90 days for short-term
temporary signs and for an additional one year for long-term temporary signs
shall be granted administratively upon written request so long as the sign
remains in compliance with all other requirements of this section.  No
additional registrations for the same location shall be accepted by the city
during any 12-month period, and if the sign pertains to an event, occurrence,
or activity, no registration shall be accepted by the city more than 90
calendar days prior to said event, occurrence, or activity. 



         g.   Any sign still installed after the expiration of
its registration shall be subject to removal by the city.



         h.   When such signs exceed the quantity or size
limitations on any parcel, those with a registration that became effective
first in time shall have priority to remain in place.



         i.   A property owner may revoke, in writing, any sign
registration for the owner's property at any time.  Revocation shall be
effective immediately upon verification by the city of the veracity of the
written revocation.  The city may immediately remove any signs for which
revocation of a registration has become effective under this subsection.



         j.   These registration requirements do not apply to
temporary signs authorized by the city in conjunction with a temporary use
permit.



         k.   Registration of a temporary sign that is not
otherwise permitted does not validate the installation of the sign and will
not be deemed a defense to any removal or enforcement by the city.



      14.   Temporary signage not exceeding 100 square feet to be
used in conjunction with a municipality-sponsored event shall not require
review, registration, or permit.



      15.   All temporary signs shall be subject to removal by the
city if the signs are placed within any right-of-way or have become
dilapidated, damaged, dangerous, faded, or an attractive nuisance. 



      16.   Signs removed by the city shall be held for ten days
before disposal, and may be retrieved during that time by the owner or
individual responsible for the sign upon payment of any administrative
processing fee established by the city's annual appropriations ordinance. 



         a.   Alternatively, the owner or individual responsible
for the sign may appeal the city's determination regarding the improper
condition of the sign to the Administrative Review Board.  In such instance,
the city shall retain the sign until the appeal is concluded, but need not
retain the sign for any future appeal efforts if the appeal is denied by the
Administrative Review Board.  If the Administrative Review Board grants the
appeal and deems the sign to be satisfactory, the administrative processing
fee shall be waived and the sign shall be returned to the applicant within
one business day, and may not be removed by the city again for a minimum of
14 days or for such other period of time deemed appropriate by the
Administrative Review Board.



   M.   For uses other than residential in residential zoning districts
(i.e. farming, agricultural, schools, churches, cemeteries, nursing homes,
private clubs, fraternal organizations), there shall be allowed one wall sign
with a maximum area of 32 square feet or one freestanding sign with a maximum
area of 32 square feet and not exceeding seven feet in height.



   N.   The maximum size of wall signage in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, O-1,
O-2, O-3, OR, TRO, PCD, M-1, and M-2 Districts (and on properties used for
purposes that are only permitted in those districts) for buildings and for
individual tenant spaces shall not exceed 10% of the total area of the
structure frontage, including the area of all fenestration, and in no
instance shall the sign area of all wall signage exceed 200 square feet.  A
wall sign may be located on the front, rear, or side facade of the
building.  Wall signs shall not extend above the top of a parapet wall or an
eve line at the wall, whichever is higher.



      1.   A wall sign shall be installed only on the wall of the
tenant space to which the sign pertains and shall be aesthetically and
thematically compatible with the building, other wall signs, the overall
development of the parcel, and nearby properties.



      2.   The structure frontage for calculating the permitted wall
signage is the overall horizontal length of the outside structure wall of the
establishment that fronts a public or private roadway and is then multiplied
by the overall height of the walls of such structure.  If the structure has
more than one wall plane which runs parallel to the frontage road, the sum of
all such wall planes may be calculated in determining overall structure
frontage.



      3.   An identification sign shall be considered incidental,
and one sign, not exceeding six square feet, may be installed by each tenant.



      4.   One additional wall sign relating to the commercial use
of the property is permitted on those facades of a building that are not
visible from a public way, subject to a maximum size limitation of 10% of the
tenant space facade for each tenant, or 10% of the building facade, on which
the wall sign is located. 



   O.   Window signage is permitted but the maximum size of a window
sign shall not exceed 25% of the total glass area of the facade it is located
on, and in no instance shall a window sign exceed 150 square feet in area. 



(Ord. No. 278-G, § 20, 9-18-90; Ord. No. 278-L, §§ 3-5, 6-2-92; Ord. No.
278-Q, § 13, 10-3-95; Ord. No. 278-R, §§ 16-19, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-T,
§§ 14, 15, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 287-U, §§ 15-17; Ord. No. 278-X, §§ 21, 22,
4-6-99; Ord. No. 278-Y, § 42, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-Z, § 1, 11-8-00; Ord.
No. 278-CC, §§ 15, 16, 17, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-HH, § 1, 2, 12-20-05; Ord.
No. 278-JJ, §§ 9-12, 3-4-08; Ord. No. 278-LL, §§ 1-2, 7-1-08; Ord. No.
278-QQ, § 2, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 14, 8-5-09; Ord. No. 278-RR, §§
3, 8, 10-18-11; Ord. No. 278-TT, § 1, 4-16-13; Ord. No. 278-UU, § 1, 2,
4-16-13; Ord. No. 278-VV, §§ 1-13, 4-1-14; Ord. No. 278-xx, § 1, 7-19-16)



SECTION 28.14.  TEMPORARY USES.



   Temporary uses  may be permitted to accommodate (i) businesses with a
property interest in the site that request approval to promote a seasonal
sale or special event on the site, or to allow non-profit, service, or
charitable organizations to conduct a special activity on the business' site;
(ii) non-profit, service, and charitable organizations conducting fundraising
or promotional events and activities; and (iii) city and governmental
agencies conducting fundraising or promotional events and activities.  By
way of example and not limitation, such events and activities might include
tent sales, sidewalk sales, carnivals and fairs, Christmas tree sales,
pumpkin sales, seasonal flower and plant sales, seasonal accessory
agricultural sales (subject to Section 3.03 C), outdoor fundraising
activities, blood drives, and other temporary uses designed to promote the
principal business or to raise funds for a non-profit organization, or for
the benefit of the city or governmental agency or the public.



   A.    A properly completed application shall be filed on a form
specified by the city accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale showing the
proposed layout of the site along with the fee established by the City
Council in the annual Appropriations Ordinance.  The property owner shall
provide a list of the temporary uses (and their duration) which have been
approved or operated upon the site during the calendar year in which the use
is proposed and any other temporary uses for which the applicant will seek
approval during the remainder of such year.An application for approval of a
temporary use shall not be processed or placed on an agenda for a public
hearing, if a public hearing is required for approval under the Zoning
Ordinance, if the site and/or building where the temporary use is proposed to
be located is subject to any outstanding, unresolved Property Maintenance
Code violation.  Any outstanding Property Maintenance Code violation must be
first resolved by correcting the violation or by having the
applicant/property owner sign a written code compliance agreement with the
City setting forth a written commitment by the applicant/property owner to
bring the site and/or building into full compliance with all provisions of
the Property Maintenance Code within a specific time period acceptable to the
City Development Director.



   B.    The applicant must provide written verification of its
property interest in the site, which at a minimum shall be a leasehold
interest, land contract, or deed.  If the applicant is not the owner of the
site, the owner of the site shall be a co-applicant and shall also provide
written verification of ownership.  The application shall be signed by both
the owner and the applicant.  The applicant and the property owner shall be
jointly responsible for conducting the temporary use or holding the event in
compliance with the city's Zoning Ordinance, the City Code, all laws, rules,
codes, and regulations deemed applicable by the city, and all conditions
imposed as part of the approval.



   C.   The proposed use shall be compatible with and shall not
conflict with principal activities conducted on the site or upon any adjacent
site. No activity shall be conducted within the public right-of-way.



   D.   There shall be adequate parking provided (hard-surfaced if
deemed appropriate by the City Manager) on the site consistent with the scope
of the proposed use.



   E.   The proposed site shall be laid out so as to ensure safe
vehicular and pedestrian circulation.



   F.   The hours of operation shall be limited to specified hours
which are consistent with the nature of the use and compatible with other
activities on the site and adjacent parcels.



   G.   The period of operation of the proposed temporary use shall be
limited to dates specified in the application which shall not exceed six
months and shall not exceed the time period determined by the City Planner to
be reasonable considering the nature of the use.  The City Planner shall use
the time periods for similar uses approved by the Planning Commission as a
guide for determining what time period is reasonable.  The duration of all
temporary uses approved and operated upon a site shall not exceed six months
in a calendar year.



   H.   All sanitary service, electrical lines and all other operations
shall comply with all applicable city codes, ordinances and regulations and
any other applicable statutes, rules or regulations of any governmental body
having jurisdiction over the activity and any permits required shall be
obtained by the applicant.  The proposed temporary use shall comply with any
other applicable written standards established and promulgated by the city. 
The City Planner shall forward the application to various city departments,
as deemed necessary, to determine compliance with the applicable city codes,
regulations and standards.  The public hearing before the Planning
Commission shall not be completed until the Planning Commission has received
reports and recommendations from the city departments enforcing such
applicable codes, ordinances, regulations, and standards.



   I.   Any temporary structures shall be erected in a safe manner in
accordance with applicable city codes, ordinances or standards.  All tents
used in conjunction with an approved temporary use shall be white.



   J.   The property shall be maintained in a neat and orderly
condition and cleaned immediately after the close of each business day.



   K.   Final cleanup of the site shall be the joint responsibility of
the applicant and the property owner and shall be assured by the posting of a
cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined by the
City Planner to ensure performance of cleanup within 48 hours of termination
of the temporary use.



   L.   Applicant shall provide proof of liability insurance in the
amount set forth in written standards established by the city, appropriate
for such use, with the city as an additional insured, along with a hold
harmless agreement in favor of the City of Sterling Heights in a form
satisfactory to the city.



   M.   Temporary signs may not be approved as a temporary use. 
Temporary signs may be permitted in conjunction with a temporary use approved
by the Planning Commission or City Planner.  Signage for the temporary use
shall be limited to 32 square feet and shall be set back not less than 12
feet from the right-of-way and shall comply with the requirements of Section
28.13.  The temporary signs shall be removed when approval for the temporary
use has expired.



   N.   An application for a temporary use shall not be approved
administratively if (i) there is any existing violation of the city's Zoning
Ordinance, the City Code, or any laws, rules, codes, and regulations deemed
applicable by the city on the proposed site, or (ii) there has been any past
complaint for violation of any codes, conditions or restrictions with respect
to the same temporary use most recently conducted upon the site which was not
corrected prior to issuance of a citation.



   O.   The temporary use shall not be of such a scope, nature or size
or shall not have any unusual or peculiar characteristics that necessitate
special safety considerations, or sanitary considerations, require special
crowd control measures or involve any hazardous or dangerous materials.  Any
temporary uses with such characteristics must be reviewed by the Planning
Commission in accordance with the standards of section 25.03.



   P.   If the proposed use or any aspect thereof cannot meet all of
the conditions determined to be applicable to the satisfaction of the City
Planner, the use shall not receive administrative approval and shall be
reviewed and considered for approval only by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the following:



      1.   The Planning Commission shall determine that the proposed
use is compatible with and does not conflict with the other activities
conducted on the site and upon adjacent sites and is not detrimental to the
health, safety and welfare of the city or its inhabitants;



      2.   All criteria and conditions set forth in Section 28.14,
Paragraphs A through O determined by the Planning Commission to be applicable
to the proposed temporary use shall be satisfied prior to approval.  The
Planning Commission may modify the conditions imposed by this section, with
the exception of compliance with all applicable laws, rules, codes, and
regulations deemed applicable by the city where the authority to grant
variances to such requirements lies within the jurisdiction of another board
or commission.  The Planning Commission shall impose reasonable conditions
designed to ensure that the objectives of the Zoning Ordinance are satisfied
before approving any temporary use;



In order to ensure that all of the conditions set forth in this Section are
satisfied and that the objectives of Section 28.14 are achieved, the Planning
Commission may, in all cases, impose reasonable conditions related to the
placement of buildings, structures and uses, parking, lighting, signage,
regulation of noise, provision of sanitary facilities and security, hours of
operation and any other matter which promotes the health, safety and welfare
of the community as affected by such use.  The conditions imposed shall meet
standards set forth in Section 1.02 of the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 278-T, §§ 16, 17, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-JJ, § 13, 3-4-08; Ord.
No. 278-QQ, §§ 2-14, 2-16-10; Ord. No. 278-RR, § 4, 10-18-11; Ord. No.
278-YY, § 13, 10-4-16)



SECTION 28.15.  VOTING PLACE.



   The provisions of this ordinance shall not be so construed as to
interfere with the temporary use of any property as a voting place in
connection with a municipal or other public election.



SECTION 28.16.  ACCESS ACROSS RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.



   Ingress and egress to a parking lot, loading area or to a use other
than residential shall not be permitted across or upon land zoned as
residential.



SECTION 28.17.  PUBLIC PARK-AND-RIDE AREAS.



   Public park-and-ride areas may be permitted by the Planning Commission,
subject to the general standards of section 25.02 and the following standards.



   A.   A sufficient number of parking spaces in excess of the required
number for any principal use shall be provided in order to accommodate the
vehicles of the users of public transportation or car/van pooling. In making
the determination of the number of spaces necessary to accommodate the
park-and-ride use, the Planning Commission may take into consideration the
hours of operation of the principal use and the park-and-ride users.



   B.   The park-and-ride area shall be hard-surfaced and shall be
maintained in good usable condition.



   C.   The park-and-ride area shall be identified by appropriate
signage.



   D.   Park-and-ride areas shall be approved only if they will
facilitate use of public transportation, car/van pooling, are conveniently
and appropriately located and will not cause undue traffic congestion to the
adjacent areas.



   E.   Ingress/egress is from a public thoroughfare with a
right-of-way of 120 feet or greater.



   F.   Minor screening provisions are required where park-and-ride
abuts residential.



   G.   All parking lot lighting must be directed to the site only and
not to exceed 15 feet in height within 75 feet of any residential area.



(Ord. No. 278-F, § 16, 8-8-90)



SECTION 28.18.  WIRELESS COMMUNICATION TOWERS, ANTENNAS AND RELATED
FACILITIES.



   Wireless communication towers, antennas and related facilities and
others similar to those cited in this section may be permitted by the
Planning Commission, subject to the general standards of section 25.02 and
the specific standards set forth below.



   A.   Design.



      1.   All communication towers, antennas and related facilities
and others similar to those cited in this section shall be designed,
constructed and maintained to minimize their visual impact to the greatest
extent possible, considering technological requirements, by means of tower
placement and use of compatible architectural elements, building materials,
screening, camouflage, landscaping and other site characteristics.



      2.   All towers shall be of monopole design. No lattice type
towers may be permitted. Towers shall be equipped with anti-climbing devices.
The Planning Commission may require a tower site to be surrounded by a six
foot chain-link fence to provide further security.



      3.   No tower lighting shall be permitted unless required by
state or federal agencies.



      4.   No advertising shall be permitted on any tower or related
facility.



      5.   A 12 foot access road constructed of materials approved
by the Planning Commission shall be provided and maintained in good condition
to provide access for service and emergency vehicles.



   B.   Colors and materials. The colors and materials of communication
towers and related facilities shall be selected to minimize their visual
impact on neighboring properties.



   C.   Site location criteria.



      1.   Wireless communications towers, antennas and related
facilities shall meet the area, bulk and setback requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located, except as otherwise provided in this
subsection. The tower shall be set back: (a) from any residential use or
proposed or existing right-of-way a distance not less than the height of the
tower; and (b) from any nonresidential use or district a distance not less
than that required to meet the minimum yard requirements for a principal
building located on the site as provided in the area, height, and bulk
requirements of that zoning district.



      2.   The communications tower and all related facilities shall
be landscaped to minimize the visual impact from neighboring property. No
tower shall be located within 1,500 feet of an existing wireless
communication tower without a variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals.



      3.   A tower may be located on property zoned for one family
residential use only if the property is: (a) developed as a publicly owned or
operated facility, including municipal facility, park, fire or police
station; a college, university or school; a golf course or other private open
air recreational use; a private club, fraternal organization or cultural
center; or a full or limited assisted housing development; or (b)
characterized by large areas of flood plain or wetland property; provided in
all cases the site shall contain at least two acres of land.



   D.   Co-location requirements.



      1.   To encourage co-location, a new or additional wireless
cellular or PCS antennas shall be permitted to be installed on any existing
building, structure or tower to which a wireless antenna is attached without
special approval land use, provided satisfactory evidence is provided to the
City Planner and City Engineer to demonstrate that such co-location is
structurally and technically sound.



      2.   An application to erect a new tower shall include the
following information, with such other information deemed necessary by the
City Planner:



         a.   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
owners of other towers or usable antenna support structures within one-half
mile of the proposed site, including city-owned property;



         b.   A five year plan and site inventory, including a
list of all existing and proposed antenna towers within the city and within
one mile of the city and a map showing propagation areas of those towers;



         c.   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the
applicant made diligent efforts to obtain permission to install or co-locate
the towers on existing usable antenna support structures within one-half mile
of the proposed tower site.



   E.   Height limitation.



      1.   No height variance shall be required for a wireless
communication tower not exceeding 120 feet in height if approved as a special
approval land use by the Planning Commission.



      2.   No height variance shall be required for a similarly
approved tower not exceeding 200 feet which is designed, engineered and
constructed to accommodate two or more wireless cellular or PCS antennas. The
owner or operator shall submit manufacturer’s specifications which support
the structural feasibility of such co-location.



   F.   Discontinuance of use of tower and removal. The owner or
operator shall notify the city in writing of its intent to discontinue use of
a tower 30 days prior to the time when such discontinuance is intended to
occur. The owner or operator of a tower shall remove all improvements,
including foundations, within six months of discontinuance of use, unless the
owner or operator obtains an extension of this time period from the Planning
Commission based upon good cause. The city may require the owner or operator
of a tower to post security in a form acceptable to the city to ensure the
timely removal of the tower.



   G.   Landscaping. Sites shall be designed to utilize existing
landscaping on the site as screening, including trees, foliage and shrubs.
The Planning Commission may require the installation and maintenance of
additional landscaping to provide denser screening to minimize visual impact
upon nearby properties.



   H.   Additional conditions of approval. The Planning Commission may
impose additional conditions in order to ensure that the requirements of this
section and of section 25.02 are satisfied and maintained.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 43, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, § 8, 10-5-04; Ord. No.
278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 28.19.  OUTDOOR PATIO SERVICE ("OPS").



   A.   An  outdoor patio space, or "OPS," that is an accessory use to
a lawful principal use is permitted for all cafes, clubs, halls,
liquor-controlled establishments, and food service establishments for
purposes of offering an outdoor space for patrons to congregate for a variety
of purposes, such as dining, drinking, and/or enjoying some form of
entertainment, subject to the following conditions:



      1.   In addition to the parking spaces required for the
principal use, sufficient parking must be provided to accommodate the OPS,
with such parking calculated on the same basis as that of the principal use. 



      2.   An OPS may not be located on a sidewalk unless a minimum
clearance width of at least five feet, or such greater width as required by
the state barrier free design law, is maintained between the outdoor seating
area and the edge of the sidewalk and any other barriers, structures, or
objects.



      3.   For any OPS proposed as part of a new development,
redevelopment, or as an addition to an existing development, the City Planner
may require the installation of additional landscaping, screening, or other
devices or materials designed to deaden noise, light, and/or other impacts
that are anticipated to extend beyond the property line of the site and/or to
provide separation from abutting parking and maneuvering areas or other areas
incompatible with an OPS use.



   B.   If Planning Commission review of nuisance mitigation is
required pursuant to the city's licensing requirements for a new or existing
OPS, the following standards shall apply:



      1.   A nuisance mitigation plan, including but not limited to
all plans to mitigate and eliminate any nuisances or disturbances caused by
noise, vibration, litter, congregation, excessive lighting, or vehicular
traffic, shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission. 



      2.   Approval of the nuisance mitigation plan may include
conditions beyond those that are otherwise required by the city's licensing
requirements and/or stricter than those that are otherwise required by any
law, ordinance, or code, including but not limited to reduced occupancy
limits, increased separation from incompatible uses, specific dates/hours of
operation, and additional noise mitigation requirements. 



      3.   Conditions imposed by the Planning Commission when
approving a nuisance mitigation plan shall be based on the location of the
OPS site, the construction and design of the OPS, the surrounding land uses
and conditions, the size of the OPS, the intended use, proposed hours of
operation, and any other factors deemed by the Planning Commission to be
relevant to preserving the public health, safety, and welfare.



      4.   Amplified sound, video displays (such as televisions),
and the use of musical instruments are not permitted unless specifically
included in the Planning Commission's approved noise mitigation plan, which
if included shall address but not be limited to type, times, numbers, and
levels (if applicable).



      5.   Any two violations of  any requirements of an approved
nuisance mitigation plan within any 12-month period shall cause the City
Planner to review the OPS approval for potential suspension or revocation. 
In the event that the violations are not remedied, or cannot be remedied, to
the satisfaction of the City Planner, the matter shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission for consideration of a modification, suspension, or
revocation of the nuisance mitigation plan.



      6.   A third violation of an approved nuisance mitigation plan
within any consecutive 12-month period shall result in an automatic
suspension of the right to utilize the OPS until the owner and/or operator of
the OPS petitions the Planning Commission for a review of the conditions of
the OPS approval.  Operation of an OPS while a nuisance mitigation plan is
suspended shall result in the issuance of a municipal civil infraction
citation punishable by a fine of $500.  A second or subsequent violation
shall be deemed a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1 of the
city code.  Any and all entities, owners, managers, and/or operators may be
issued a citation if deemed to be jointly responsible for allowing or not
stopping the operation of the OPS while the nuisance mitigation plan is
suspended.



(Ord. No. 278-ZZ, § 2, 12-20-16)



SECTION 28.20.  NOTICES.



   Whenever the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act or this ordinance requires a
public hearing, including but not limited to applications for rezoning,
special approval land uses, planned center developments, special development
options, variances, administrative appeals, temporary use approvals,
interpretations, or modifications of the Zoning Ordinance, public notice
shall be given in accordance with the following requirements:



   A.   Responsibility.  The Office of Planning shall prepare a notice
meeting the requirements of this Section and have it published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city and mail or deliver it to individuals
entitled to notice not less than 15 days before the date of the hearing at
which the request will be considered.



   B.   Content.  All notices of public hearings which are published,
mailed or delivered notices shall contain the following:



      1.   Nature of request.  Identify the nature of the request
(request for rezoning, text amendment, special approval land use, planned
unit development, planned center development, special development option,
variance, administration, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose).



      2.   Location of request.  Identify the property that is the
subject of the request.  The notice shall include a listing of all existing
street addresses within the subject property.  Street addresses do not need
to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the
property.  If there are no street addresses, other means of identification
may be used in the notice, such as tax parcel identification numbers,
identifying the nearest cross streets, or including a map showing the
location of the property.  No street addresses must be listed when 11 or
more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is
for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property.



      3.   Public hearing information.  Indicate when and where the
request will be considered, including the date, time and place of the public
hearing(s) and that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or
by counsel.



      4.   Written comments.  Indicate when and where written
comments will be received concerning the request.



      5.   Handicap access.  Provide information concerning how
handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap
accessible.



   C.   Personal and mailed notice.



      1.   General.  When the provisions of this ordinance or state
law requires that notice of the public hearing be personally delivered or
mailed, such notice shall be given to:



         a.   The owner(s) of the property that is the subject of
the request, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the
property.



         b.   All persons to whom real property is assessed
within 300 feet of the boundary of the property which is the subject of the
request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the
jurisdiction of the City of Sterling Heights, unless the request relates to



            1.   A rezoning request involving 11 or more
adjacent properties; or



            2.   An ordinance interpretation that does not
relate to a specific property. If the name of the occupant is not known, the
term “occupant” may be used in making notification. Notification need not
be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure
contains more than one  dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by
different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one
occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a
single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct
spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships,
businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of
the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary
entrance to the structure.



         c.   All neighborhood organizations, public utility
companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice
pursuant to Section 28.20E.



      2.   Notice by mail/affidavit.  Notice shall be deemed mailed
by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed,
postage paid. The Office of Planning shall prepare a list of property owners
and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as of any individuals to
whom personal notice was delivered.



   D.   Timing of notice.  Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act, notice of a public hearing by publication and personal
notice shall be provided with respect to an application for rezoning, text
amendment, special approval land use, special development option, planned
unit development, planned center development, administrative appeal, site
plan and temporary land use approval reviews (when review is by the Planning
Commission), or ordinance interpretation relating to specific property not
less than 15 days before the date of the hearing at which the request will be
considered.



   E.   Registration to receive notice by mail.



      1.   General.  Any neighborhood organization, public utility
company, railroad or any other person may register with the City Clerk to
receive written notice of all public hearing requests to be held under the
Zoning Ordinance is provided in Section 28.20 , personal and mailed notice,
or written notice of all applications for development approval within the
zoning district in which they are located. The City Clerk shall be
responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the
provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body.



      2.   Requirements.  The requesting party must provide the
City Clerk information on an official form to insure notification can be
made. All registered persons must re-register biennially to continue to
receive notification pursuant to this Section.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 21, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-ZZ, § 1, 12-20-16)



ARTICLE 29.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT



SECTION 29.00.  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.



   Except where otherwise stated in this ordinance, the provisions of this
ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Building Official of the
City of Sterling Heights, his or her deputies, or such other person as may be
designated by the City Manager. The City Manager may establish other
regulations which apply to satellite dishes and similar equipment by
providing them in a document to be made readily available to antenna users.
Such regulations shall not be more burdensome to affected antenna users than
is necessary to accomplish a clearly defined and stated safety objective.



(Ord. No. 278-U, § 18, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 15, 8-5-09)



SECTION 29.01.  DUTIES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE BUILDING OFFICIAL.



   A.   The Building Official shall have the power to grant zoning
compliance permits and certificates of occupancy or use and to make
inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out his or her duties
in the enforcement of this ordinance.



   B.   The Building Official shall have the plans, specifications and
other material submitted with each application for a building and/or zoning
compliance permit reviewed by the appropriate city departments. The Building
Official shall not issue any building and/or zoning compliance permit until
such plans and specifications have been reviewed in detail and found to
conform with this ordinance.



   C.   Issuance of a zoning compliance or building permit shall in no
case be construed as waiving any provision of this ordinance.



   D.   The Building Official under no circumstances is permitted to
grant exceptions to the actual meaning of any clause, order or regulation nor
to make changes or to vary the terms of this ordinance.



   E.   Deed restrictions, covenants or private agreements have no
basis for approval or denial of a building and/or zoning compliance permit.



   F.   If any application for a permit is not approved, the Building
Official shall state in writing the cause for such disapproval.



   G.   If the Building Official shall find that any provisions of this
ordinance is being violated, he or she shall notify the person responsible
for such violation and/or the owner of record of the lot upon which such
violation is taking place. The notice shall include the nature of violation
and the applicable section of the ordinances. He or she shall order
discontinuance of the illegal use of any lots or structures; or if illegal
additions, alterations or structural changes, discontinuance of any illegal
work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance
or City Code to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, its
provisions.



(Ord. No. 278-OO, § 16, 8-5-09)



Editor’s note:



   Ord. No. 278-A, §48, adopted April 17, 1990, amended the zoning
ordinance by changing all references to "zoning official" or "chief zoning
official" to refer to the "code enforcement officer." The aforesaid changes
shall be made as the ordinance is amended.



SECTION 29.02.  PERMITS REQUIRED.



   A.   A building permit shall be required for all construction,
alterations, demolition or other changes as regulated by the Building Code of
the City of Sterling Heights. In addition, a zoning compliance permit shall
be required whenever the proposed use or change is affected by, or regulated
by, a provision of the zoning ordinance.



   B.   A zoning compliance permit shall be required to establish a
principal or accessory use upon a lot; to change one principal use to another
principal use upon a lot; to institute a new principal or accessory use upon
a lot; to extend a principal use to additional land; to construct, enlarge or
structurally alter any sign; or in any other instance where zoning ordinance
compliance is required.



   C.   Every application for a permit for excavation, construction,
moving, alteration or change in type of use or type of occupancy shall be
accompanied by a written statement and/or plans and specifications, including
a plot plan and/or site plan showing the following items in sufficient detail
to enable the Building Official to ascertain whether the proposed work or use
conforms with the provisions of this ordinance and the approved site plan:



      1.   The actual shape, location and dimensions of the lot or
parcel and data to locate the lot or parcel on the ground;



      2.   The shape, size and location of all buildings or other
structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other
structures already on the lot;



      3.   A detailed description of the existing and proposed
principal and accessory uses of the lot and of all such structures upon it,
including, in residential areas, the proposed number and size of dwelling
units;



      4.   For any development other than single or two family
residential, the location of all existing and proposed service drives,
parking areas, exits and entrances, walls, greenbelts, fences, swimming pools
and other features of the plan for site development;



      5.   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining
lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this
ordinance are being met.



   D.   In all cases where a building permit is required, application
for a zoning compliance permit shall be made coincidentally with the
application for a building permit; in all other cases, it shall be made prior
to the date when a new, changed or enlarged principal or accessory use of a
building or premises, or part thereof, is intended to begin.



   E.   A building or zoning compliance permit for any proposed work
shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing,
unless such application has been diligently prosecuted or a permit shall have
been issued; except that the Building Official shall grant one or more
extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding 90 days each if there
is reasonable cause. Any permit issued shall become invalid if the authorized
work is not commenced within six months after issuance of a permit or if the
authorized work is suspended or abandoned for a period of six months after
the time of commencing the work.



   F.   The Building Official shall review all plans and permits for
conformance with the Michigan Building Code and the City Zoning Ordinance.
Where a site plan has been required, the Building Official shall review the
building permit request and construction plans for conformance to the
approved site plan. Building permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Building Official authorize only the use,
arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications and no other use, arrangement or construction.



   G.   It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for the
construction of any building or other structure, including an accessory
building, or to commence the moving, structural alteration or repair of any
structure, including an accessory building, until the Building Official has
issued for such work a building and zoning compliance permit.



   H.   It shall be unlawful to establish a principal or accessory use
upon a lot, change the type of principal or accessory use of a lot or
building, change the type of use upon a lot or the type of occupancy of any
building, or to extend any principal or accessory use on any lot, until the
Building Official has issued a permit for such proposed use. A zoning
compliance permit shall authorize and permit only the principal and accessory
uses and occupancy of buildings specifically set forth in the application for
a zoning compliance permit and all other principal uses or accessory uses
conducted upon the premises shall be unlawful. The Building Official may
return an application for zoning compliance permit as incomplete if the
applicant does not describe in detail the principal and accessory uses the
applicant intends to conduct on the lot or within building(s) located in the
lot.



   I.   The Building Official shall maintain a record of all
certificates of zoning compliance and occupancy.



(Ord. 278-OO, § 17, 8-5-09)



SECTION 29.03.  CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.



   A.   No building, structure or lot for which a building or zoning
compliance permit has been issued shall be used or occupied until the
Building Official has, after final inspection and approval, issued a
certificate of occupancy indicating compliance has been made with all the
provisions of this section. However, the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this
section.



   B.   No establishment of a principal or accessory use, change of
principal or accessory use or addition of a new principal or accessory use
shall be made in any building, premises or land, or part thereof, now or
hereafter erected, altered or used, that does not comply with the provisions
of this ordinance; and no such change of use or occupancy shall be made
without the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and compliance for such
new use.



   C.   All site improvements which are included on an approved site
plan, or which are otherwise required by this ordinance, shall be
constructed, installed or placed on the property by the property owner or his
or her designate and shall be approved by the appropriate department by the
time a final certificate of occupancy is issued.



   D.   A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the
Building Official for a period not exceeding six months, provided that such
temporary certificate may include such conditions and safeguards as will
protect the safety and health of the occupants and the public. The temporary
certificate shall note the items which have not received approval. The
Building Official may require a performance guarantee, or similar security as
regulated by section 29.04, be posted to assure completion of the improvement
as approved.



   E.   A record of all certificates and permits issued (including the
specifically approved principal and accessory uses of lots and occupancy of
buildings) shall be kept on file in the office of the Building Official.



(Ord. No. 278-OO, § 18, 8-5-09)



SECTION 29.04.  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.



   To ensure compliance with the zoning ordinance and any condition
imposed thereunder, the city may require that a cash deposit, certified
check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety bond acceptable to the
city, covering the estimated cost of improvements associated with a project
for which site plan approval is sought, be deposited with the Clerk of the
city to ensure faithful completion of the improvements.



   A.   The performance guarantee shall be deposited at the time of the
issuance of the building permit authorizing the activity or project. The city
shall establish procedures whereby a rebate of any cash deposits in
reasonable proportion to the ratio of work completed on the required
improvements will be made as work progresses.



   B.   This section shall not be applicable to improvements for which
a cash deposit, certified check, irrevocable bank letter of credit or surety
bond has been deposited pursuant to Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.



   C.   As used in this section, IMPROVEMENTS means those features and
actions associated with a project which are considered necessary by the body
or official granting approval to protect natural resources or the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city and future users or
inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways,
lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, landscaping and drainage.



SECTION 29.05.  LANDSCAPING AND SITE IMPROVEMENTS; RESUMPTION AND
RESTORATION.



   It is the intent of the city to improve the aesthetics and
environmental quality of the city by requiring commercial and industrial
properties with required landscaping or other exterior site improvements
(such as roads, drives, parking areas, utilities, retention areas, walls,
fences, open space areas, etc.) that have deteriorated over time due to a
lack of care, maintenance, repair, or replacement to be brought into
compliance with the current standards of the Zoning Ordinance.



   A.   Landscaping.



      1.   Landscaping that is not in compliance with the provisions
of the Zoning Ordinance shall be allowed to continue so long as it otherwise
remains lawful and is properly maintained.



         a.   However, such landscaping shall not be extended,
replaced, or moved except in a manner that complies with the terms of this
Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   When existing landscaping on a site dies, becomes
diseased, becomes overgrown, or is missing from the site despite being
required in an approved landscape plan or site plan for the site, the dead,
diseased, overgrown, or missing landscaping shall be replaced with
landscaping that meets the current requirements of the Zoning Ordinance.



      3.   A property owner shall bring the landscaping on a site
into compliance with all current Zoning Ordinance requirements in any of the
following circumstances:



         a.   Whenever a property owner proposes to do site
modifications that require a new site plan approval or replacement work
relating to landscaping that requires a new landscape plan approval;



         b.   Whenever a property owner changes the use of the
property or building;



         c.   Whenever a property owner undertakes improvements
relating to a parking lot and/or paving, except that routine maintenance of a
parking lot and/or paving shall not cause application of this provision
unless the structural integrity of the parking lot or paving has deteriorated
to the extent that it must be replaced rather than repaired;



         d.   Whenever the property is approved for expansion of
a non-conforming use or structure; or



         e.   Whenever the property is approved for a map
amendment to the zoning map or a conditional rezoning agreement.



   B.   Site improvements.



      1.   Site improvements that are not in compliance with the
provisions of the Zoning Ordinance shall be allowed to continue so long as
they otherwise remain lawful and are properly maintained.



         a.   However, such site improvements shall not be
extended, replaced, altered, moved, constructed, or reconstructed except in a
manner that complies with the terms of this Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   If an existing site improvement has deteriorated and/or
has been destroyed, removed, or unlawfully modified to the extent that it is
no longer in compliance with the Zoning Ordinance standards applicable at the
time the site improvement was approved, the site improvement shall not be
permitted to be resumed or restored to non-compliant standards but shall be
brought into compliance with the current standards of the Zoning Ordinance,
except that routine maintenance of a site improvement shall not cause
application of this provision unless the structural integrity of the site
improvement has deteriorated to the extent that it must be replaced rather
than repaired.



      3.   A property owner shall bring the site improvements on the
site into compliance with all current Zoning Ordinance requirements in any of
the following circumstances:



         a.   Whenever a property owner proposes to do site work
or work on any site improvement which requires a permit or city approval;



         b.   Whenever a property owner changes the use of the
property or building;



         c.   Whenever the property is approved for expansion of
a non-conforming use or structure; or



         d.   Whenever the property is approved for a zoning map
change or conditional zoning agreement.



   C.   Phasing of work for compliance.



      1.   The City Planner may allow a property owner who is
required to bring landscaping or site improvements into compliance with the
current requirements of this Zoning Ordinance pursuant to this section to do
so over a period of time, provided the property owner executes and delivers
to the city a Landscaping Upgrade Agreement or Site Improvement Agreement, as
the case may be, in recordable form prepared by the city setting forth the
property owner's commitments and obligations to install such landscaping or
site improvements.



      2.   In implementing this phased compliance, the City Planner
is authorized to allow a property owner a period of up to three years
depending on the nature, scope, and cost of the estimated work to bring the
landscaping or site improvements into compliance with current Zoning
Ordinance requirements.  The phasing period shall require continuous,
regular progress with respect to bringing the landscaping or site
improvements into compliance with current Zoning Ordinance requirements.



      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary
contained in this section, a property owner shall not cause any condition or
allow any condition to exist on its property which creates a hazard to the
health, safety, or welfare of the public or anyone on the property. 



   D.   Zoning Board of Appeals authority.



      1.   A property owner aggrieved by an administrative
determination made relating to Section 29.05 may file an administrative
appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the provisions of
Section 30.02 Paragraph B.1. of the Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   A property owner may seek a modification from the Zoning
Board of Appeals of the requirements of Section 29.05 as applied to its
property in accordance with the provisions of Section 30.02 Paragraph C.4. of
the Zoning Ordinance.



   E.   Process.



      1.   A written notice of violation shall be delivered to a
property owner that fails to bring any landscaping and/or site improvement
into compliance as required by this section.



      2.   Until July 1, 2017, the property owner may restore the
landscaping and/or site improvement in a manner that complies with the
requirements applicable to the property prior to the issuance of the notice
of violation. 



      3.   Effective July 1, 2017, if the property has been
determined by the city to be substantially and materially out of compliance
with its approved site plan, landscape plan, and/or the ordinance standards
applicable to site improvements and/or landscaping on the property, the
notice shall require the property owner to submit a new or updated
landscaping plan and/or site plan to the City Planner which shall incorporate
the current requirements of the Zoning Ordinance. 



      4.   Failure to comply with these requirements shall subject
the property owner to the remedial and enforcement provisions set forth
elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance and in Section 11-141 of the City Code.



(Ord. No. 278-YY, § 12, 10-4-16)



ARTICLE 30.  Zoning Board of Appeals



SECTION 30.00.  CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.



   A.    Zoning Board of Appeals which shall perform its duties and
exercise its powers as provided in Public Act 207 of 1921, as amended, and in
such a way that the objectives of this ordinance shall be observed, public
safety secured and substantial justice done. The  Zoning Board of Appeals
shall consist of seven regular members, each to be appointed for a term of
three years, expiring on June 30 in the year of expiration. All vacancies for
unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. The
compensation for members of the Board shall be established by City Council.
There is hereby established a Zoning Board of Appeals which shall perform its
duties and exercise its powers as provided in Public Act 110 of 2006, as
amended, and in such a way that the objectives of this ordinance shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consist of seven regular members, each to be appointed
by a majority of the City Council members serving. All members of the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall be selected from the electors of the City and shall be
representative of the population distribution and of the various interests in
the City. One member of the Board may be a member of the Planning Commission,
with the remaining members selected from the electors of the City.
Appointments shall be for a three year term expiring on June 30 in the year
of expiration, except for appointments to fill vacancies or appointments of
the member of the Board who is also a member of the Planning Commission. All
vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term
in the same manner as the original appointment. The term of the member of the
Board who is also a member of the Planning Commission shall be limited to the
time he or she is a member of the Planning Commission. Appointments shall be
made not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has
expired. The City Council may also appoint to the Zoning Board of Appeals not
more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members who may
be called to serve in the absence of a regular member or for the purpose of
reaching a decision on a case in which a member has abstained for reasons of
conflict of interest. The alternate member shall serve in accordance with the
provisions of applicable law. The compensation for members of the Board shall
be established by City Council, and members may be reimbursed for expenses
actually incurred in the discharge of their duties.



   B.   The City Council may also appoint positions for up to two
alternate members to serve on the Zoning Board of Appeals for the same terms
as regular members. The alternate members shall be called on a rotating basis
to sit as regular members of the Board in the absence of a regular member. An
alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member
for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member
has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. Once an alternate has been
called to serve in a particular case, he or she shall continue to participate
in that case until a decision has been rendered.



   C.   Members of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be removed by the
City Council for misfeasance, malfeasance or nonfeasance in office upon
written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself
or herself from a vote in which he or she has a conflict of interest. Failure
of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member
has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office.



   D.   A member of the Zoning Board of Appeals who is also a member of
the Planning Commission or City Council shall not participate in a public
hearing or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of
the Planning Commission or City Council. However, the member may consider and
vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property.



(Ord. No. 278-Q, § 14, 10-5-95; Ord. No. 278-NN, §§ 22 - 24, 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 30.01.  PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD.



   A.   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall establish rules and
procedures in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and the
applicable state law.



   B.   All meetings of the Zoning Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the Chairperson or the Board in accordance with their adapted
procedures and at such other times as the Board shall determine or specify in
its rules of procedure. All meetings, including hearings, conducted by the
Board shall be open to the public, except those authorized to be conducted in
closed sessions pursuant to the Open Meetings Act, Public Act 267 of 1976.
The public shall be afforded an opportunity to speak at any public hearing in
accordance with the rules of procedure and by-laws of the Board. The Board
shall not conduct business unless a majority of its members are present.



   C.   If the Zoning Board of Appeals receives a written request for a
variance, interpretation of the Zoning Ordinance, or an appeal of an
administrative decision, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall conduct a public
hearing on the request. Notice shall be given in accordance with Section
28.20. If the request does not involve a specific parcel of property, notice
need only be published as set forth in Section 28.20 A and given to the
person making the request as set forth in Section 28.20 C 1 a.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, §§ 25, 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 30.02.  POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have all powers and duties granted by
state law and by this ordinance to such boards, including the following
specific powers:



   A.   Ordinance interpretations.



      1.   Interpret the ordinance test and map and all matters
relating thereto whenever a question arises in the administration of this
ordinance as to the meaning and intent of any provision or part of this
ordinance. Any text interpretation shall be narrow and in a manner as to
carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance. Interpretations shall not
have the effect of amending the ordinance.



      2.   Map interpretations should be based on the rules of the
ordinance (Article 2) and any relevant historical information.



   B.   Appeals of administrative decisions.



      1.   To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant that there is error in any order, interpretation, requirement,
permit, decision or refusal made by the Zoning Official in enforcing any
provision of this ordinance.



   C.   Modification and variance of ordinance requirements.



      1.   To hear and decide on all matters referred to it or upon
which it is required to pass under this ordinance.



      2.   Permit such modification of the height, placement and
area regulations as may be necessary to secure an appropriate improvement of
a lot which is of such shape or so located with relation to surrounding
development or physical characteristics that it cannot otherwise be
appropriately improved without such modification.



      3.   Permit the modification of the automobile parking space
or loading space requirements where, in the particular instance, such
modifications will not be inconsistent with the purpose and intent of such
requirement.



      4.   Modify the environmental provisions of Article 24,
including walls, buffering, screening or landscaping, provided the spirit and
intent of Article 24 is upheld.



      5.   Modify the requirements under section 28.00, subparagraph
H, if the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the intended function of the
antenna would be adversely affected, in some significant way, if the antenna
had to be constructed in accordance with the other provisions of that
section, or the variance is necessary to harmonize the city’s ordinances
and federal laws, rules or regulations. A variance under this section does
not require a showing of hardship or practical difficulty.



      6.   To grant variances to the provisions of this ordinance
where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships within the
meaning of state law and this article in the way of carrying out the strict
letter from this ordinance so that the spirit of the ordinance will be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done in
accordance with the applicable standards set forth below.  In the
consideration of all appeals and proposed variances to this ordinance, the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall, before granting any variance in a specific
case, first determine that the proposed variance will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property or unreasonably increase the
congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire or endanger the
public safety or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values
within the surrounding area or in any other respect, impair the public
health, safety, comfort, morals or welfare of the city's inhabitants.



         a.   Standards for Approval of a Non-Use Variance.  The
Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a non-use variance to provide relief from a
specific standard in this ordinance relating to an area, dimension or
construction requirement or limitation upon the concurring vote of a majority
of the members of the Zoning Board of Appeals. A non-use variance shall not
be granted unless the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that there is a practical
difficulty in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance. 
In determining whether a practical difficulty exists, the Zoning Board of
Appeals must find that:



            (i)   Compliance with the strict letter of the
restrictions governing area, setbacks, frontage, height, bulk, lot coverage,
density or other dimensional or construction standards will unreasonably
prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will
render conformity with such restrictions unnecessarily burdensome;



            (ii)   The grant of a variance will do substantial
justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district
and a lesser variance will not give substantial relief to the applicant as
well as be more consistent with justice to others property owners in the
zoning district;



            (iii)   The plight of the applicant is due to
unique circumstances of the property;



            (iv)   The problem is not self-created;



            (v)   The spirit of the ordinance will be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; and



            (vi)   There is compliance with the standards for
discretionary decisions as contained in paragraph D below.



         b.   Standards Applicable to Use Variances.  The 
Zoning Board of Appeals may grant a use variance to authorize a land use
which is not, otherwise, permitted by this ordinance in the district where
the property is located upon the concurring vote of five members of the 
Zoning Board of Appeals.  An application for use variance shall not be
submitted or considered unless the applicant has (i) received a written
determination from the Office of Planning and Zoning that the proposed land
use is not permitted under this ordinance in the district where the property
is located, or (ii) received a final decision from the City Council denying a
rezoning of the property to a zoning district where the proposed land use
would be permitted under this ordinance.  A use variance shall not be
granted unless the  Zoning Board of Appeals finds on the basis of
substantial, competent and material evidence presented by the applicant, that
there is an unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter
of this ordinance.  In determining whether an unnecessary hardship exists,
the  Zoning Board of Appeals must find that:



         (i)   The property in question cannot be reasonably used
or cannot yield a reasonable return on a prudent investment if the property
were to be used only for a purpose allowed in the zoning district where the
property is located;



         (ii)   The plight is due to unique circumstances
peculiar to the property and not to general neighborhood conditions;



         (iii)   The use to be authorized by the variance will
not alter the essential character of the area and locality;



         (iv)   The problem is not self-created;



         (v)   The spirit of this ordinance will be observed,
public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; and



         (vi)   There is compliance with the standards for
discretionary decisions as contained in paragraph D below.



      c.   An application for approval of a variance shall not be
processed or placed on an agenda for a public hearing, if a public hearing is
required for approval under the Zoning Ordinance, if the site and/or building
for which the variance is sought is subject to any outstanding, unresolved
Property Maintenance Code violation.  Any outstanding Property Maintenance
Code violation must be first resolved by correcting the violation or by
having the applicant/property owner sign a written code compliance agreement
with the City setting forth a written commitment by the applicant/property
owner to bring the site and/or building into full compliance with all
provisions of the Property Maintenance Code within a specific time period
acceptable to the City Development Director.



   D.   Discretionary Standards.  For decisions of the  Zoning Board
of Appeals referred to in paragraphs a and b above, and in all other
instances in this ordinance where discretionary decisions must be made by a
board, commission or official, the requirements and standards as particularly
set forth in this ordinance, concerning the matter for a decision shall be
followed and such discretionary decision shall also be based upon the
findings that the building structure or use which is the subject of the
approval will, when approved:



      1.   Promote the intent and purpose of this ordinance;



      2.   Be designed, constructed, operated, maintained and
managed so as to be compatible, harmonious and appropriate in appearance and
in operation with the existing or planned character of the general vicinity,
adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacity of public
services and facilities affected by the building structure or land use, and
the community as a whole;



      3.   Be served adequately by essential public facilities and
services, such as highways, streets, police and fire protection,
drainageways, refuse disposal or that the persons or agencies responsible for
the establishment of the building structure, land use or activity shall be
able to provide adequately any such service sufficiently;



      4.   Not be detrimental, hazardous, or disturbing to existing
or future neighboring uses, persons, property or the public welfare; and



      5.   Not create additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services that will  be detrimental to the economic
welfare of the community.



   E.   Time limitations.  If the  Zoning Board of Appeals approves a
variance, the variance shall remain in effect only so long as the facts and
circumstances as presented to the  Zoning Board of Appeals and upon which
the variance was granted continue to exist and that the conditions attached
to the approval are satisfied and maintained.  The variance shall lapse
unless application for a required special land use, building permit, site
plan approval, zoning compliance or other required permits, which utilize the
variance is made and received by the city not later than one year of the date
written notice of the Board's decision is sent to or delivered to the
petitioner, or the date the minutes of the Board are approved relating to the
Board's final decision on the variance request, whichever occurs first,
unless the Board establishes a different time period, or unless an extension
is granted as authorized by this paragraph.  If a written request for a time
extension based upon good cause is received prior to the expiration of the
specified time period, the Office of Planning and Zoning may grant an
extension under such terms and conditions and for such period of time not
exceeding six months as it shall determine to be necessary and appropriate. 
If the variance has lapsed and the petitioner desires to proceed using the
benefit conferred by the variance, the petitioner must reapply for the
variance and demonstrate that all of the requirements for approval of a
variance have been met, based upon the facts and circumstances in existence
at the time the new request is submitted.  The Board shall have the right to
deny a variance if the facts and circumstances pertaining to the request have
changed, if the petitioner is not willing to satisfy the conditions attached
to the original approval, or if the petitioner has not affirmatively
demonstrated that all of the substantive requirements for the approval of a
variance have been satisfied as of the time the new application for variance
is considered.



   F.   The City Council shall have the authority to approve variances
or modifications of the standards of the Zoning Ordinance if the variance or
modification was considered and approved by the City Council:



      1.   As part of a Planned Unit Development project under
Section 22.03;



      2.   As a development pursuant to a conditional rezoning
approved by the City Council under Section 32.00 C. 4. and H.; or



      3.   As a development pursuant to a consent judgment approved
by the City Council.  The City Council shall have the same authority with
respect to considering and approving such requests as the  Zoning Board of
Appeals.



(Ord. No. 278-U, § 19, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-CC, §§ 18, 19, 20, 6-3-03;
Ord. No. 278-FF,  § 4, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 34, 1-6-09; Ord. No.
278-RR, § 5, 10-18-11)



SECTION 30.03.  LIMITATIONS ON THE POWERS OF THE BOARD.



   A.   The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be
necessary to approve any modification, interpretation or appeal stated in
section 30.02A, B and C.



   B.   The concurring vote of five members of the Board shall be
necessary to approve any use variance permitted under section 30.02D.



   C.   Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to override
the decisions of the Planning Commission with respect to the approval or
denial of special approval land uses.



   D.   Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to override
the decisions of the City Council with respect to the approval or denial of
planned unit developments or any other decision authorized to be made by the
City Council.



   E.   Nothing contained herein shall empower the Board to change the
terms of this ordinance, to effect changes in the zoning map or to add to the
uses permitted in any zoning district, except when specifically empowered to
do so (section 30.02(D)).



   F.   Every decision of the Board shall be based upon findings of
fact, and each and every such finding shall be supported in the record of the
proceedings of the Board.



   G.   In authorizing a variance or taking any other action within its
jurisdiction, the Board may attach such conditions as may be deemed necessary
in the furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance, provided any conditions
are in compliance with the three standards listed in section 25.03D of this
ordinance.  Any failure to satisfy a condition of approval imposed by the
Zoning Board of Appeals shall constitute a separate violation of the Zoning
Ordinance.



   H.   The following procedural remedies shall be available to enforce
conditions of approval imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals relating to an
approval of a modification or variance to ordinance requirements:



      1.   If the City Manager or his/her designate reasonably
believes, based on available information, that the applicant, property owner,
or occupant for whom a modification or variance of ordinance requirements has
been approved has failed to satisfy the conditions of approval, the city may,
through the authorized official designated below, take any of the following
actions in order to obtain compliance:



         a.   The Building Official, Code Enforcement Officer,
Fire Marshal, Police Officer or other city employee authorized to issue an
ordinance complaint or civil infraction may issue an ordinance complaint or
civil infraction to be prosecuted in the District Court based upon his/her
observations or investigation, or may ask the city attorney to request
issuance of warrant for an ordinance complaint based upon the information or
evidence presented to him/her that there has been a violation of the City
Code or Zoning Ordinance.



         b.   The City Manager or his/her designate based upon
available information or evidence may request the Zoning Board of Appeals to
conduct a hearing in accordance with the procedure set forth in paragraph 2
below to determine whether the conditions of approval have been satisfied,
and if not, whether the conditions of approval relating to approval of the
modification or variance should be enforced, or the approval revoked for
failing to satisfy the conditions.



         c.   After City Council authorization, the city attorney
may commence litigation in the Circuit Court to require the responsible party
to satisfy the conditions or abate violation of the Zoning Ordinance as
authorized by law, or request revocation of the approval.



         d.   The city through the appropriate authorized
official may take any other enforcement or remedial action authorized by law.



      2.   If the Zoning Board of Appeals receives a request from
the City Manager or his/her designate supported by credible information that
the applicant, property owner, or occupant granted for whom approval of a
modification or variance to ordinance requirements has been granted has
failed to continuously satisfy the conditions of approval, the Zoning Board
of Appeals may conduct a hearing in accordance with the following procedure
to review whether the applicant, property owner, or occupant has satisfied
the conditions of approval of the modification or variance:



         a.   The applicant, property owner, or occupant granted
approval of the modification or variance and other persons entitled to notice
of the original hearing on the ordinance modification or variance request,
shall be advised in writing by the city administration of the date of the
meeting at which the Zoning Board of Appeals intends to review compliance
with the conditions of approval, which notice shall be not less than 30 days
before the scheduled meeting, except in cases where the public health, safety
or welfare is imminently threatened or endangered, in which case a hearing
shall be held within no earlier than five days after written notice of the
meeting date has been given.



         b.   The written notice shall specify the condition(s)
of approval relating to the modification or variance with which the
applicant, property owner, or occupant is alleged to have failed to comply.



         c.   At the Zoning Board of Appeals hearing, the city
administration and other interested parties (or their authorized
representatives) shall be given an opportunity to present evidence or
information showing that the conditions of approval have not been
continuously satisfied.



         d.   At the Zoning Board of Appeals hearing, the
applicant, property owner, or occupant and other interested parties (or their
authorized representatives) shall be given an opportunity to present evidence
or information showing whether the conditions of approval have been
continuously satisfied.



         e.   After the Zoning Board of Appeals concludes the
hearing, the Board may make its determination as to whether the applicant,
property owner, or occupant has continuously satisfied the conditions of
approval, whether the applicant, owner or occupant should be given additional
time to satisfy the conditions of approval, or whether the conditions of
approval should be changed.  The Board may determine that the applicant has
satisfied the conditions of approval, has failed to continuously satisfy the
conditions, or if it deems appropriate, grant an additional time period for
compliance, or change the conditions of approval.  In addition, the Board
may revoke the approval of the modification or variance, or recommend that
the City Council commence an action in Circuit Court to enforce the
conditions, or alternatively revoke the approval of the modification or
variance if the Board determines by majority vote of those members present
that the applicant, property owner, or occupant has not continuously
satisfied one or more of the conditions of approval.  The reasons for the
Board's action shall be recorded into the record, with a written copy
furnished to the applicant, property owner, or occupant after certification
of the minutes of the meeting at which such action was taken.



         f.   The applicant, property owner, or occupant, or any
person who has an interest affected by the Zoning Ordinance who is aggrieved
by a decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, may appeal a final decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals to the Circuit Court within the time period
prescribed by law.  A recommendation of Circuit Court action shall not
constitute a final decision.  The appeal period shall commence on the date
the minutes of the Zoning Board of Appeals are certified relating to the
Board's decision. 



         g.   If the city prevails in any action taken to enforce
the conditions of approval imposed by the Zoning Board of Appeals relating to
the modification or variance, or if the Zoning Board of Appeals revokes the
modification or variance as a result of the applicant, property owner, or
occupant failing to continuously satisfy the conditions of approval, the
applicant, property owner, or occupant shall be required to reimburse the
city for any costs incurred in taking such action, including attorney fees,
experts fees, court costs, and other expenses incurred.  The city may impose
a lien against any interest the applicant, property owner, or occupant has in
the property to secure payment of such reimbursement.



      3.   The procedures set forth in section 30.03H1b relating to
modifications or variances to the Zoning Ordinance requirements shall apply
only to such approvals granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals after the
effective date of this amendment to the Zoning Ordinance.



      4.   The City Manager may promulgate administrative rules and
regulations necessary to implement and administer the enforcement and hearing
procedures set forth in section 30.03 of this ordinance.  All rules and
regulations shall be effective 30 days after promulgation.  Copies of the
rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk as of their
effective date and shall be subject to public inspection or copying during
the city's normal business hours.



   I.   Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal the decision to the Circuit
Court within the time period prescribed by law.  The appeal period shall
commence on the date the minutes of the Zoning Board of Appeals are certified
relating to the Board's decision. Any party who is aggrieved by a decision of
the Zoning Board of Appeals may appeal the decision to the Circuit Court
within 30 days after the Zoning Board of Appeals makes a final decision and
issues its written decision signed by the chairperson, or signed by the
members of the body if there is no chairperson, or within 21 days after
approval of the minutes of such final decision by the Zoning Board if the
Zoning Board’s chairperson (or all of its members where there is no
chairperson) do not issue a written decision.



(Ord. No. 278-Y, § 44, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-EE, §§ 4, 5, 10-5-04; Ord.
No. 278-NN, § 26, 34, 1-6-09)



SECTION 30.04.  PROCEDURE FOR APPEALS TO ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS.



   A.   Appeals shall be commenced by a person filing a notice of
appeal or petition as described in the rules and procedures of the Zoning
Board of Appeals, accompanied by such appeal fee as may be specified by City
Council. The notice of appeal shall specify the specific grounds upon which
the appeal is based and shall be signed by the applicant and property owner.
It shall also specify the requirement from which a variance is sought and the
nature and extent of such variance.



   B.   The appeal shall also be accompanied by a fully completed
application along with plot plans meeting the rules of procedure adopted by
the Board.



   C.    The Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the
appeal and shall give notice as required by this ordinance and the Michigan
Zoning Enabling Act.



   D.    The Office of Planning shall transmit to the Board all of the
documents and records related to the appeal.



   E.   Any person may appear in person or be represented by a duly
authorized agent.



   F.   The Board shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal, and
shall review the official record, and base its decision on the information
presented. The official record shall include:



      1.   The relevant administrative record and administrative
orders issued thereon relating to the appeal;



      2.   The notice of appeal;



      3.   Such documents, exhibits, photographs or written reports
as may be submitted to the Board for its consideration;



      4.   The minutes of the hearing, findings of fact and
decisions and orders of the Board.



   G.   The record and decision of the Board shall meet all of the
following:



      1.   Complies with the constitution and laws of this state;



      2.   Is based upon proper procedure;



      3.   Is supported by competent material and substantial
evidence on the record;



      4.   Represents the reasonable exercise of discretion granted
by law to the Zoning Board of Appeals.



(Ord. No. 278-EE, § 6, 10-5-04; Ord. No. 278-NN, § 27 - 29, 34, 1-6-09)



ARTICLE 31.  DEFINITIONS



SECTION 31.00.  CONSTRUCTION OF LANGUAGE.



   Except as specifically indicated otherwise, the following rules of
construction apply to the text of this ordinance.



   1.   The particular shall control the general.



   2.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the
text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall
control.



   3.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The
word "may" is permissive.



   4.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words
used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.



   5.   A "building" or a "structure" includes any part thereof, and
the word building includes the word structure.



   6.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for,"
"intended for," "maintained for" or "occupied for."



   7.   The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, public or private, as well as an
individual.



   8.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two or more items, conditioning, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either . . . or," the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:



         a.   "And" indicates that all connected items,
conditions, provisions or events shall apply;



         b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items,
conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination;



         c.   "Either . . . or" indicates that the connected
items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in
combination.



   9.   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily
assigned to them.



(Ord. No. 278-N, § 23, 8-1-95)



SECTION 31.01.  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY BANQUET OR EVENT USE.  A building or facility, or part of a
building or facility, which offers, provides, or allows catering of food and
beverage services in its event facilities or within separate indoor event
rooms or areas which are available for use by individuals or groups as an
accessory use to a principal use allowed under the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Sterling Heights.  The term "ACCESSORY BANQUET OR EVENT USE"
specifically excludes (a) banquet and event facilities as defined below, (b)
establishments which do not permit their event facilities or event rooms to
be used by patrons beyond 11:00 p.m., or (c) events offering, providing, or
allowing food or beverage services which are regulated as temporary uses
under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.  The term "ACCESSORY BANQUET
OR EVENT USE" does not include any building or part of a building which is
used as a "banquet and event facility" as defined in this section.



   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A structure subordinate and clearly incidental to
the principal building on the same parcel and used for a purpose customarily
incidental to the purposes of the principal building. The term “accessory
structure" shall have the same meaning for purposes of the zoning ordinance
as the term "accessory building."



   ACCESSORY USE. A subordinate use which is customarily incidental to the
principal use on the same lot or parcel.



   ACT. Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended.



   ADULT BOOK STORE OR VIDEO STORE. An establishment having, as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines
and other periodicals, video cassettes, films and other such visual media
which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter
depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" as defined in this section or an establishment
with a significant segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such
material, unless such area is physically separated from the remainder of such
establishment and which is accessible to adults only.



   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USE. Any adult bookstore or video store, adult
mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, massage
parlor, adult personal service businesses, adult novelty businesses or any
combination of such uses.



   ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof with
a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas,"
as defined in this section, for observation by patrons therein.



   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A building or any part thereof or a
drive-in theater with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting
material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas," as defined in this section, for observation by patrons
therein.



   ADULT NOVELTY BUSINESSES. A business which has as a principal activity
the sale of devices of simulated human genitals or devices designed for
sexual stimulation.



   ADULT PERSONAL SERVICE BUSINESSES. A business having as a principal
activity the provision of personal services to another person on an
individual basis in a closed room while nude or partially nude. It includes
but is not limited to the following activities and services: massage parlors,
erotic rubs, modeling studios, body painting studios, wrestling studios and
individual theatrical performances.



   AGRICULTURE. The art or science of cultivating the ground; the
production of crops or livestock on a farm; but excluding agricultural
business or industry such as commercial greenhouses, the sale of nursery
stock, riding or boarding stables, fur farms, piggeries, farms used for
disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish or offal and slaughtering of animals,
except animals raised on the premises for use and consumption by persons
residing on the premises.



   ALLEY. A public or legally established private thoroughfare, other than
a street, affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting
properties and not intended for general traffic circulation.



   ALTERATION. Any change, addition or modification in construction or
type of occupancy or any change in the structural members of a building, such
as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders or any change which may be
referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed."



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. Any machine, device, or game, with or without a video
screen or display, that is constructed principally for entertainment or
amusement purposes, including but not limited to a pinball machine, air
hockey machine, foosball or table soccer machine, skee-ball machine,
shuffleboard, a miniature pool table, shooting gallery device, miniature or
modified bowling game, pool or similar game table, bubble hockey machine,
electronic game of skill, video game, self-operated or attendant-operated
merchandise redemption devices, or any similar machine, instrument, device,
game, or contrivance, which is made available for display or operation and
which may be operated or set in motion by the insertion of a coin or a token,
paper currency, ticket, payment of a fee or other valuable consideration, or
use of a swipe card. Each device, regardless of the number of stations, shall
be considered one device. The term amusement device does not include music
playing devices, vending machines, rides, or any non-electronic activity
provided for no cost where no element of chance, bonus, or prize is involved,
nor any video lottery games or game terminals or equipment operated or
provided directly by the Michigan Lottery as a state agency.



   AMUSEMENT DEVICE CENTER. Any of the following:



         1.   An establishment, business, or location open for
public use and participation and which has as its principal use, or which is
devoted primarily to, the operation of amusement devices.



         2.   An establishment, business, or location with more
than 15 amusement devices within a space of less than 45,000 square feet.



         3.   An establishment, business, or location with more
than 25 amusement devices.



   ANCILLARY AREAS (ELDERLY HOUSING). Activities and facilities which are
not necessarily residential in character but are essential to the residential
function. These areas may include but are not limited to: public lobbies,
corridors, elevators and stairs, laundry facilities, tenant storage,
mechanical/electrical spaces, management office and mail and receiving area.



   ANIMAL. Any live creature, excepting fish, turtles and birds similar to
species of the parrot family.



   ANTENNA. A device designed and intended for transmitting or receiving
television, radio or microwave signals. An ANTENNA includes all mounting and
stabilizing items, such as a tower, a pole, a bracket, guy wires, hardware,
connection equipment and related items. Antennas are also "accessory
structures" within the meaning of the zoning ordinance.



   APARTMENT. A building containing three or more dwelling units whose
entrances are from a common hallway or area or series of hallways or areas.



   AUTHORIZED CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer or other person employed by
the city who is legally authorized to issue municipal civil infraction
citations or municipal civil infraction notices.



   AUTOMOBILE REPAIR GARAGE. A building or premises where the following
services may be carried out in a completely enclosed building: major repairs,
including, but not limited to, engine rebuilding and the rebuilding of motor
vehicles; application of paint preservation materials; radiator repair and
replacement; transmission repair and replacement; automobile and van
customizing; collision service, such as body, frame or fender straightening
and repair; and the painting and rustproofing of automobiles. AUTOMOBILE
REPAIR GARAGES may also include facilities and/or equipment allowing for the
repair of other motor vehicles, including trucks, recreational vehicles, vans
and buses, among others.



   AUTOMOBILE SERVICE CENTER. A building or premises used primarily for
the sale and installation of major automobile accessories, including but not
limited to tires, batteries, radios, electronic devices, air conditioners,
windows and mufflers, plus such services as brake repair and adjustment,
shock absorber installation and repair, wheel alignment and balancing, oil
changes and lubrication, tune-ups, exterior reconditioning (excluding paint
or painting and major mechanical work) and vehicle inspection pollution
compliance facilities but excluding any major mechanical repairs, collision
work, undercoating or painting. Sale of gasoline and other fuels for the
propulsion of motor vehicles (stored only in underground tanks) and the
retail sale of oil and other automotive products shall not be the primary use
of the premises. The primary use of the premises shall be devoted to one or
more of the listed service activities.



   AWNING. A metal, wooden, fiberglass, canvas or other fire-retardant
fabric cover which extends over a porch, patio, deck, balcony, window, door
or open space.



   BAKERY. A facility where baked goods are manufactured and/or displayed
primarily for retail sales on premises. This establishment may include an
area for consumption within the building, provided that it is not the primary
use of the premises.



   BANQUET AND EVENT FACILITY.  A freestanding building with one or more
rentable separate event rooms or areas which is principally used for the
holding of (a) private events or gatherings which are not open to the general
public, or (b) public events offered by the proprietor of the banquet
facility which are open to the public, where food or beverage services are
offered, provided, or catered by such proprietor.  The term "BANQUET AND
EVENT FACILITY" does not include any building or part of a building which is
used as an "accessory banquet or event use" as defined in this section. 



   BARN. A detached accessory building to be used for the storage and
keeping of farm and agricultural equipment and garden supplies and equipment,
used in conjunction with an agricultural use located on the premises.



   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partially or wholly
below-grade, but so located that the average vertical distance from the grade
to the floor is greater than the average vertical distance from the grade to
the ceiling; provided, however, that if the average vertical distance from
the grade to the ceiling is five feet or more, such basement shall be
considered as a story (see illustration).



   BEDROOM. A room designated or used, in whole or in part, for sleeping
purposes.



   BERM. A mound of soil or earth that has been graded, shaped and
improved with sod or landscaping in such a fashion as to be utilized for
screening purposes.



   BOARDING HOUSE. A building, other than a motel/hotel where, for
compensation and/or prearrangement for periods exceeding seven days, lodging
or lodging and meals are provided for three or more persons, together within
one dwelling unit.



   ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS. The  Zoning Board of Appeals of the City of
Sterling Heights.



   BODY ART FACILITY. A location at which an individual does one or more
of the following for compensation:



      (1)   Performs tattooing.



      (2)   Performs branding.



      (3)   Performs body-piercing.



   BODY-PIERCING.  The perforation of human tissue other than an ear for
a nonmedical purpose.



   BRANDING.  The making of a permanent mark on human tissue by burning
with a hot iron or other instrument.



   BUILDING. Any structure, temporary or permanent, having one or more
floors and a roof intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals
or property.



   BUILDING FRONT. The facade of a building having frontage on a street.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the established
grade to the highest point on the roof surface for flat roofs; to the deck
line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip or gambrel roofs; or to a point equivalent to the foregoing on any
other roof. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be
measured from the average level of the grade at the building wall (see
illustration).



   BUILDING LINE. A line parallel to the front lot line at the minimum
required front setback line (see illustration).



   BUILDING, MAIN OR PRINCIPAL. A building, or where the context so
indicates, a group of buildings in which is constructed the main or principal
use of the lot on which said building is located.



   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated by the City Manager to perform
the duties of the Building Official under this Zoning Ordinance and other
codes and ordinances of the city.



   CABARET. An establishment which features topless and/or bottomless
dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, male and female
impersonators or similar entertainers.



   CANOPY. A roof-like structure providing shelter to a public access area
which is either freestanding or projected from a building and is supported by
structural members. A CANOPY may be constructed of metal, wood or any
approved fire-retardent material such as cloth, canvas, fabric, plastic, or
any light flexible material which is attached to or constructed on a canopy.



   CEMETERY. Land used or intended to be used for the interment of human
or animal remains, including crematories, mausoleums and mortuaries when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.



   CITY. The City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY COUNCIL. The City Council of the City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY PLANNER. The City Planner of the City of Sterling Heights.



   CITY PLANNING COMMISSION. The City Planning Commission of the City of
Sterling Heights.



   CIVIL INFRACTION. An act or omission that is prohibited by law and is
not a crime under that law or that is prohibited by an ordinance and is not a
crime under that ordinance and for which civil sanctions may be ordered.



   CLINIC, MEDICAL. A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of sick
or injured persons and those in need of medical or minor surgical attention,
which customarily provides a wider range of treatment or testing procedures
than is normally available in a physician’s office. A clinic may
incorporate customary laboratories and pharmacies incidental or necessary to
its operation or to the service of its patients but may not include
facilities for in-patient care or major surgery.



   CLINIC, VETERINARY. A place for the care, diagnosis and treatment of
sick and injured animals. A clinic may incorporate customary laboratories,
pharmacies and other facilities and services incidentally necessary to the
operation of the clinic.



   CLUB. A building or portion of a building, together with the grounds
and related facilities, primarily used by an organization of persons for
special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, science,
literature, politics or similar activities but in no way operated for profit.



   CLUSTER. A residential development design technique that concentrates
buildings in specific areas on the site to allow the remaining land to be
used for recreation, common open space and the preservation of
environmentally sensitive features.



   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The Code Enforcement Officer of the City of
Sterling Heights who administers and enforces the zoning ordinance.



   COMMON AREAS (ELDERLY HOUSING). Activities and facilities not essential
to the residential function but are provided for the convenience of residents
to promote and support recreational and social functions. These areas include
but are not limited to: multi-purpose rooms, party kitchens, barber and
beauty shops, handicraft areas and meeting rooms.



   CONDOMINIUM ACT. Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended.



   CONDOMINIUM MASTER DEED. The document recording the condominium project
as approved by the city to which is attached by exhibits and incorporated by
reference the approved by-laws for the project and the approved subdivision
plan for the site.



   CONDOMINIUM SUBDIVISION PLAN. The site plan illustrating the existing
site features and all proposed improvements pursuant to the requirements for
site plan review.



   CONDOMINIUM UNIT. That portion of the condominium project designed and
intended for separate ownership and use, as described in the master deed.



   CONFORMING COMMERCIAL EARTH STATION. An antenna that is two meters or
less in diameter and is located in an area where commercial or industrial
uses are generally permitted under state or local land use regulations. Such
an area does not extend to those portions of a site where most land uses are
forbidden or severely restricted, such as, for example, street areas, utility
easements, visibility triangles and required yards.



   CONGREGATE CARE HOUSING. A group of dwelling units providing shelter
and services for the elderly which may include meals, housekeeping and
personal care assistance.



   CUL-DE-SAC. A street terminated at one end with a turning radius.



   DAY CARE FACILITY (CHILD AND ADULT). A structure and accessory facility
wherein child or adult care is provided for children or adults unrelated by
blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility which
receives a payment, fee or grant for any person receiving care, wherever
operated, and whether or not operated for profit. Care facilities provide
care, protection and supervision for less than 24 hours a day on a regular
basis.



   DECK. A structure comprising a decorative wooden platform or tiers of
decorative wooden platforms located adjacent to any structure and used for
leisure and recreational activities. A DECK may include appurtenant
accessories such as railings, whirlpools, spas, hot tubs, gazebos and similar
related facilities.



   DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the city within which certain uses of
land and buildings are permitted and within which certain regulations and
requirements apply under the provisions of this ordinance.



   DRIVE-IN or DRIVE-THROUGH. A business establishment so developed that
its retail or service character is characterized by providing a maneuvering
lane or parking spaces so as to serve patrons while in the motor vehicle
(e.g. restaurants, cleaners, banks, theaters).



   DWELLING. A building or a portion thereof which is occupied as the
home, residence or sleeping place of one or more human beings. In no case
shall a travel trailer, recreational vehicle, automobile chassis or tent be
considered a dwelling. In the case where a building is occupied in part as a
dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall comply with the provisions relative
to dwellings.



   DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A building designed, arranged or occupied as
a dwelling and containing three or more dwelling units, and including
townhouses, apartments and multiplexes, but excluding cluster developments.



   DWELLING, ONE FAMILY. A building designed, arranged or occupied as a
dwelling unit for one family only, including cluster housing.



   DWELLING, TWO FAMILY. A building designed, arranged or occupied as a
dwelling and containing two separate dwelling units.



   DWELLING UNIT. A room or rooms within a dwelling connected together,
constituting separate independent living quarters for one household,
physically separated from any other rooms or dwelling units and containing
permanent provisions for its own independent bathroom, sleeping and kitchen
facilities.



   EFFICIENCY UNIT. A dwelling unit with eight bathroom and principal
kitchen facilities designed as a self-contained unit for occupancy for
living, cooking and sleeping purposes and having no separate designated
bedroom.



   ENHANCED LANDSCAPING TREATMENT.  An outdoor site element, feature, or
amenity (such as an outdoor dining area, plaza, or pedestrian pass through)
that (i) contributes to making a place more inviting and aesthetically
pleasing to current or prospective residents, employees, businesses,
visitors, or others who currently or may in the future live, work, play, do
business, or visit the city, and/or (ii) promotes community spirit within the
city, and camaraderie among those who live, work, play, do business, or visit
the city. 



   ERECTED. Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon or any
physical operations on the premises which are required for the construction
of a building or structure. Excavations, fill, drainage and the like shall be
considered a part of erection.



   ESSENTIAL SERVICES. Any of the following services which provide a basic
and indispensable service to residents and businesses, if such service is
designed and constructed to directly serve local users within the geographic
boundaries of the city. Such ESSENTIAL SERVICES may include the erection,
construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal
departments of gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or distribution
systems, collection, communication (including cellular telephone equipment
and related facilities located on municipally-owned property, which are
utilized as part of the city emergency communication network, but excluding
cellular telephone equipment and related facilities which are not located
upon municipally-owned property or which are not incorporated into the city
emergency communication network, computer networking, private mail services
and facsimile transmission centers), supply and disposal systems, including
towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire
alarm and police call boxes, neighborhood municipal drop-off centers, traffic
signals, hydrants and similar equipment, provided they are designed and
constructed to directly serve local users. Any of the services which serve
users beyond the limits of Sterling Heights shall not constitute an ESSENTIAL
SERVICE. ESSENTIAL SERVICES shall be exempt from this ordinance. See "public
utility."



   EXCAVATION. Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening,
general farming and group care.



   FAMILY. Any individual, two or more persons related by blood or
marriage or group of not more than five persons who need not be related by
blood or marriage occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a
common household. The relationship must be of a permanent and distinct
character with a demonstrable and recognizable bond characteristic of a
cohesive unit. FAMILY does not include any organization or group of
individuals where the common living arrangement or basis for the
establishment of the housekeeping unit is temporary.



   FENCE. A partly obscuring structure serving as a physical barrier,
marker or enclosure but excluding a masonry wall.



   FILLING. The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into the
ground, except common household gardening or lawn care.



   FLOODPLAIN AREA. That area defined as a special flood hazard area in
“The Flood Plain Insurance Study of the City of Sterling Heights,” dated
May 15,1986.



   FLOOR AREA. Area measured to the exterior face of exterior walls and to
the centerline of interior partitions, plus, similarly measured, that area of
all other stories having more than 84 inches of headroom which may be made
usable for human habitation, but excluding the floor area of basements,
attics, garages, breezeways, porches and accessory buildings.



   FOSTER CARE FACILITY. A building or structure and accessory facility
within which 24 hour care, family-type living arrangements, including room
and board and/or personal services, are provided to persons who are unrelated
to the facility owner or operator. Such facilities may include child or adult
care and may be a part of an existing residence or a separate facility.



   FOUNDATION PLANTING.  A planting providing decorative landscaping
adjacent to (i) an exterior building wall visible to the general public from
a public thoroughfare, or parking lot of the overall shopping center or site,
or (ii) an outdoor dining area or outdoor plaza area. 



   FRONTAGE. That side of a lot abutting a street.



   FRONTAGE GREENBELT.  A flat or undulating landscaped area or
landscaped berm located in the front yard(s) of a lot or parcel of a depth
not less than the required front yard setback.



   FRONTAGE LANDSCAPING.  Grass, shrubs, trees, other plantings, mulch,
and decorative stones installed in a bed or other landscape area located in
the frontage greenbelt of a lot or parcel parallel to the street(s) adjacent
to the lot or parcel.



   FRONTAGE TREES.  Evergreen or deciduous trees installed in the
frontage greenbelt of a lot or parcel.  Frontage trees shall not include
street trees planted in the right-of-way area adjacent to the front yard of a
lot or parcel.



   FULL ASSISTED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A structure and accessory
facilities designed exclusively to provide for the care of the aged and
infirm or those suffering from bodily disorders where two or more persons are
housed or lodged and are furnished meals, nursing and/or medical care
assistance.



   GARAGE. An accessory building or portion of a main building designated
or used solely for the storage of motor-driven vehicles, boats and similar
vehicles and equipment and not more than two commercial vehicles, owned and
used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory.



   GASOLINE SELF-SERVICE STATION. A building or premises designed
primarily for the pumping by customers of gasoline and other fuels used for
the propulsion of motor vehicles (stored only in underground tanks) and to
provide self serve retail sale of oil and other products used by motor
vehicles, but excluding the sale of tires, batteries, shocks and the like and
the repair and maintenance of vehicles. The retail sale of nonalcoholic
beverages, cigarettes and other convenience store food items shall be
permitted within the gasoline self-service station building, including a
drive-through window, provided such sales do not constitute the principal use
of the premises.



   GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A building or premises to be used for the
retail sale of gasoline, oil or other fuel for the propulsion or lubrication
of motor vehicles (including some, but not only, self-service gasoline sale)
and which may include facilities for minor services such as tune-ups, brake
adjustments and repair, shock absorber repair and replacement, wheel
alignments, the changing and repairing of tires, washing, polishing, oil
changes, lubrication and other minor servicing, but excluding painting,
engine rebuilding and other major repairs not incidental to the principal.
The provision of the above-listed and similar service activities on the
premises shall not be permitted unless the premises are used primarily for
the retail sale of gasoline and oil and other automotive products. The retail
sale of nonalcoholic beverages, cigarettes and other convenience store food
items shall be permitted within the automobile service station provided such
sales do not constitute the principal use of the premises. A drive-through
window shall not be permitted.



   GRADE. The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating
the number of stories and the height of the building. The building grade
shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the
finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall
be determined by averaging the elevation of the grade for each face of the
building.



   GREENBELT. A strip of land of specified width and location reserved for
the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer
strip.



   GROCERY STORE (FOOD STORE). An establishment that deals primarily in
the retail sale of staple food stuffs, meats, produce, dairy products, baked
goods, health and beauty aids and household supplies.



   HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any item which constitutes a HAZARDOUS MATERIAL as
defined in the Fire Prevention Code adopted by the city, including but not
limited to explosives and blasting agents, compressed gases, flammable and
combustible liquids, flammable solids, oxidizers, organic peroxides,
pyrophoric materials, unstable (reactive) materials, water-reactive
materials, cryogenic liquids, highly toxic or toxic materials, radioactive
materials, corrosives, irritants, sensitizers and medical wastes and any
other hazardous material determined by the Fire Department to present a
"health hazard" or "physical hazard" as such terms are defined under the Fire
Prevention Code.



   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation, activity or hobby that is traditionally
or customarily carried on within the walls of a dwelling unit, provided that
it is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for
dwelling purposes, is not offensive and does not change the character
thereof. A home occupation shall include use of a single family residence by
an owner or occupant giving instruction in a craft or fine art within the
residence, subject to other limitations contained in this ordinance.



   HOSPITAL. An institution providing health services, primarily for
in-patients, plus medical and surgical care for the sick or injured,
including such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments,
central service facilities and staff offices.



   IMPOUND LOT. A parcel of land used to store and dispose of articles
impounded, seized or recovered by the Police Department, the Treasurer or any
other authorized representative of the city, county, state or federal
governments.



   INDEPENDENT HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A group of dwelling units
principally designed for elderly residents who are generally capable of
living and caring for themselves independently without supervision, personal
care assistance and extensive medical attention.



   JUNK YARD.  Includes automobile wrecking yards and/or other areas used
for the purchase, sale, exchange, disassembly, storage, processing, baling or
packaging of junk, including but not limited to scrap metals, unusable
machinery or motor vehicles, tires, bottles and paper and not including uses
established entirely within enclosed buildings.



   KENNEL. Any lot or premises on which four or more dogs or cats, six
months or older, are kept either permanently or temporarily.



   LABORATORY. A building devoted to experimental or routine study, such
as testing and analytical operations, and in which manufacturing of products
is not permitted.



   LIMITED ASSISTED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY. A group of dwelling units
providing shelter and services principally for the elderly which may include
one or more of the following: social programs, meals, housekeeping and
personal care/medical assistance.



   LINEAR FOOTAGE OR LINEAR FEET.  The straight line measurement in feet
of lot or parcel frontage on a street or of an object (such as exterior wall
of a building).



   LOADING SPACE. An off-street facility or space on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings for the temporary parking of commercial
vehicles while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.



   LOT. Land occupied, or intended to be occupied, by a main building and
accessory buildings, together with such yards and open spaces as are required
under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically
designated as such on public records.



   LOT AREA. The total horizontal area between the lot lines of a lot.



   LOT, CORNER. Any lot containing two or more front yards, including a
cul-de-sac lot. A through lot shall not be considered a corner lot unless it
abuts two or more streets in addition to the street abutting the rear lot
line. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a
corner lot for the purposes of this ordinance if the arc is of less radius
than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points where the lot
lines meet the curve of the straight street line extended, form an interior
angle of less than 135 degrees (see illustration).



   LOT COVERAGE. That part or percentage of lot occupied by principal and
accessory buildings.



   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance measured from the lot line to
the rear lot line.



   LOT, INTERIOR. Any lot other than a corner or through lot.



   LOT, THROUGH. A lot which may include a corner lot, having frontage on
two parallel or approximately parallel streets.



   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot line separating a lot from the street
right-of-way line. In the case of a through lot, all portions of the lot
having frontage on a street right-of-way shall be considered a front lot line.



   LOT LINE, REAR. That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case
of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line,
parallel to the front lot line and not less than ten feet long, lying
farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot.



   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line.



   LOT OF RECORD. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a
recorded plat on file with the County Register of Deeds or any parcel which
has been separated therefrom in accordance with the provisions of the plat
act and which exists as described.



   LOT WIDTH. The least straight line distance between the side lot lines
measured but not encroaching into the front yard setback.



   MAJOR INDUSTRIAL FACILITY. A parcel of property of twelve (12) or more
acres zoned M-1 Light Industrial or M-2 Heavy Industrial (or a combination of
such zoning classifications) that is developed with buildings of 150,000
square feet or more of lot coverage (or was developed with such buildings
immediately preceding the application under the IFR Option). A major
industrial facility also includes a parcel of property of less than twelve
(12) acres or which is developed with buildings of less than 150,000 square
feet of lot coverage if the Planning Commission has approved a modification
of such minimum standard for a particular site as authorized by Section 22.05
D 1 e.



   MANEUVERING LANE. A paved lane or drive located in an off-street
parking area facilitating the flow of vehicles to and from parking spaces.



   MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external
soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or
electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such supplementary aids as
rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions,
ointments or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice.



   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT. Any building, room, place or establishment where
manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced for pay upon the
human body by anyone not a duly licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor,
registered nurse or practical nurse operating under a physician’s
directions, registered speech pathologists and physical or occupational
therapists who treat only patients recommended by a licensed physician and
operate only under such physician’s direction, whether with or without the
use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices. A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT,
as defined herein, shall include, but is not limited to, massage parlors,
health clubs, health spas, sauna baths, turkish bathhouses and steam baths.
This term shall not include a regularly licensed hospital, medical clinic or
nursing home or other licensed facilities where massages are provided as an
incidental or accessory use to the main use of the premises for a related
activity.



   MASTER LAND USE PLAN. A comprehensive plan document including graphic
and written material intended to establish policies and directions for the
future growth and development of the city, including the location of future
residential commercial and industrial areas, parks, streets and similar forms
of development.



   MASTER ROAD PLAN. The adopted Master Road Plan of the City of Sterling
Heights, as amended from time to time.



   MEZZANINE. An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and
ceiling of a main story occupying not more than one-third of the floor area
of such main story.



   MOBILE HOME. A structure in one or more sections which is built on a
chassis and designed to be used as dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required facilities and includes the
plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in the
structure.  MOBILE HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. A MOBILE
HOME shall not lose its character as such when placed on a permanent
foundation.



   MOBILE HOME PARK. A lot or parcel or tract of land used or intended to
be used as a site for mobile homes, under the control of a person upon which
three or more mobile homes are located on a continual nonrecreational basis
and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a
charge is made therefor, together with any building, structure, enclosure,
street equipment or facility used or intended to be used incidental to the
harboring or occupancy of mobile homes, for use incidental to the occupancy
of a mobile home and which is not intended for use as a temporary trailer
park and licensed pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 419 of 1976.



   MODULAR HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, not
built on a chassis, constructed according to the city’s Building Code and
designed to be used as a dwelling unit with a permanent foundation when
connected to the required facilities.



   MOTEL. A series of attached, semidetached or detached rental units
containing bedroom, bathroom and closet space, which provides overnight
lodging and are offered to the public for compensation.



   MULTIPLEX. A building designed exclusively for occupancy by three or
more families living independently of each other. Each dwelling unit shall
have the following characteristics:



      (1)   Two side walls exposed to the outside;



      (2)   Separate maintained entrances, directly to the outside;



      (3)   Not more than two common walls with adjoining units; and



      (4)   Single story units.



   MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION. A civil infraction involving a violation of
a city ordinance. MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION does not include a violation
described in section 113 of the Act, being M.C.L. §§ 600.113(a) and
600.113(c)(i) through (vi) and (ix), as amended, or any act or omission that
constitutes a crime and is punishable as a misdemeanor under this ordinance.



   NEIGHBORHOOD MUNICIPAL DROP-OFF CENTER. A municipal recycling center
where recyclables are collected and diverted from landfill disposal.



   NONCONFORMING BUILDING. A building, or portion thereof, lawfully
existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and
that does not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in
which it is located.



   NONCONFORMING LOT. A lot with dimensions which conflict with the
provisions of this ordinance.



   NONCONFORMING USE. A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at
the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, and that does
not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located.



   NURSERY, PLANT MATERIAL. A space, building or structure, or combination
thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail
sale on the premises, including products used for gardening or landscaping.
The definition of nursery within the meaning of this ordinance does not
include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits,
vegetables or Christmas trees.



   NURSERY SCHOOL. A public or private school, kindergarten or child care
facility wherein day care and education is provided for seven or more minors.



   OCCUPIED. Used in any way at the time in question.



   OFF-STREET PARKING LOT. A facility other than for single or two family
dwellings providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and
aisles for maneuvering so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the
parking of more than three vehicles.



   OPEN SPACE. Land required by this ordinance to remain as open space to
be used for recreation, resource protection, amenity or other specified
purpose.



   PARKING SPACE. A marked area of definite length and width inclusive of
vehicle circulation areas giving access thereto and which is fully accessible
for the storage and parking of permitted vehicles.



   PARKING STRUCTURE. A building or structure, or part thereof, used or
intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles.



   PAWNBROKER.  A person, corporation, or member, or members of a
copartnership or firm, who loans money on deposit, or pledge of personal
property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence
of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other
valuable thing on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated
price.



   PET. An animal kept for pleasure rather than utility.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department,
board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal,
state or municipal regulations to the public: electricity, gas, sanitary
sewers, cellular telephone service, steam, communications, telegraph,
transportation or water services, subject to the provisions of this ordinance.



   PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY. A building or structure devoted to providing
the public with water, gas, electricity, waste and sewage disposal or similar
uses but which does not include a storage yard.



   RECREATIONAL FACILITIES (PRIVATE CONTRACTUAL). Facilities including but
not limited to batting cages, golf domes, concession stands, swimming pools
and the like, excluding portable toilet facilities which are installed at
city and public (non-city) owned and/or operated parks through contractual
arrangement.



   REPEAT OFFENSE. A second (or subsequent) municipal civil infraction
violation of the same requirement or provision of this ordinance committed by
a person within any six month period for which the person admits
responsibility or is determined to be responsible.



   RESIDENTIAL ENTRANCEWAY STRUCTURE. A masonry structure, wall,
gatehouse, gate, column or similar architectural feature located near the
entranceway to a residential development which marks or identifies the
development.



   RESTAURANT. An establishment whose principal business is the sale of
food and/or beverages to customers in a ready-to-consume state and whose
principal method of operation includes one of the following characteristics:



      (1)   Customers are normally provided with an individual menu
and are served their foods and beverages by a restaurant employee at the same
table or counter at which food and beverages are consumed;



      (2)   A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages are
consumed within the restaurant building.



   RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT. A business establishment primarily selling
prepared foods and/or beverages intended to be taken off the premises for
consumption.



   RESTAURANT, FAST FOOD. An establishment whose principal business is the
sale of food and/or beverages in a ready to consume state for consumption:



      (1)   Within the restaurant building; or



      (2)   Off-the-premises as carry-out orders and whose principal
method of operation includes the following characteristics: food and/or
beverages are usually served in edible containers or in paper, plastic or
other disposal containers; or



      (3)   The establishment includes a drive-through service
facility.



   ROADSIDE STAND. A temporary or existing structure containing not more
than 200 square feet of floor area and operated for the purpose of selling
agricultural, dairy or poultry products raised or produced only by the
proprietor of the stand or by his or her family at that location.



   SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA. A structure or apparatus capable of receiving
communications from a transmitter or a transmitter relay located in a
planetary orbit.



   SATELLITE EARTH STATION. An antenna, usually parabolic in shape,
designed and intended for transmitting or receiving television, radio or
microwave signals to or from earth satellites.



   SEASONAL ENCLOSURE. A room addition with no more than 25% of any
elevation being constructed of materials other than glass, screen or approved
transparent materials.



   SELF-STORAGE FACILITY. A group of buildings divided into separate units
or areas used to meet the storage needs of businesses and residents of the
community on a self-service basis. This use is not designed to serve as a
warehouse for inventory or equipment for commercial and industrial uses, as
such a warehousing use by nature requires greater frequency of deliveries to
and from the storage location than accompanies the self-storage facility use.



   SHED. An accessory building designated or used solely for the storage
of lawn and gardening tools and equipment, snowblowers, patio furniture and
other similar household and lawn equipment but excluding the storage of
automobiles, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles or equipment on trailers,
trailers and similar vehicles and equipment, owned and used by the occupants
of the building to which it is accessory.



   SIGN. See section 28.13.



   SIMPLIFIED TRADITIONAL.  An architectural style incorporating design
elements which include dormers, cupolas, cornices, parapets, canopies,
awnings, and masonry or brick piers, pilasters, and lintels.  (See
illustration at end of the definitions in this section). 



   SITE CONDOMINIUMS. A condominium version of a platted subdivision.
These developments include a dwelling unit or structure and an area of land
immediately surrounding each dwelling or building unit (referred to as
building envelope) which together are equivalent to the area of a platted lot.



   SITE-OBSCURING. An opaque fence, greenbelt, decorative masonry wall or
other structure which serves as a complete visual barrier to persons outside
its perimeter.



   SITE PLAN. A detailed drawing showing all salient features of a
proposed development so that it may be evaluated to determine its compliance
with all applicable requirements of this ordinance.



    SPECIAL APPROVAL LAND USES. A land use or an activity which, under
certain circumstances, might be detrimental to other permitted uses and
should not be permitted as a right in a given zoning district, but which use
can be permitted under circumstances unique to the proposed location and
subject to conditions acceptable to the city which provide protection to land
uses.



   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.



      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human
genitals, pubic region, buttock and female breast below a point immediately
above the top of areola; and



      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even
if completely and opaquely covered.



   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.



      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;



      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; and



      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals,
pubic region, buttock or female breast.



   STABLE, PRIVATE. An accessory building for the keeping of horses for
non-commercial use of the residents of the principal building on the lot,
excluding the keeping of horses for others or for commercial riding or
boarding.



   STABLE, RIDING OR BOARDING. An accessory structure or building wherein
horses, ponies or other equine are kept or sheltered for riding, showing,
breeding or boarding purposes for a fee or for hire, remuneration or sale.



   STATE LICENSED RESIDENTIAL FACILITY.A structure constructed for
residential purposes that is licensed by the state under the adult foster
care facility licensing act, 1979 PA 218, MCL 400.701 to 400.737, or 1973 PA
116, MCL 722.111 to 722.128, and provides residential services for 6 or fewer
persons under 24-hour supervision or care.



   STORAGE YARD. An open area, not enclosed by a building, primarily used
to store goods, raw materials, equipment or vehicles when not in use but
excluding waste or scrap materials.



   STORY. That portion of a building between a floor and a ceiling.



   STORY, HALF. An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof, the usable
floor area of which does not exceed 50% of the floor area immediately below.
Tri-level shall be considered one and one-half stories, quad-level shall be
considered two stories.



   STREET, PRIVATE. A street which serves more than one property and
adjacent landowners are responsible for its maintenance.



   STREET, PUBLIC. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to abutting property and which has been accepted either expressly
or impliedly by the city, Macomb County Road Commission or other public road
agency as a public street.



   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATION. Any change in the supporting members of a
building or structure, such as bearing walls; or partitions, columns, beams
or girders, stairways or any change in the width or number of exits; or any
substantial change in the roof and exterior wall.



   SUPERMARKET. An establishment that deals primarily in the retail sale
of food, sundries, household and general merchandise in a large variety and
quantity and typically includes personal services such as photo processing,
shoe repair, dry cleaning, video rentals and the like.



   TATTOO.  Any of the following indelible marks:



      (1)   An indelible mark made upon the body of another
individual by the insertion of a pigment under the skin.



      (2)   An indelible design made upon the body of another
individual by production of scars other than by branding.



   TATTOOING.  The making of a tattoo upon the body of another individual.



   TEMPORARY. For a duration of less than one year.



   TEMPORARY USE OR BUILDING. A use or building permitted after approval
by either the Planning Commission or Office of Planning and Zoning for
periods of time that are limited in duration to the period of a seasonal sale
or special event or a non-permanent structure used in conjunction with a
temporary use.



   TOWNHOUSE. A building occupied by three or more families in which each
unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located
above another unit and each unit is separated from another unit by one or
more common fire resistant walls.



   TRUCK STORAGE.  An area used for the temporary storage of private
trucks or trucks for hire.



   TRUCK TERMINAL. A structure owned, leased or operated by a common
carrier to which goods, except raw or unprocessed agricultural products,
natural minerals or other resources, are delivered for immediate distribution
to other locations or to be amalgamated for delivery in larger units to other
points in the metropolitan area or for distribution or amalgamation involving
transfer to other modes of transportation.



   USE, PRINCIPAL. The primary and chief purpose for which a lot, parcel
or building is used.



   USE, VARIANCE. A variance granted for a use or structure that is not
permitted in a particular zoning district.



   VARIANCE. A modification of the literal provisions of this ordinance
granted by the Zoning Board of Appeals in situations or under circumstances
where permitted by law.



   WALL. An obscuring structure of definite height and location,
constructed of masonry, concrete or similar material and intended for
security, screening or enclosure.



   YARD. An open space of prescribed width or depth on the same lot with a
building or group of buildings, which open space lies between the building or
group of buildings and the nearest lot line and is unoccupied from the ground
upward, except, as otherwise provided herein.



   YARD, FRONT. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line
and the nearest point on the main building (see illustration).



   YARD, REAR. An open space extending the full width of the lot, the
depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line
and the nearest point on the main building (see illustration).



   YARD, SIDE. An open space between a main building and the side lot
line, extending from the front yard, the width of which is the horizontal
distance from the nearest point of the side lot line to the nearest point of
the main building (see illustration).







 



(Ord. No. 278-A, §§ 44-46, 4-17-90; Ord. No. 278-G, § 21, 9-18-90; Ord.
No. 278-L, § 6, 6-2-92; Ord. No. 278-N, §§ 24, 25, 8-1-95; Ord. No. 278-O,
§ 11, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 278-R, §§ 20, 21, 8-20-96; Ord. No. 278-T, § 18,
6-3-97; Ord. No. 278-U, §§ 20-23, 1-6-98; Ord. No. 278-W, § 1, 11-30-98;
Ord. No. 278-Y, §§ 45, 46, 5-16-00; Ord. No. 278-AA, § 13, 3-20-01; Ord.
No. 278-CC, § 21, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-KK §§ 2, 3, 4-15-08; Ord. No.
278-LL, § 3, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 278-MM, § 5, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 278-NN, §§
30, 31, 34, 35, 1-6-09; Ord. No. 278-OO, § 19, 8-5-09; Ord. No. 278-PP, §
4, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 278-XX, § 2, 7-19-16; Ord. No. 278-YY, § 14, 10-4-16;
Ord. No. 278-AAA, § 2, 5-3-17; Ord. No. 278-BBB, § 8, 7-18-17)




[Click here to view Basic Structural Terms image.]





[Click here to view Building Line image.]





[Click here to view Basement & Story and Building Height image.]





[Click here to view Lots & Areas image.]





[Click here to view Through Lot, Interior & Corner image.]





[Click here to view Yards image.]




ARTICLE 32.  ZONING CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS



SECTION 32.00.  AMENDMENT INITIATION.



   A.   An amendment to this ordinance text and/or map may be initiated
by: City Council on its own motion; the Planning Commission; or by petition
of a property owner, vested party or one with a legal interest.



   B.   All petitions for amendments to this ordinance shall be in
writing, signed and filed with the city. At this time, the fee established by
City Council shall be paid.



   C.   All petitions for amendments to this ordinance, without
limiting the right to file additional materials, shall contain at least the
following:



      1.   The petitioner's name, address and interest in the
petition, as well as the name, address and interest of every person having a
legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition. The
signature of each party having an interest must be presented on the
application;



      2.   A description of the proposed amendment;



      3.   If the proposed amendment would require a change in the
zoning map, a fully dimensioned map showing:



         a.   The land which would be affected by the proposed
amendment;



         b.   A legal description of such land;



         c.   The present zoning classification of the land.



      4.   An owner may voluntarily offer in writing to use and
develop land with a particular use or development as a condition to rezoning
or to amendment of the zoning map relating to the land. 



         a.   An owner willing to condition rezoning or map
amendment upon use or development of the land in a particular manner may
request (but shall not be required to obtain) a pre-preliminary review prior
to filing a formal petition for rezoning or for map amendment.



         b.   The petitioner's new application request, including
the proposed conditions, shall be considered by the Planning Commission
during the public hearing prior to making a recommendation on the proposed
request to the City Council.



         c.   A request for rezoning or map amendment based upon
conditions shall be subject to all of the requirements and procedures set
forth in Article 24 which do not conflict with this division, division C.5.,
and Section 32.04 H.



         d.   The conditions offered by the owner and accepted by
the City Council as a condition of the rezoning or map amendment shall be
incorporated into a written agreement approved by the owner and the city,
including any site plans, elevation plans, landscape plans, signage plans, or
other applicable conditions which were offered by the owner and accepted by
the city as part of the conditions relating to the rezoning or map
amendment.  The agreement shall be recorded with the Macomb County Register
of Deeds.  Any approved final site plan for the proposed use or development
must be consistent with the conditions of approval proposed by the owner and
accepted by the City Council. 



         e.   The owner must receive final site plan approval for
the proposed use or development within 12 months of the effective date of the
ordinance amendment approving the conditional rezoning or map amendment,
obtain a building permit within 18 months of the effective date, and complete
development of the proposed development within 30 months of the effective
date.  If the owner fails to proceed with development of its property in
accordance with the mutually agreeable conditions, the zoning of the land
reverts to its former zoning classification.  This time limitation may be
extended by the City Council in response to a request from the owner. 



         f.   An owner who develops land with a development or
use pursuant to a conditional rezoning or map amendment shall continuously
operate and maintain the development or use in compliance with all of the
terms and conditions of the conditional rezoning agreement executed by the
City and the owner.  Any failure to satisfy a condition of rezoning or map
amendment incorporated into the written agreement shall constitute a separate
violation of the Zoning Ordinance.



         g.   Any rezoning or map amendment approved pursuant to
this conditional rezoning or map amendment procedure shall be binding upon
and inure to the benefit of successor owners of the land in accordance with
the terms and conditions set forth in the agreement. 



         h.   The conditions of the rezoning or map amendment
offered by the owner and approved by the City Council shall not be altered or
added to during the specified time period except as provide in provided in
division i. below.



         i.   Any changes to the conditions of the rezoning or
map amendment shall be incorporated into a written amendment to the agreement
executed by the owner and the city, which shall be recorded with the Macomb
County Register of Deeds.



      5.   If a petition for amendment of the zoning classification
of a rezoning or map amendment for a parcel of property of land is denied by
the City Council, a new application requesting amendment of the current
zoning classification to the same requested classification or to a more
intense zoning classification shall not be accepted by the Office of Planning
for a period of one year after the effective date of such denial unless:



         a.   Changed conditions in the surrounding neighborhood
and/or vicinity are clearly evident;



         b.   The provisions of the zoning ordinance relating to
the matter previously decided by the City Council have been amended; or



         c.   The new application is filed by a new property
owner or party with an interest in the property.



         d.   The denial received by the petitioner related to a
request for rezoning or map amendment based upon conditions in accordance
with the procedure set forth in Section 32.00C.4.  After the City Council
makes a determination that such request satisfies one of the exceptions set
forth in C.5.a., b., or c., the petitioner may file its application for
rezoning for consideration in accordance with the procedures for zoning
amendments set forth in Article 32.



         e.   A petitioner who wishes to submit a new application
for rezoning or map amendment within the one year period after denial of a
request for conditional rezoning or map amendment may do so by filing a new
application for rezoning or map amendment accompanied by a new application
and fee.  The petitioner's new application request shall be considered by
the Planning Commission which shall make a recommendation to the City Council
after conducting a public hearing in accordance with the procedures
applicable to requests for conventional rezoning or map amendment.  A
petitioner who wishes to submit a new application for rezoning or map
amendment within the one year period after denial of a request for rezoning
or map amendment that was considered in the conventional manner must submit
correspondence demonstrating that the request meets one of the above criteria
set forth in Section 32.00 C.5.a., b., or c.  The City Council must
determine that the petitioner's new request for rezoning or map amendment is
within any of the exceptions set forth in C.5.a., b., or c. prior to
acceptance of the new application by the Office of  Planning and prior to
conducting any public hearing.



(Ord. No. 278-CC, § 22, 6-3-03; Ord. No. 278-FF, § 5, 5-3-05)



SECTION 32.01.  ACTION OF PLANNING COMMISSION.



   A.   Upon receipt of a petition to amend this ordinance, the
Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed amendment to
this ordinance before making a recommendation to the City Council. Notice of
the public hearing shall be given according to state law. After the public
hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward to the City Council a summary
of the comments submitted at the public hearing and its recommendations and
report on the proposed amendment.



SECTION 32.02.  ACTION OF CITY COUNCIL.



   A.   Upon receipt of the recommendations and report from the
Planning Commission, the city may adopt the ordinance and maps with or
without amendments or may refer the ordinance and maps back to the Planning
Commission for further study and a supplemental report before taking final
action on the proposed amendment.



   B.   An amendment to this zoning ordinance may be passed only by an
affirmative vote of at least five members of the City Council if a protest
against the proposed amendment is presented to the City Council at or before
the time for final action on the amendment. The protest shall be duly signed
by:



      1.   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included
in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned land; or



      2.   The owners of at least 20% of the area of land included
within an area extending outward 100 feet from any point on the boundary of
the land included in the proposed change, excluding publicly owned land.



   C.   Following adoption of an amendment to this ordinance by the
City Council, notice of adoption shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city. The notice shall include the following information:



      1.   Either a summary of the regulatory effect of the
amendment, including the geographic area affected or the text of the
amendment;



      2.   This ordinance shall be effective upon the expiration of
seven days after publication of a notice of adoption;



      3.   The place and time where a copy of the ordinance may be
purchased or inspected.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 32, 1-6-09)



SECTION 32.03.  FILING OF PETITIONS FOR AMENDMENTS FEES.



   All petitions for amendments to this ordinance shall be in writing,
signed and filed with the City Clerk on forms provided by the city and
according to the administrative provisions established by the city. At this
time, the fee established by City Council to cover the cost of processing,
erection of public notice signs and hearings shall be paid.



(Ord. No. 278-X, § 22, 4-6-99)



SECTION 32.04.  CONTENTS OF PETITION FOR AMENDMENT.



   All petitions for amendments to this ordinance, without limiting the
rights to file additional material, shall contain at least the following:



   A.    The petitioner’s name, address and verified interest in the
petition, as well as the name, address and interest of every person having a
legal or an equitable interest in the land covered by the petition;



   B.   The nature and effect of the proposed amendment;



   C.   If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning
map, a fully dimensioned map showing:



      1.   The land which would be affected by the proposed
amendment;



      2.   A legal description of such land;



      3.   The present zoning classification of the land;



      4.   The zoning classification of all abutting districts;



      5.   All public and private rights-of-way and easements
bounding and intersecting the land under consideration.



         An application for approval of a rezoning shall not be
processed or placed on an agenda for a public hearing until the site for
which the rezoning has been requested is subject to any outstanding,
unresolved Property Maintenance Code violation.  Any outstanding Property
Maintenance Code violation must be first resolved by correcting the violation
or by having the applicant/property owner sign a written code compliance
agreement with the City setting forth a written commitment by the
applicant/property owner to bring the site and/or building into full
compliance with all provisions of the Property Maintenance Code within a
specific time period acceptable to the City Development Director.



   D.   If the proposed amendment would require a change in the zoning
map, the names and addresses of the owners of all land within the area to be
changed by the proposed amendment.



   E.   The alleged error in this ordinance, if any, which would be
corrected by the proposed amendment, together with a detailed explanation of
such error in the ordinance which is alleged and detailed reasons as to how
the proposed amendment will correct the same.



   F.   The changed or changing conditions, if any, in the area or in
the municipality generally which make the proposed amendment reasonably
necessary.



   G.   All other circumstances, factors and reasons which applicant
offers in support of the proposed amendment.



   H.   If the proposed request for rezoning or zoning map amendment
includes conditions upon which the owner proposes to develop the land with a
particular development or use, the owner may submit with the petition any
documentation or information related to its proposed development, including
but not limited to the following materials (in addition to those required
by  division A. through G.):



      1.   A detailed site plan for the proposed use or development
of the land showing proposed buildings, setbacks, driveways, parking and
other information required by Article 26 of the Zoning Ordinance.



      2.   Elevation drawings for any proposed buildings or
structures to be constructed on the land, and descriptions of building
materials to be incorporated.



      3.   Landscape plans showing the proposed landscaping and
screening of the use or development of the property.



      4.   Signage plans showing the proposed signage to be
installed as part of the proposed development or use of the land.



      5.    A written agreement specifying the conditions of
approval voluntarily offered by the petitioner as a condition to approval of
a rezoning or map amendment of the property, which may include site plans,
elevation drawings, landscape plans, signage plans or other document that
assist in identifying the conditions that have been proposed by the owner and
accepted by the city.



      6.   The time period during which the owner intends to proceed
with and complete development of the land in the manner proposed in the
agreement (including interim benchmarks such as anticipated time to obtain
site plan approval and securing of building permits), and after which the
zoning change made by the rezoning or map amendment shall revert to the
former zoning classification unless the time period is extended by the city.



   I.   Approval of a rezoning or map amendment by the City Council
conditioned upon development or use of land in a particular manner with a use
which is a special approval land use under the Zoning Ordinance shall not
require separate special approval land use if the development or use has been
approved by the City Council as part of the conditional rezoning or map
amendment for the land.



   J.   Approval of a rezoning or map amendment by the City Council
conditioned upon development or use of land in a particular manner with a use
or in a manner which requires a variance or modification of the standards set
forth in the Zoning Ordinance shall not require separate approval of the
variance or modification if the development or use has been approved by the
City Council with the variance or modification included as part of the
conditional rezoning or map amendment for the land.



   K.   An owner shall not be required to propose voluntary conditions
as part of a request for rezoning or map amendment.



   L.   An owner who has filed a request for rezoning or map amendment
with conditions may request at any time prior to a final decision of the City
Council that the petition be considered as a request for map amendment or
rezoning without conditions.  In such instances, the petition shall be
referred to the Planning Commission for a new public hearing after notice is
given as required by law.



(Ord. No. 278-FF, §§ 6-7, 5-3-05; Ord. No. 278-RR, § 6, 10-18-11)



SECTION 32.05.  COMPREHENSIVE REVIEW OF ORDINANCE.



   The Planning Commission, at intervals of not less than three years,
shall examine the provisions of this ordinance and shall submit a report to
City Council recommending changes, if any, deemed desirable in the interests
of public health, safety and welfare.



SECTION 32.06.  RESERVED.



Editor's note:



   Ord. No. 278-J, § 1, adopted June 18, 1991, enacted § 32.06, relative
to a moratorium on certain commercial retail development, which was repealed
effective Dec. 21, 1991 by § 4 of said  ordinance. Ord. No. 278-K, § 1,
adopted May 19, 1992, enacted § 32.06, relative to a moratorium on certain
commercial retail development, which was repealed effective July 31, 1992 by
§ 4 of said ordinance.



ARTICLE 33.  PENALTIES, PUBLIC NUISANCES, SEVERABILITY AND REPEAL



SECTION 33.00.  VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.



   A.   Whenever, by the provisions of this ordinance, the performance
of any act is required or the performance of any act is prohibited or
wherever any regulation, dimension or limitation is imposed on the use of or
upon any land or on the erection or alteration or the use or change of
occupancy or structure or the uses within such structure, a failure to comply
with such provisions of this ordinance shall constitute a violation of this
ordinance. Every day on which a violation exists shall constitute a separate
violation and a separate offense.



   B.   Any person, or any other acting in behalf of said person,
violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction
thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than $500 and the costs of
prosecution, by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both such fine
and imprisonment at the discretion of the court. The imposition of any
sentence shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements
of this ordinance.



   C.   Municipal civil infraction.  It is unlawful and constitutes a
municipal infraction for any person to violate or fail to comply with the
following provisions of this zoning ordinance:



 

Article
 
Title
 
Section


23
 
Residential parking must be on paved areas
 
23.01(J)


28
 
Portable signs
 
28.13


28
 
All signs within the city must be properly maintained
 
28.13


28
 
Regulation of window signs
 
28.13


28
 
Operation of outdoor patio while nuisance mitigation plan suspended
 
28.19(B)6 (first offense only)



 



   The sanction for a municipal civil infraction citation shall be a civil
fine in the amount provided by this zoning ordinance, plus any costs,
damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of
Public Act 236 of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws.



      1.   The fine for a first offense violation of § 28.19(B)6
shall be $500.  Unless otherwise specifically provided by this code, the
fine for any other violation of this zoning ordinance shall not be less than
$100 or more than $200.



      2.   An increased fine may be imposed by the court for each
repeat offense in accordance with the following:



         a.   The fine for any offense that is a first repeat
offense shall be no less than $250 nor more than $400;



         b.   The fine for any second repeat offense or any
subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $500.



   D.   In addition to all other remedies, the city may commence and
prosecute appropriate actions or proceedings in court to restrain or prevent
any noncompliance with or violation of any of the provisions of this
ordinance or to correct, remedy or abate such noncompliance or violation.



(Ord. No. 278-W, § 2, 11-30-98; Ord. No. 278-ZZ, § 3, 12-20-16)



SECTION 33.01.  PUBLIC NUISANCE.



   Any use of land or of a dwelling, building or structure, including a
tent or recreational vehicle, used, erected, altered, razed or converted in
violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or a regulation adopted
under it is declared to be a public nuisance per se and shall be abated by
order of a court of competent jurisdiction. The City Manager or his or her
designate(s) shall administer and enforce the Zoning Ordinance.



(Ord. No. 278-NN, § 33, 1-6-09)



SECTION 33.02.  SEVERANCE CLAUSE.



   Sections of this ordinance shall be deemed to be severable and should
any section, paragraph or provision thereof be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such holdings shall not affect the validity of
this ordinance as a whole or any part hereof, other than the part so declared
to be unconstitutional or invalid.



SECTION 33.03.  REPEAL.



   The existing zoning regulations of the City of Sterling Heights, being
the zoning ordinance, Ordinance Number 131 adopted by the City Council on
June 17, 1970, as amended, are hereby repealed. The adoption of this
ordinance, however, shall not affect or prevent any pending or future
prosecution of, or action to abate, any existing violation of the
aforementioned ordinance dated June 17, 1970, as amended, if the use so in
violation is in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.



SECTION 33.04.  MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS.



   A.   Definitions. In this article, the following words shall have
the following meaning ascribed to them.



      BUREAU. The City of Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau as established by this article.



      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION ACTION. A civil action in which the
defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction.



      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION CITATION. A written complaint or
notice to appear in court upon which an authorized city official records the
occurrence or existence of one or more municipal civil infractions by the
person cited.



      MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTION NOTICE. A written notice prepared by
an authorized city official directing a person to appear at the City of
Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau to pay the fine and
costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines
adopted by the city.



   B.   Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. A municipal
civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized
city official of: (1) municipal civil infraction citation directing the
alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil infraction
notice directing the alleged violator appear at the City of Sterling Heights
Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau, within ten days, to pay a civil fine
if the alleged violator admits responsibility.



   C.   Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service.
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized
city officials as follows:



      1.   The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be
within a reasonable time after the citation is issued;



      2.   The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be
the District Court;



      3.   Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall
be in a form approved by the State Court Administrator. The original citation
shall be filed with the District Court. Copies of the citation shall be
retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by
Section 8705 of the Act;



      4.   A citation for a municipal infraction signed by an
authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation
alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the
complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately
above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties
of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information,
knowledge and belief;"



      5.   An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit
a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible
and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation;



      6.   An authorized city official may issue a citation to a
person if:



         a.   Based upon investigation, the official has
reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal
civil infraction; or



         b.   Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone
who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the
official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for
an infraction and if the City Attorney approves in writing the issuance of
the citation;



      7.   Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by
an authorized city official as follows:



         a.   Except as provided by Section 33.04C,7,b, an
authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon
the alleged violator;



         b.   If the municipal civil infraction action involved
the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the
citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator but
may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by
posting the copy on the land or attaching the copy to the building or
structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first-class
mail to the owner of the land, building or structure at the owner’s last
known address.



   D.   Municipal civil infraction citations; contents.



      1.   A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and
address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the
place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number
of the court and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made.



      2.   Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator
that he or she may do one of the following:



         a.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction by mail, in person or by representation at or by the time
specified for appearance;



         b.   Admit responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or
in person or by representation;



         c.   Deny responsibility for the municipal civil
infraction by doing either of the following:



            (1)   Appearing in person for an informal hearing
before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being
represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is
requested by the city;



            (2)   Appearing in court for a formal hearing
before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney.



      3.   The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of
all of the following:



         a.   If the alleged violator desires to admit
responsibility "with explanation” in person or by representation, the
alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone or
by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a
scheduled date and time for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on
the citation;



         b.   If the alleged violator desires to deny
responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by
mail, by telephone or by representation within the time specified for
appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing,
unless a hearing date is specified on the citation;



         c.   A hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a
formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city;



         d.   At an informal hearing the alleged violator must
appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the
opportunity of being represented by an attorney;



         e.   At a formal hearing the alleged violator must
appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by
an attorney.



      4.   The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type
that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified
in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a
misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the
alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction.



   E.   Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau.



      1.   The City of Sterling Heights Municipal Ordinance
Violations Bureau ("Bureau") is established as authorized by Section 8396 of
the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil
infractions in response to municipal civil infraction notices issued and
served by authorized city officials and to collect and retain civil fines and
costs as prescribed by ordinance.



      2.   The Bureau shall be located at a site designated by the
City Manager and shall be under the supervision and control of the City
Manager. The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall
adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint any
regulations for the operation of the Bureau and appoint any necessary
qualified city employee(s) to administer the Bureau.



      3.   The Bureau may dispose of municipal civil infractions for
which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction
notice (as differentiated from a citation) has been issued. The Bureau may
not dispose of a municipal civil infraction citation (as differentiated from
a municipal civil infraction notice).



      Nothing in this article shall prevent or restrict the city from
issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from
prosecuting any action for such a violation in a court of competent
jurisdiction. No person shall be required to respond to a municipal civil
infraction notice at the Bureau and may instead have the violation processed
as a citation so that the matter will be handled by a court of competent
jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to respond to any municipal
civil infraction notice at the Bureau shall not prejudice or diminish such
person’s rights, privileges and protection accorded by law.



      4.   The Bureau shall only accept admissions of responsibility
for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal civil infraction notice
has been issued (as differentiated from a municipal civil infraction
citation). The Bureau shall collect and retain civil fines and costs
resulting from those admissions. The Bureau shall not accept payment of a
civil fine from any person who denies responsibility for the offense or who
admits responsibility only with an explanation. In no event shall the Bureau
determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or
matter relating to the alleged violation.



      5.   Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be
issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances
and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in sections
33.040 and 33.04C,7,a. and b. of this ordinance. In addition to any other
information required by this ordinance, the notice of violation shall
indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the Bureau,
the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone
number of the Bureau, the hours during which the Bureau is open, the amount
of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation and the consequences for
failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time.



      6.   An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil
infraction violation notice shall appear at the Bureau and pay the specified
fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal
civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in
person or by representation.



      7.   If an authorized city official issues and serves a
municipal civil infraction notice and if an admission of responsibility is
not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of
fines for the violations are not paid at the Bureau within ten days from the
date of issuance of the municipal civil infraction notice, a municipal civil
infraction citation may be filed with the District Court and a copy of the
citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at his
or her last known address. The citation filed with the Court shall consist of
a sworn complaint containing the allegations stated in the municipal civil
infraction notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond
to the citation.



   F.   Schedule of municipal civil infraction fines.



      1.   The following schedule of civil fines payable to the
Bureau for admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal
civil infraction notices shall apply:



         a.   $100 for each violation;



         b.   $250 for the first repeat offense;



         c.   $500 for any second or subsequent repeat offense.



      2.    A copy of the schedule, as amended from time to time,
shall be posted at the Bureau.



(Ord. No. 278-W, § 3, 11-30-98)



SECTION 33.05.  SCHEDULE OF REGULATIONS.



 



Sterling Heights Zoning Ordinance Schedule of Regulations
 
Minimum Yard Setbacks
 



Front Yard Setbacks
 




 
Minimum Lot Size
 
Maximum Bldg. Height
 
Regional 204'
 
Regional 150'
 
Major
 
Secondary
 
Collector
 
Local
 
Private Road
 
Side Yard Setbacks
 
Rear Yard Setbacks
 
Min. Floor Area (Sq. Ft.) 
 
Max.  Lot Coverage


Zoning Districts
 
Area
 
Width
 
Stories
 
Feet
 
Not Abutting Residential
 
Abutting Residential
 
Not Abutting Residential
 
Abutting Residential


R-100 One Family
 
14,000
 
100
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
10/25
 
10/25
 
35
 
35
 
2,000
 
30%


R-90 One Family
 
11,700
 
90
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
8/20
 
8/20
 
35
 
35
 
2,000
 
30%


R-80 One Family
 
10,000
 
80
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
5/15
 
5/15
 
35
 
35
 
1,800
 
30%


R-70 One Family
 
8,400
 
70
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
5/15
 
5/15
 
35
 
35
 
1,400
 
30%


R-60 One Family
 
7,200
 
60
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
5/15
 
5/15
 
35
 
35
 
1,000
 
30%


R-2 Two Family
 
12,000
 
100
 
2
 
25
 
132
 
105
 
90
 
73
 
65
 
60
 
30
 
10/20
 
10/20
 
35
 
35
 
800
 
30%


MHP Mobile Home Park
 
5,500
 
—
 
2
 
25
 
110 feet from the centerline of any abutting public road
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
25
 
720
 
—


RM-1 Low Rise Multiple
 
(See District Requirements)
 
2
 
25
 
(See District Requirements)
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
(See District Require-ments)
 
25%


RM-2 Low Rise Multiple
 
2
 
25
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
35
 
25%


RM-3 Mid and High Rise Multiple
 
None
 
None
 
(See District Requirements)
 
18%


O-1 Business & Professional Office
 
12,000
 
80
 
1
 
20
 
137
 
110
 
95
 
78
 
70
 
65
 
35
 
0/20
 
35
 
20
 
35
 
800
 
—


O-2 Planned Office
 
2 Ac.
 
200
 
2
 
30
 
152
 
125
 
110
 
92
 
85
 
80
 
52
 
25
 
75
 
40
 
75
 
5,000
 
—


O-3 Office/ Commercial Service
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
—
 
177
 
150
 
135
 
118
 
110
 
105
 
75
 
(See District Requirements)
 
—
 
35%


C-1 Local Convenience
 
12,000
 
80
 
1
 
20
 
137
 
110
 
95
 
78
 
70
 
65
 
35
 
5/20
 
50
 
60
 
50
 
700
 
—


C-2 Planned Comparison
 
10 Ac.
 
300
 
2
 
30
 
177
 
150
 
135
 
118
 
110
 
105
 
75
 
25
 
—
 
40
 
—
 
—
 
—


C-3 General Business
 
20,000
 
100
 
2
 
30
 
137
 
110
 
95
 
78
 
70
 
65
 
35
 
(See District Requirements)
 
—
 
—


C-4 Multi Use
 
(See District Requirements)


P-1 Parking
 
12,000
 
80
 
2
 
25
 
137
 
110
 
95
 
78
 
70
 
65
 
35
 
(See District Requirements)
 
—
 
—


O-R Office Research
 
40,000
 
140
 
2
 
30
 
177
 
150
 
135
 
118
 
110
 
105
 
75
 
25/100
 
75
 
75
 
100
 
5,000
 
—


M-1 Light Industrial
 
20,000
 
100
 
—
 
35
 
177
 
150
 
135
 
118
 
110
 
105
 
75
 
5/20
 
20/50
 
50
 
50/20
 
5,000
 
—


M-2 Heavy Industrial
 
25,000
 
100
 
—
 
50
 
177
 
150
 
135
 
118
 
110
 
105
 
75
 
15
 
20/50
 
50
 
20/20
 
10,000
 
—


PCD Planned Center District and TRO Technical Research Office District(See
District Requirements)




 


Disclaimer:
This Code of Ordinances and/or any other documents that appear on this site
may not reflect the most current legislation adopted by the Municipality.
American Legal Publishing Corporation provides these documents for
informational purposes only. These documents should not be relied upon as the
definitive authority for local legislation. Additionally, the formatting and
pagination of the posted documents varies from the formatting and pagination
of the official copy. The official printed copy of a Code of Ordinances
should be consulted prior to any action being taken.

For further information regarding the official version of any of this Code of
Ordinances or other documents posted on this site, please contact the
Municipality directly or contact American Legal Publishing toll-free at
800-445-5588.


                 © 2019 American Legal Publishing Corporation
                            techsupport@amlegal.com
                                1.800.445.5588.




SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



   Art. I.   Short Title, § 1.01



   Art. II.   Definitions, § 2.01



   Art. III.   Platting Procedure and Data Required, §§ 3.01-3.05



   Art. IV.   Design Standards, §§ 4.01-4.05



   Art. V.   Improvements, §§ 5.01-5.03



   Art. VI.   Compliance Standards, §§ 6.01-6.04



   Art. VII.   Variances, §§ 7.01-7.03



   Art. VIII.   Parcel Splitting, § 8.01



   Art. IX.   Fees and Charges



   Art. X.   Penalties, § 10.01



   Art. XI.   Amendments, § 11.01



   Art. XII.   Severability



   Art. XIII.   Repeal of Existing Subdivision Regulation Ordinance, §
13.01



   Art. XIV.   Effective Date, § 14.01



ORDINANCE NO.  196



   An act to regulate the subdivision of land; to promote the public
health, safety and general welfare; to further the orderly layout and use of
land; to provide for orderly growth and harmonious development of land; to
secure adequate traffic circulation and to lessen congestion in the streets
and highways; to facilitate adequate provisions for transportation, water,
sewage, drainage and other public requirements; to plan for the provision of
adequate recreational areas, school sites and other community facilities; to
facilitate the division of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land; to
promote appropriate land development throughout the city; to provide for the
approvals to be obtained by subdividers prior to the recording and filing of
plats; to establish the procedure for vacating, correcting and revising
plats; to control residential building development within flood plain areas;
to provide for the filing of amended plats; to approve the penalties for
violations hereof and to provide logical procedures for the achievement of
these purposes. The City of Sterling Heights ordains:



ARTICLE I.  SHORT TITLE



SECTION 1.01.  [SHORT TITLE].



   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the City of Sterling
Heights Subdivision Regulations.



Editor’s note:



   Ordinance No. 196 is set out herein as adopted on July 19, 1977. The
original arrangement, numbering system, titles and catchlines have been
retained. However, the editor has employed a uniform system of capitalization
and punctuation, and enclosed in brackets [ ] any corrections or material
added for clarity.



Statutory reference:



   Subdivision Control Act of 1967, M.S.A. §§ 26.430-(101)-26.430(293);
M.C.L. §§ 560.101-560.293



ARTICLE II.  DEFINITIONS



SECTION 2.01.  [DEFINITIONS].



   The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this ordinance unless otherwise specifically stated. The word
"person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust,
company or corporation, public or private, as well as an individual. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory, and the word "may" is
permissive.



   ALLEY. Public or private right-of-way which provides a secondary means
of access to a lot, block or parcel of land.



   AREA DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A graphic presentation indicating a scheme of
how an area of land abutting the property to be platted can be developed with
streets.



   BLOCK. Property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two
nearest intersecting streets, between the nearest such street and railroad
right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream or between any of
the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development.



   BUILDING LINE or SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to a street right-of-way
line, shore of a lake, edge of a stream or river bank, established on a
parcel of land or on a lot for the purpose of prohibiting construction of a
building between such line and right-of-way, other public area or the shore
of a lake or the edge or a stream or river bank.



   CAPTION. The name by which the plat is legally and commonly known.



   COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT. A business center establishing building area,
parking areas, service areas, screen plating and widening, turning movement
and safety lane roadway improvements.



   COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLAN (or MASTER PLAN). The Comprehensive Land
Use Plan for the city, including graphic and written proposals indicating the
general locations recommended for streets, parks, schools, public buildings,
zoning districts and all physical developments of the City of Sterling
Heights and includes any unit or part of such plan separately adopted and any
amendments to such plan or parts thereof duly adopted by the Planning
Commission and certified to the Council and to the County Register of Deeds.



   COUNTY PUBLIC WORKS COMMISSIONER. The Macomb County Public Works
Commissioner.



   COUNTY PLAT BOARD. The Macomb County Plat Board.



   COUNTY ROAD COMMISSIONERS. The Macomb County Road Commission and/or its
duly authorized agent.



   COUNTY PLAT COORDINATING COMMITTEE- P.C.C. A committee represented by
the offices of the Macomb County Road Commission, the Macomb County Public
Works Commission, the Macomb County Department of Health and the Macomb
County Planning Commission and established for the purpose of reviewing
preliminary plats to afford, advise and give assistance to the developer and
his or her engineer.



   DEDICATION. The intentional appropriate of land by the owner to public
use.



   DEVELOPER. (See Subdivider)



   DIVISION (PARTITIONING, DIVIDING). The dividing and recording of
parcels of land into smaller tracts for the purpose of sale, lease or other
legal transfer of use.



   EASEMENT. A right or privilege over a specific portion of land area
granted by the owner to the public, a corporation or some particular person
or persons for specific uses and purposes and which is designated a "public"
or "private" easement depending on the nature of the user.



   FLOOD PLAIN. That area of land adjoining the channel of a river,
stream, watercourse, lake or other watercourse which will be inundated by a
flood as defined by the zoning ordinance for the City of Sterling Heights.



   GOVERNING BODY. The Sterling Heights City Council.



   GREENBELTS or BUFFER PARKS. A strip or parcel of land privately
restricted or publicly dedicated as open space located between similar or
dissimilar uses for the purpose of protecting and enhancing each use.



   HEALTH DEPARTMENT. The state, city, county or district health
department having jurisdiction.



   IMPROVEMENTS. Grading, street surfacing, curb and gutter, sidewalks,
crosswalks, water mains and lines, sanitary and storm sewers, culverts,
bridges, utilities, trees and other additions to the natural state of land
which increases its value, utility or habitability.



   LOCATION MAP. A map indicating significant physical features of the
area surrounding the property to be subdivided.



   LOT. A measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described
and fixed in a recorded plat.



      (a)   LOT DEPTH. The horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines.



      (b)   LOT WIDTH. The horizontal distance between the side lot
lines measured at the setback line and at right angles to the lot depth.



   LOT SPLIT. The division of a parcel of land whose boundaries are fixed
in a recorded plat into more than one but less than five lots or tracts.



   MASTER PLAN. (See Comprehensive Development Plan.)



   OUTLOT. Any lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park
or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use.



   PARCEL or TRACT. A continuous area or acreage of land which can be
described in the subdivision regulations.



   PLANNED INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT. A planned area designed specifically
for industrial use providing, but not limited to, screened buffers, wider
paving and turning provisions, traffic safety lanes and increased utility
capacity, where necessary.



   PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A land area which has both individual
building sites and common property and which is designated and developed
under one owner or organized group as a separate neighborhood or community
unit.



   PLANNING COMMISSIONER. The Planning Commission of the City of Sterling
Heights as established under Public Act 285 of 1931, as amended.



   PLAT. A map or chart of a subdivision of land.



      (a)   PRE-PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map drawn to scale, showing the
existing features of a site and its surroundings and the general layout of a
proposed subdivision.



      (b)   PRELIMINARY PLAT. A map showing the salient features of
a proposed subdivision of land submitted to an approving authority for
purposes of preliminary consideration.



      (c)   FINAL PLAT. A map of all or part of a subdivision
prepared and the accuracy certified by a registered civil engineer or land
surveyor in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Control Act
and this ordinance and suitable for recording.



   PROPRIETOR. (See Subdivider.)



   PUBLIC RESERVATION. A portion of a subdivision which is set aside for
public use and made available for public use and acquisition.



   PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, firm or corporation, municipal department,
board or commissioner duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under state
or city regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal,
communication, telegraph, transportation or water or other services of a
similar nature.



   PUBLIC OPEN SPACE. Land dedicated or reserved for use by the general
public. It includes, but is not limited to, parks, parkways, recreation
areas, school sites, community or public building sites, streets and highways
and public parking spaces.



   REPLAT. The process of changing, or a map or plat which changes, the
boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof as provided in
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Land reserved, used or to be used for a street, alley,
walkway or other public purpose.



   STREET. A public way or right-of-way dedicated to public use which
provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties, whether
designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, lane or
however otherwise designated and includes the land between right-of-way
lines, whether improved or unimproved, and may comprise pavement, shoulders,
curbs and gutters, sidewalks, parking areas, lawn areas and other areas
within the right-of-way lines. The following are included.



      (a)   COLLECTOR STREET. A street intended primarily to gather
traffic from minor streets and carry it to major streets.



      (b)   CUL-DE-SAC. A short minor street, having one end open to
traffic and being permanently terminated at the other end by a vehicular turn
around.



      (c)   EXPRESSWAY. Those streets designed for high speed, high
volume traffic, with full or limited access, some grade crossings and limited
driveway connections.



      (d)   FREEWAY. Those streets designed for high speed, high
volume through traffic, with completely controlled access, no grade crossings
and no private driveway connections.



      (e)   INDUSTRIAL STREET. A street serving or intended to serve
lots or parcels of land platted or to be developed for industrial use or as
an industrial subdivision.



      (f)   MAJOR THOROUGHFARE. An arterial street of great
continuity which is intended to serve as a large volume trafficway for both
the immediate area and region beyond and may be designated in the Master Road
Plan as a major thoroughfare.



      (g)   MARGINAL ACCESS STREET. A minor street parallel and
adjacent to a major thoroughfare and which provides access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.



      (h)   MINOR STREET. A street supplementary to a secondary
thoroughfare and intended to serve primarily the local needs of the
neighborhood and of limited continuity used primarily as access to abutting
residential properties.



      (i)   PUBLIC WALKWAY. A public right-of-way dedicated for the
purpose of a pedestrian access to residential areas and located so as to
connect to two or more streets or a street and a parcel of land or other open
space.



      (j)   SECONDARY THOROUGHFARE. A street intended to serve as a
major means of access from minor and/or collector streets to major
thoroughfares or as a connector between major thoroughfares and having
considerable continuity within the framework of the Master Road Plan.



   SUBDIVIDER. A person or persons, firm, corporation, association,
partnership, trust or any legal combination of them or any other legal entity
proceeding under these regulations to affect a subdivision of land. The word
SUBDIVIDER shall include the word "proprietor" as used in Public Act 288 of
1967, as amended.



   SUBDIVIDE or SUBDIVISION. The partitioning or dividing of a parcel or
tract of land by the subdivider (proprietor) thereof or by his or her heirs,
executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors or assigns for
the purpose of sale or lease of more than one year or of building
development, where the act of division creates five or more parcels of land
each of which is ten acres or less in area or five or more parcels of land
each of which is ten acres or less in area are created by successive
divisions within a period of ten years.



   SUBDIVISION CONTROL ACT.  Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, of the
State of Michigan.



   SURVEYOR. Either a land surveyor or a civil engineer, both of whom must
be registered in the state.



   TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP. A map showing existing physical characteristics with
contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of existing and
proposed grades and drainage.



   WATER RESOURCES COMMISSION. The Water Resources Commission of the State
of Michigan.



   ZONING ORDINANCE. The City of Sterling Heights Zoning Ordinance, as
amended.



ARTICLE III.  PLATTING PROCEDURE AND DATA REQUIRED



   The procedures for the submittal, review and approval of a subdivision
plat shall follow the steps as listed below.



   Section 3.01.   Pre-Application Investigation.



   Section 3.02.   Pre-Application Review (if elected).



   Section 3.03.   Preliminary Plat Application, Review and Tentative
Approval.



   Section 3.04.   Final Approval of Preliminary Plat.



   Section 3.05.   Final Plat Approval.



SECTION 3.01.  PRE-APPLICATION INVESTIGATION.



   1.   Prior to the preparation of a preliminary plat, the subdivider
may meet informally with the City Planner and other city agencies concerned
to investigate the procedures and standards of the City of Sterling Heights.



   2.   The subdivider shall familiarize himself or herself with the
zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, engineering specifications and
other similar ordinances or controls relative to the subdivision and
improvement of land so as to make himself or herself aware of the
requirements of the municipality.



   3.   The subdivider shall review the area zoning for the proposed
subdivision to determine if it is properly zoned for the intended use.



   4.   The subdivider shall complete an investigation of existing
schools and of public open spaces, including parks and playgrounds, to serve
the proposed subdivision.



   5.   The subdivider shall investigate the relationship of the
proposed subdivision with respect to the Master Road Plan.



   6.   The subdivider shall investigate the standards for sewage
disposal, water supply and drainage of the city and Macomb County and the
health standards of Macomb County and the State of Michigan.



   7.   The subdivider shall review Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended,
and the requirements of those state and county agencies which are required by
said Public Act to review and approve the plat.



SECTION 3.02.  PRE-APPLICATION REVIEW.



   A.   [Layout.]  The pre-application layout, if submitted, shall
consist of the following:



      1.   General layout of streets, blocks and lots in sketch form;



      2.   Existing conditions and characteristics of the land on
and adjacent to the site;



      3.   Any general area set aside for schools, parks and other
community facilities.



   B.   Procedure.



      1.   The subdivider shall submit 12 copies of the
pre-application layout to the City Planner.



      2.   The Planning Department or subdivision committee will
review the plan with the subdivider or his or her agent. The review shall
consist of examining the following:



         (a)   Major thoroughfares in the area;



         (b)   Utility systems available to service the platted
areas;



         (c)   Adjacent land use;



         (d)   Unusual development problems;



         (e)   Topography;



         (f)   Existing zoning;



         (g)   Adequacy of existing schools and public open space;



         (h)   Availability and feasibility of providing city
services;



         (i)   Conformance to the Master Plan;



         (j)   Applicable ordinance provisions;



         (k)   Environmental effects.



      3.   The City Planner shall review the proposed subdivision
and:



         (a)   Stipulate the necessary changes that would make
the plat acceptable for processing;



         (b)   Notify the proprietor of the results of the
pre-application review.



SECTION 3.03.  APPLICATION, REVIEW AND TENTATIVE APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY
PLAT.



   A.   Procedure. The subdivider shall submit to the City Clerk not
less than 30 copies of the preliminary plat and location map, together with a
written application in triplicate and other data required by the subdivision
regulations.



   B.   Submittal. The following shall be shown on the preliminary plat
or submitted with it:



      1.   Statement of intended use of the proposed plat, such as
residential single family, two family and multiple housing, commercial,
industrial, recreational or agricultural;



      2.   Proposed sites, if any, for multi family dwellings,
shopping centers, churches, industry and other nonpublic uses exclusive of
single family dwellings;



      3.   Any sites proposed for parks, playgrounds, schools or
other public uses.



   C.   Fees. Fees, as required in accordance with this ordinance, for
checking and reviewing the proposed plat are to be deposited with the City
Treasurer when the application is submitted.



   D.   Preliminary plat. The preliminary plat, with a topographical
map superimposed at the same scale, shall contain the following information
and shall be drawn up and submitted in the following manner:



      1.   Scale of map. (Minimum scale: 1" = 100');



      2.   Name of and acreage contained within the proposed
subdivision;



      3.   Name, address and phone number of subdivider, proprietor,
owner, engineer, land surveyor, designer or planner who prepared the
preliminary plat;



      4.   Location of the subdivision, giving the numbers of
section, town and range and the name of the city and county;



      5.   Date for preparation, scale and north point;



      6.   Lots and outlots shall be shown as follows:



         (a)   All lots to be numbered consecutively;



         (b)   Total number of lots to be shown;



         (c)   All outlots to be lettered alphabetically;



         (d)   Total number of outlots to be shown;



         (e)   The length of each lot line;



         (f)   Width of each lot;



         (g)   Building setback lines;



         (h)   Width and location of any known existing easement;



      7.   Existing elevations around the perimeter of the property
to be subdivided to a point 250 feet outside the perimeter. The elevations
shall be given at all points or locations where property lines change course
or at intervals of not more than 100 feet. Contour lines shall be shown at
one foot intervals except where the topography is such that the interval
should be increased for clarity, in which case contours shall be shown at two
foot or five foot intervals as determined by the City Engineer;



      8.   Proposed street layout shall be shown indicating:



         (a)   Width of the right-of-way;



         (b)   Proposed connections with existing or future
streets;



         (c)   Width and location of public walkways;



         (d)   Rights-of-way and easements, showing location,
width and purpose;



      9.   Designation of any land proposed to be acquired, reserved
or dedicated for public use and/or the use of property owners in the
subdivision;



      10.   All land within the boundaries of the plat shall be
shown thereon in such a manner that title to the area may be clearly
established as to whether dedicated to public use or reserved to private use;



      11.   The exterior boundaries of the subdivision shall include
and correctly show the area within the existing right-of-way of any abutting
street, county road or state trunk line highway, if such area has not
previously been dedicated to public use and if it is the proprietor’s land;



      12.   When any part of this land lies within or abuts a
floodplain area, the plat shall include the following:



         (a)   The floodplain, as established by ordinance of the
City of Sterling Heights, shall be shown within a contour line;



         (b)   The floodplain area shall be clearly labeled on
the plat.



   E.   [Area development plan.] The area development plan shall be
combined with the location map and shall indicate how the remaining tract or
tracts can be developed in relation to the initial subdivision to be platted
and further contain the following information:



      1.   General street patterns;



      2.   Location of schools and recreation areas;



      3.   Proposed general layout for entire area.



   F.   Location map. The location map shall contain the following
information and be drawn in the following manner:



      1.   The area included in the location map shall extend at
least 300 feet beyond the perimeter of the proposed subdivision and shall
show how this area may be or has been developed and/or subdivided. (Minimum
scale of map: 1" = 200');



      2.   Title and location of proposed subdivision;



      3.   Name and address of subdivider and owners of record;



      4.   North point, scale and date;



      5.   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision, section or
corporation lines within or adjacent to the tract;



      6.   Location of the following:



         (a)   Existing subdivisions, assessors’ plats,
supervisors’ plats or adjoining proposed subdivisions, together with their
recorded liber and page;



         (b)   Platted location, widths and names of existing or
prior streets and private streets;



      7.   Locations of streams, lakes, swamps and drainage features;



      8.   Names of owners of all unplatted adjoining properties as
recorded on the tax records of the City of Sterling Heights;



      9.   Location of existing drains or high tension electrical
lines in and around the proposed subdivision;



      10.   The names of abutting subdivisions.



   G.   Review of preliminary plat (step 1).



      1.   Upon being furnished with all the required information
and data, the preliminary plat and location map shall be referred to the
appropriate city departments, local school districts and any other
governmental board, agency or authority the city deems has an interest or
concern in the plat for their review and recommendations.



      2.   Following review of the preliminary plat by the above it
shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission with written comments and
recommendations by the reviewing party.



   H.   Review of preliminary plat (step 2).



      1.   The City Planner shall review the proposed plat and
location map for conformance with all ordinances, administrative rules and
regulations and the Master Plan of the city.



      2.   The Planning Commission shall review the proposed plat
with the City Planner, who shall prepare his or her recommendations with
copies of all written comments received as required in section 3.03,
subsection G, to be submitted to the Planning Commission at the time of the
hearing.



   I.   Notice of hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing
on the proposed plat and notice of said hearing shall be sent to the name and
address shown on the plat by registered or certified mail; said notice shall
inform of the time and place of the meeting of the Planning Commission which
will consider the plat; said notice shall be sent not less than five days
before the date fixed therefor. Similar notice shall be mailed to owners of
land immediately adjoining the platted land, as their names appear on the tax
records of the municipality or county. A notice of hearing and a location map
shall be sent to Michigan Bell, Detroit Edison, Consumers Power Company and
any other affected public utility company.



   J. Tentative approval of preliminary plat-Planning Commission.
Following the receipt and review of all comments and recommendations and
following the hearing on the plat, the Planning Commission shall, if it finds
that all conditions have been met, recommend tentative approval of the
preliminary plat and record same on the plat and in its minutes or recommend
disapproval of the proposed plat with reasons for such disapproval to be
recorded in the minutes of the Planning Commission meeting and forward the
same with a letter advising of the approval or disapproval and the reasons
therefor to the City Council and the subdivider. The Planning Commission
shall forward its recommendations to the City Council within 70 days after
submittal of the application to the City Clerk.



   K.   Tentative approval of preliminary plat-City Council. The City
Council, within 90 days from the date of filing of application, shall
tentatively approve the proposed plat and date its approval on the plat which
is to be returned to the developer or set forth in writing its reasons for
rejection and requirements for tentative approval. The 90 day period may be
extended if the applicant consents.



   L.   Conditions and duration of tentative approval. Tentative
approval of the preliminary plat shall confer upon the proprietor for a
period of one year from date approval of lot sizes, lot orientation and
street layout. Such tentative approval may be extended if applied for by the
proprietor and granted by the City Council.



SECTION 3.04.  FINAL APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT.



   A.   Distribution to authorities. The subdivider shall submit an
approved tentative preliminary plat to the various authorities as required by
sections 112 through 119 of the Subdivision Control Act.



   B.   List of authorities. The subdivider shall file with the
Planning Commission a list of all authorities to whom validated copies of the
preliminary plat have been distributed.



   C.   Submittal to the City Clerk.



      1.   When the subdivider has secured the approvals of the
various approving authorities as required by sections 112 through 119 of the
Subdivision Control Act, he or she shall deliver all copies plus not less
than 30 copies of the proposed final preliminary plat to the City Clerk.



      2.   A certificate signed by a registered engineer or surveyor
certifying that all proposed lots conform to the minimum requirements for the
particular zoning district as set forth in the Sterling Heights Zoning
Ordinance shall accompany the submittal.



   D.   Review and final approval of preliminary plat.



      1.   The preliminary plat shall be reviewed by appropriate
administrative officials of the city and the City Manager or his or her
designates shall make written comments to the City Council regarding the
preliminary plat.



      2.   If the preliminary plat does not meet all requirements,
the City Planner shall notify the subdivider by letter, giving the earliest
date for resubmission of the plat and additional information required.



      3.   If the preliminary plat meets all requirements laid down
for tentative approval, the City Planner shall forward the preliminary plat
to the City Council.



   E.   City Council, final approval of the preliminary plat.



      1.   The City Council shall consider and review the
preliminary plat at its next meeting or within 20 days from the date of
verified compliance with all conditions of tentative approval of preliminary
plat.



      2.   The City Council shall give final approval of the
preliminary plat, if the proprietor has met all conditions laid down for
approval of said plat, or reject said plat and advise the proprietor of the
reasons for the rejection.



      3.   The City Council shall instruct the City Clerk to
promptly notify the proprietor of approval or rejection in writing.



      4.   The City Council shall instruct the City Clerk to note
all proceedings in the minutes of the meeting, which minutes shall be open
for inspection.



      5.   The 20 day period for consideration by the City Council
may be extended if the applicant consents.



   F.   Conditions and duration of approval of preliminary plat.



      1.   Approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute
approval of the final plat, but rather, that final plat approval shall be
conditional on all requirements being met.



      2.   Final approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective
for a period of two years from the date of approval by the City Council, but
may be extended for periods not to exceed one year, if applied for by the
subdivider in writing and granted in writing by the City Council.



      3.   No installation or construction of any improvements shall
be made before the final approval of the preliminary plat by the City
Council, final approval of engineering plans by the City Engineer and payment
of all fees to the City Treasurer as required under the provisions of this
ordinance.



   G.   Final engineering plans review fee schedule. All final plat
fees shall be determined by the City Engineer and collection of same verified
by the City Engineer. All fees shall be established by Council resolution and
collected in advance of the installation or construction of any improvements.



SECTION 3.05.  FINAL PLAT.



   The procedure for preparation and review of the final plat shall be as
follows.



   A.   Requirements.



      1.   The final plat shall comply with the provisions of the
Subdivision Control Act.



      2.   The final plat shall conform to the preliminary plat
(stage 2) as approved and shall constitute only that portion of the approved
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the
time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to this subdivision
regulations ordinance.



      3.   A written application for approval and the filing and
recording fee required by section 241 of the Subdivision Control Act shall
accompany all final plats.



   B.   Filing and review.



      1.   One mylar and not less than 25 copies of the final plat
shall be filed with the City Clerk and the subdivider shall deposit such sums
of money as required by this ordinance or any other ordinance of the city
with the City Treasurer.



      2.   The final plat shall be reviewed by the City Engineer and
the City Planner as to compliance with the approved preliminary plat and
plans for utilities and other improvements.



      3.   The City Engineer and City Planner shall notify the City
Council of their recommendations for approval or rejection of the final plat.



   C.   Final approval.



      1.   The City Council shall consider and review the final plat
at its next meeting or within 20 days from the date of submission to the City
Clerk.



      2.   If the final plat meets all requirements, the City
Council shall prepare a resolution of approval of the final plat and
authorize the City Clerk to sign the plat on behalf of the city.



      3.   If the final plat does not meet all requirements, the
City Council shall reject the plat and specify the reasons for rejection.



      4.   Upon the approval of the final plat by the City Council,
the subsequent approvals shall follow the procedure set forth in the
Subdivision Control Act. The mylar copy shall be forwarded to the Clerk of
the County Plat Board.



ARTICLE IV.  DESIGN STANDARDS



   The design standards set forth in this article are development guides
to be used by the developer. All final plans for the construction or
provision of the required facilities must be reviewed and approved by the
City Engineer to insure compliance with all appropriate codes, ordinances and
standards of the city.



SECTION 4.01.  STREETS.



   A.   General. The standards set forth under this section shall be
the minimum standards for streets, roads and intersections. Generally, all
streets shall be dedicated to public use.



   B.   Location and arrangements.



      1.   The proposed subdivision shall conform to the various
elements of the Master Plan and shall be considered in relation to the
existing and planned major and secondary thoroughfares, and such part shall
be platted in the location and width indicated on such plan. The standards
for state and county roads are intended to be in harmony with all the road
right-of-way standards and policies of the Macomb County Road Commission and
the Michigan Department of State Highways and Transportation.



      2.   The street layout shall provide for continuation of
secondary thoroughfares in the adjoining subdivisions or of the proper
projection of streets when adjoining property is not subdivided (generally
not more than 1,300 feet apart) or conform to a plan for a neighborhood unit
drawn up and adopted by the Planning Commission.



      3.   The minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by
through traffic shall be discouraged. Whenever and wherever possible,
collector streets shall form the basic design for residential subdivisions.
Primary consideration shall be given to a street pattern which is efficient
and where all lots are conveniently accessible to collector, secondary or
major thoroughfares. All minor streets should be oriented to lead to an
elementary school as much as possible.



      4.   Where a proposed subdivision borders on or contains an
expressway or other limited access highway right-of-way, the Planning
Commission may require the location of a street approximately parallel to and
on each side of such right-of-way of a distance suitable for the development
of an appropriate use of the intervening land as for parks in residential
districts or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate areas. Such
distances shall be determined with due consideration of minimum distance
required for approach grades to future grade separations.



      5.   Planting strips may be required to be placed next to
incompatible features such as highways, railroads and commercial or
industrial uses to screen the view from residential properties. Such screens
shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall not be a part of the normal
roadway right-of-way or utility easement and shall meet the standards and
specifications adopted by the City Council.



      6.   Street names shall not duplicate any existing street name
in the City of Sterling Heights except where a new street is a continuation
of an existing street. Street names that may be spelled differently but sound
the same shall also be avoided. Street names are to be approved by the City
Engineer.



   C.   Right-of-way width. Street right-of-way shall conform to at
least the following minimum requirements.



 



Street Type
 
Right-of-Way Width


1.     Major thoroughfares
 
In conformance with the adopted Master Road Plan and rules of the County Road
Commission and the State Department of Highways


2.     Secondary streets
 
86 feet


3.     Minor streets (single family residential)
 
60 feet


4.     Industrial streets
 
60 feet, plus ten feet utility easements on each side


5.     Multiple family residential streets
 
60 feet


6.     Marginal access streets
 
40 feet


7.     Collector streets
 
70 feet


8.     Alleys (where permitted)
 
20 feet


9.     Boulevard
 
86 feet


10.     Cul-de-sac streets:
 


   (a)   Residential
 
60 feet and shall terminate in a circular right-of-way of 110 feet diameter.
Upon concurring recommendation from the City Planner and City Engineer the
Planning Commission may consider a reduction to a right-of-way to 100 feet
diameter


   (b)   Industrial
 
60 feet and shall terminate in a circular right-of-way of 150 feet diameter.




 



   11.   Maximum length of cul-de-sac streets shall be 500 feet. The
maximum length may be exceeded where in the opinion of the Planning
Commission there is justification for a greater length but not to exceed 800
feet.



   12.   Boulevard streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of
86 feet and shall have an improved roadway minimum width of 22 feet and the
exterior diameter of the roadway at its terminating loop shall be not less
than 65 feet. The boulevard areas between the roadways shall be dedicated to
the public.



   13.   Half streets shall be prohibited, except where absolutely
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of this ordinance and where the Planning Commission
finds it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when
the adjoining property is developed. Where there exists adjacent to the tract
to be subdivided a dedication or platted and recorded half street, the other
half shall be dedicated.



   D.   Grade standards. For adequate drainage, the following grades
shall be:



      1.   Minimum grades shall not be less than 0.4%;



      2.   Maximum grades shall not be greater than 6%;



      3.   Maximum grades for public walkways shall not be greater
than 10%;



      4.   The City Council may make an exception to these standards
on the recommendation of the City Engineer. See Article VI.



   E.   Street alignment.



      1.   Horizontal alignment. When street lines defect from each
other by more than ten degrees in alignment, the centerlines shall be
connected by a curve with a minimum radius of 500 feet for arterial streets
(major thoroughfares), 400 feet for collector streets and 150 feet for local
or minor streets. Between reverse curves, on minor streets, there shall be a
minimum tangent distance of 50 feet, and on collector or arterial streets,
225 feet.



      2.   Vertical alignment.



         (a)   Major thoroughfares shall have profile grade
changes, where the grade change exceeds a total of 1.2% connected by vertical
curves of a minimum length equivalent to 20 times the algebraic difference in
the rate of grade.



         (b)   Secondary streets shall have profile grade changes
where the grade change is over a total of 1.5% connected by vertical curves
of a minimum length equivalent to 15 times the algebraic difference in the
rate of grade.



         (c)   Minor streets shall have profile grade changes of
1.5% connected by vertical curves of a minimum length equivalent to ten times
the algebraic difference in the rate of grade.



      3.   Visibility requirements. Minimum vertical visibility,
measured from four and one-half foot eye level to 18 inch tail light level
shall be:



         (a)   Major streets shall have a minimum vertical sight
distance of 350 feet;



         (b)   Secondary streets shall have a minimum vertical
sight distance of 200 feet;



         (c)   Minor streets shall have a minimum vertical sight
distance of 200 feet and 100 feet when minor streets are less than 500 feet
in length.



      4.   Minimum horizontal visibility.



         (a)   Major streets shall have a minimum horizontal
visibility of 1,800 feet measured on centerline.



         (b)   Secondary streets shall have a minimum horizontal
visibility of 1,100 feet measured on centerline.



         (c)   Minor streets shall have a minimum horizontal
visibility of 100 feet measured on centerline.



   F.   Intersections.



      1.   Angle of intersection.



         (a)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as
nearly as possible to 90 degrees.



         (b)   Curved streets intersecting with major
thoroughfares and secondary thoroughfares shall do so with a tangent section
of centerline 100 feet in length measured from the right-of-way line of the
major thoroughfare or secondary street.



         (c)   Slight jogs at intersections shall be avoided.
Where such jogs are unavoidable, street centerlines shall be offset by a
distance of 150 feet or more.



      2.   Sight triangles. Minimum clear sight distances at all
minor street intersections shall permit vehicles to be visible to the driver
of another vehicle when each is 120 feet from the center of the intersection.



      3.   Vertical alignment of intersections. Intersection areas
should be designed with appropriate drainage grades. Gutter drainage shall
not be carried across through streets but shall be collected at the
intercepting streets.



SECTION 4.02.  BLOCKS.



   Blocks within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.



   A.   Sizes.



      1.   The maximum length for residential blocks shall not
exceed 1,300 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, physical conditions may justify a greater distance.



      2.   Minimum length for residential blocks shall generally not
be less than 500 feet in length, except where, in the opinion of the Planning
Commission, physical conditions justify a lesser distance.



      3.   Widths of blocks shall be determined by the condition of
the layout and shall be suited to the intended layout.



   B.   Arrangement. Blocks shall be so designed as to provide two
tiers of lots, except where lots back onto an arterial street, natural
feature or subdivision boundary.



   C.   Public walkways.



      1.   Right-of-way for public walkways may be required where
necessary to obtain convenient pedestrian circulation.



      2.   Widths of public walkways shall be 60 feet and shall be
dedicated as a public street for this purpose.



   D.   Easements.



      1.   Location of utility line easements shall be provided
along the rear or side lot lines as necessary. Easements shall give access to
every lot, park or public grounds. Such easements in the rear yard shall
generally be a total of not less than 12 feet wide, normally six feet for
each lot. Such easements in the side yard shall generally be a total of not
less than six feet wide, normally all on one  lot; provided, however,
conditions may require larger easements.



      2.   Recommendations on the proposed layout of telephone and
electric company easements shall be sought from all of the utility companies
servicing the area. (See Article V section 5.03(B).



      3.   Easements needed for storm drainage shall be determined
by the City Engineer and shall meet the requirements of this ordinance and
the City Engineer.



SECTION 4.03.  LOTS.



   Lots within subdivisions shall conform to the following standards.



   A.   Sizes and shapes.



      1.   The lot size, width, depth and shape in any subdivision
proposed for residential use shall be appropriate for the location and the
type of development contemplated.



      2.   Lot areas shall conform to the minimum requirements of
the zoning ordinance for the district in which the subdivision is proposed.



      3.   Lot widths shall in no case be less than that required by
the zoning ordinance and the Subdivision Control Act for the district in
which the subdivision is proposed.



      4.   Whenever easements along the rear lot line exceed six
feet in width, the depth of the line shall be increased by the width of the
easement which exceeds six feet.



      5.   One family residential lots fronting on major
thoroughfares shall be a minimum of 80 feet in width and 140 feet in depth
with a front setback of 40 feet for R-1C, R-170, R-1B and R-2 Residential
Districts. The R-1A Residential District shall be 100 feet in width and 140
feet in depth with a front setback of 40 feet.



      6.   Lots abutting a public walkway shall be considered corner
lots.



      7.   Corner lots, including lots abutting public walkways,
shall be provided with an additional 20 feet of width above that required by
the zoning ordinance and the Subdivision Control Act for the district in
which the subdivision is proposed.



      8.   Corner lots shall be provided a side yard setback
abutting the side street equal to the front yard setback required for that
district.



      9.   Building setback lines shall conform to the minimum
requirements of the zoning ordinance.



      10.   Excessive lot depth in relation to width shall be
avoided. A depth-to-width ratio of three to one shall normally be considered
a maximum.



      11.   Lots and outlots intended for purposes other than
residential use shall be specifically designed for such purposes and shall
have direct access to a street and adequate provision for off-street parking
and unloading all in accordance with the requirements of the zoning ordinance.



   B.   Lot arrangements.



      1.   All lots shall front or abut on only one street, except
corner lots and lots located on a curve of a street and except for the cases
covered in item 4 following. Variances may be permitted for approved planned
unit developments.



      2.   Side lot lines shall be essentially at right angles to
straight streets and radial to curved streets.



      3.   All driveways of corner lots shall exit onto minor
streets and not major or secondary thoroughfares.



      4.   Residential lots abutting major thoroughfares or
secondary streets, where marginal access streets are not practical, shall be
platted with reverse frontage lots. In order to restrict access to the
arterial street, to minimize noise and to protect outdoor living areas, an
approved screen planting and berm shall be provided in a dedicated,
non-access easement along the rear property line, which easement shall be at
least 20 feet wide and in addition to the normal utility easement. A
decorative masonry wall complying with the requirements of section 24.01
paragraph (B)(4) of Ordinance 278 as amended may be constructed in lieu of or
in conjunction with the berm required by this section.



      5.   Residential lots extending through a block and having
frontage on two local streets shall be prohibited.



      6.   Lots shall have a front to front relationship across all
streets wherever possible except as provided for under section 4.02B,1. Any
deviation shall require the review and approval of the Planning Commission.



(Ord. No. 196-C, § 1, 6-2-92)



SECTION 4.04.  FLOODPLAIN.



   If any part of a proposed subdivision lies within the floodplain of a
river, stream, creek or lake, approval of the final plat shall be conditioned
on the following:



   1.   No building shall be located on any portion of a lot lying
within a floodplain, unless approved in accordance with the rules of the
Water Resources Commission of the Department of Natural Resources;



   2.   Restrictive deed covenants shall be filed and recorded with the
final plat that the floodplain area will be left essentially in its natural
state;



   3.   Any portion of the proposed subdivision within the floodplain,
either wholly or in part, shall require specific compliance with the
Subdivision Control Act and its review by the Water Resources Commission of
the Department of Natural Resources.



   4.   If it is determined that a flood problem does exist, the City
Council shall reject the plat for failure to comply with the provisions of
this section.



SECTION 4.05.  NATURAL FEATURES.



   A.   Existing features. Existing natural features and character of
lands shall be preserved wherever possible. Due regard must be shown for all
natural features such as large trees, natural groves, watercourses and
similar community assets that will add attractiveness and value to the
property, if preserved. The preservation of drainage and natural stream
channels must be considered by the subdivider, and the dedication and
provision of adequate barriers, where appropriate, shall be required.



   B.   Suitability of lands. Lands subject to flooding or otherwise
deemed by the Planning Commission to be uninhabitable shall not be platted
for residential purposes or for uses that may, in the judgment of the
Planning Commission, increase the danger to health, life or property or
increase the flood hazard. Such land shall be platted for other uses, such as
parks or other open space.



   C.   Environmental assessment. Where appropriate, the Planning
Commission may require the subdivider to submit an environmental assessment
which shall include reviews and statements from all affected agencies.



ARTICLE V.  IMPROVEMENTS



   It is the purpose of this section [article] to establish and define
minimum acceptable standards for public improvements which shall be required
to be constructed by the subdivider as conditions for final plat approval and
also to outline the procedures and responsibilities of the subdivider and the
various public officials and agencies concerned with the administration,
planning, design, construction and financing of public facilities and to
further establish procedures for assuring compliance with these requirements.
All those improvements for which standards are not specifically set forth
shall be established by the City Engineer and the City Council.



SECTION 5.01.  PROCEDURE.



   A.   The subdivider shall have prepared, by a registered civil
engineer, a complete set of construction plans. Such construction plans shall
be in accord with the approved preliminary plat and shall be prepared in
conjunction with the final plat. Construction plans are subject to approval
by the responsible public agencies shown.



   B.   Monuments shall be set in accordance with the Subdivision
Control Act.



SECTION 5.02.  STREETS.



   Street and utility improvements shall be provided in accordance with
the standards and requirements with specifications approved by the City
Council. The following standards shall apply.



   A.   Local.



      1.   Residential subdivision street (minor street):



         (a)   Serves adjacent residential development;



         (b)   Cross section standards:



            (1)   Right-of-way:  60 feet;



            (2)   Pavement width:  28 feet (back-to-back of
curb);



            (3)   Separation strip:  10 feet;



            (4)   Sidewalks:  5 feet wide, one foot from
property line both sides of street, unless modified by the City Council
pursuant to paragraph (section) 5.03;



            (5)   Concrete pavement and sidewalk.



      2.   Industrial streets.



         (a)   Serves adjacent industrial development.



         (b)   Cross section standards:



            (1)   Right-of-way:  60 feet;



            (2)   Pavement width:  36 feet (back-to-back of
curb);



            (3)   Sidewalks:  5 feet, both sides of street
(where warranted).



            (4)   Concrete pavement and sidewalk.



      3.   Collector streets.



         (a)   Serves as access between local residential streets
and secondary or major street.



         (b)   Cross section standards:



            (1)   Right-of-way:  70 feet;



            (2)   Pavement:  36 feet (back-to-back of curb);



            (3)   Sidewalks:  5 feet, both sides of street;



            (4)   Concrete pavement and sidewalk.



      4.   Arterial streets.



         (a)   Secondary streets:



            (1)   Serves as a major means of access from minor
and/or collector streets;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  86 feet;



               b.   Pavement:  47 feet (back-to-back of
curb);



               c.   Sidewalks:  5 feet, both sides of
street.



            (3)   Parking:  Not allowed.



         (b)   Major thoroughfares:



            (1)   Serves through traffic, has considerable
route continuity;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  120 feet to 180 feet;



               b.   Pavement:  Current standards and
specifications established by the Macomb County Road Commission and the City
of Sterling Heights.



               c.   Sidewalks:  5 feet, both sides of
street.



         (c)   Expressway or parkway:



            (1)   Serves through traffic, with partial control
of access;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  204 feet;



               b.   Pavement:  Conform to current
standards and specifications established by the Macomb County Road Commission
and the City of Sterling Heights;



               c.   Sidewalks:  5 feet, where frontage
warrants;



            (3)   Parking:  Not allowed.



         (d)   Freeway:



            (1)   Serves through traffic at high speeds, high
volumes and has full control of access;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  300 feet or more as
required;



               b.   Pavement:  Conform to current
standards and specifications established by the Macomb County Road Commission
and/or State Department of Highways;



               c.   Sidewalk:  On service drives, where
warranted;



            (3)   Parking: on service drives, where parking
lane has been provided.



            (4)   Interchange with:



               a.   Secondary thoroughfare;



               b.   Major thoroughfare;



               c.   Expressways.



      5.   Other public roads.



         (a)   Marginal access street:



            (1)   Provides access from abutting properties to
major thoroughfares;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  40 feet;



               b.   Pavement width:  22 feet (back-to-back
of curb);



               c.   Parking:  Not permitted;



               d.   Sidewalks:  5 feet, one side;



               e.   Concrete pavement and sidewalks.



         (b)   Cul-de-sac:



            (1)   Provides access to abutting properties and
serves as vehicular turnaround;



            (2)   Cross section standards:



               a.   Right-of-way:  60 feet;



               b.   Vehicular turn-around:  110 feet
diameter;



               c.   Pavement:  28 feet (back-to-back of
curb);



               d.   Parking:  Permitted;



               e.   Sidewalks:  5 feet, both sides of
street, unless modified by the City Council pursuant to paragraph [section]
5.03;



               f.   Concrete pavement and sidewalks.



(Ord. No. 196-B, §§ 2-4, 8-18-87)



SECTION 5.03.  OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.



   A.   Sidewalks.



      1.   Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along both sides
of every dedicated street or portion thereof shown on the plat, except as
provided in this paragraph or as modified by the City Council pursuant to the
paragraph 2 of this section. Sidewalks may not be required along industrial
service streets or alleys. In addition, sidewalks need be provided only one
side of marginal access street. Sidewalks shall be five feet wide and shall
be placed one foot off the property line. At all intersections, sidewalks
shall be constructed from curb to sidewalk. Sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with the ordinances and specifications of the city.



      2.   (a)   Upon petition by the proprietor, the City
Council, after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, may
modify the requirements for installation of sidewalks which do not abut
collector or arterial streets or major thoroughfares in platted residential
subdivisions in the following circumstances:



            (1)   In platted single family residential
subdivisions with lots developed with a minimum width of 70 feet or more;



            (2)   On lots (irrespective of size) located
immediately adjacent to a cul-de-sac of 500 feet or less in length within any
platted single family residential subdivision;



            (3)   As part of the development of a single
family residential planned unit development (PUD), provided an alternative
pedestrian circulation plan is provided.



         (b)   In the event a proprietor requests the elimination
of sidewalks within a platted subdivision, the City Council may require such
developer to install greenbelts, berms, trees, landscaping, bicycle paths
and/or to develop open recreational areas in lieu of installation of the
sidewalks. These requirements shall apply to subdivided lots and common areas
within the subdivision and to common areas located adjacent to a subdivision
and a thoroughfare adjoining but outside the combines of the subdivision.



         (c)   A proprietor who wishes to eliminate or modify the
requirements for installation of sidewalks in a platted subdivision shall
submit with the request a plan designating in detail the additional
improvements, trees, landscaping and/or open recreational areas to be
provided by the proprietor. The plan pertaining to landscaping shall be in
substantial conformance with the requirements of Article XIX, section 19.08
of the zoning ordinance and the plan pertaining to other improvements shall
be in accordance with the requirements of Article XXA, section 20A.02 of the
zoning ordinance. The plan shall be drawn to scale and shall contain detailed
specifications and data pertaining to the improvements to be made and
landscaping and trees to be provided, including the proposed location, type,
number and size of trees and landscaping at planting. The City Council shall
make a final determination as to the specifics of the improvements and
alternate landscaping and trees to be provided.



Editor’s note:



   It should be noted that these references are to the prior zoning
ordinance, No. 131, repealed by Ord. No. 278



         (d)   The proprietor shall deposit cash with or shall
furnish to the city an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount determined
by the city to secure completion of the installation of the improvements
and/or trees and landscaping. At the time the request for modification of the
sidewalk requirements is submitted, the proprietor shall submit to the city
an estimate of the cost of the alternative improvements or landscaping to be
installed. The cash deposit or letter of credit shall be in an amount
determined by the city and shall not be less than 100% of the estimated
costs. The cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit shall be held and
administered in accordance with the provisions of section 6.03 of the
subdivision regulations. If the landscaping, trees or improvements are not
installed within the specified time period set forth therein, the cash
deposit or irrevocable letter of credit shall be forfeited and the city may
use said funds to install the improvements and/or landscaping.



         (e)   All improvements to be completed or landscaping to
be installed shall be done in accordance with established city standards.



   B.   Telephone and electric service.  All lines for telephone,
electric, television and other similar service distributed by wire or cable
shall be placed underground entirely throughout a subdivided area, (exclusive
of main supply lines, perimeter feed lines and necessary surfaced facilities)
and such conduits or cables shall be placed within private easements provided
to such service companies by the developer or within dedicated public ways.
Those telephone and electrical facilities placed in dedicated public ways
shall be planned so as not to conflict with other underground utilities. All
telephone and electrical facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
standards of construction approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission.
All underground utility installments which traverse privately owned property
shall be protected by easements granted by the subdivider. The subdivider or
proprietor shall bear any increase in cost, if any, over the normal mode of
construction of telephone or electrical lines and facilities, as determined
by the telephone or electric company involved, in accordance with the valid
rules and regulations of the telephone or electric company involved.



   C.   Grading and centerline gradients. Per plans and profiles
approved by the City Engineer.



   D.   Curbs and gutters. In accordance with details and
specifications prescribed by the City Engineer. No curb drop shall be
installed at the time of paving unless a house exists at the time of paving.



   E.   Storm drainage system and other drainage improvements. An
adequate storm drainage system, including necessary storm sewers, drain
inlets, manholes, culverts, bridges and other appurtenances, shall be
required in all subdivisions per plans approved by the City Engineer and
governing body. Where county drains are involved, a certificate of approval
from the County Public Works Commissioner must be submitted by the subdivider
as required by section 3.04. Rear lot drainage shall be provided in
accordance with current standards adopted by the city. Storm sewers shall be
provided in such a manner that each lot, outlot or parcel is serviced by a
storm sewer. An outlet shall be provided for each lot for the purpose of
connecting the sump pump discharge of the storm and ground water drainage
collected in footing drains and/or basement drains. Where practical, the
storm sewers for this purpose shall be extended along the rear yard easements.



   F.   Sewage disposal. The sewerage system shall generally be located
within street rights-of-way per plans approved by the City Engineer and
governing body.



   G.   Water supply. Water distribution system per plans approved by
the City Engineer and in conformance with the regulation of the Michigan
Department of Health relating to municipal water supplies and a certificate
of approval from the Michigan Department of Health must be submitted by the
subdivider.



   H.   Landscaping and trees.



      1.   Trees. In accordance with section 4.05 of this ordinance,
existing trees shall be preserved by the subdivider if feasible. The
following information must be supplied to and approved by the City Planner:



         (a)   Location of trees to be retained;



         (b)   Specifications for protection during development;



         (c)   Specifications for grading and drainage to assure
the preservation of those trees to be retained.



      2.   Landscaping.



         (a)   The subdivider shall submit to the Planning
Department a landscape plan for unusual areas in the proposed subdivision.
During the plat review process the City Planner shall determine the specific
areas requiring landscaping. This includes, but is not limited to:
boulevards, buffer strips and islands. It is required that all landscape data
must be submitted, reviewed and approved before final plat approval is
granted.



         (b)   The City Council may require completion of all or
some of the required landscaping prior to approval of the final plat or a
deposit by the proprietor with the City Treasurer in the form of cash in an
amount sufficient to insure completion within the time specified. The amount
of the deposit shall be set by the City Council based upon an estimate from
the City Planner.



   I.   Street signs. Street name signs shall be provided at
intersections of all streets. The Police Department shall determine necessary
traffic-control signs required for the subdivision. The developer shall
escrow funds with the city to provide for installation of the signs. The
signs shall be as specified by the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic-Control
Devices and/or the agency having jurisdiction of the street.



   J.   Fire hydrants and water mains.



      1.   Water mains. All water mains shall be of sufficient size
to provide the needed quantity of water for the use intended of the property
and for firefighting use. Water mains shall form a network of pipes arranged
as far as possible in loops so as to give at least two directions of supply
to any point.



      2.   Hydrants.



         (a)   Hydrants shall be placed with consideration to
their possible use.



            (1)   In residential districts, hydrants shall
have a maximum spacing of 500 feet.



            (2)   In business and industrial districts,
hydrants shall have a maximum spacing of 300 feet.



         (b)   Hydrants shall have two four-inch discharge
outlets with Detroit Fire Department hose thread.



         (c)   Hydrants shall have a value opening of at least
six inches.



         (d)   Hydrant barrels shall have a net area of at least
133% of the valve opening.



         (e)   Hydrants shall have a connection with the water
main of not less than six inches in diameter.



         (f)   Hydrants shall have a uniform sized pentagonal
operating nut measuring one and one-half inches from point to flat.



         (g)   Hydrants shall, immediately after being placed in
service, be painted in accordance with city requirements.



         (h)   Hydrant discharge outlets shall be about 18 inches
above the earth, finished grade.



         (i)   Hydrants shall be so located so that they are not
more than ten feet from the curb.



      3.   Water mains and hydrants shall be in service before any
building permits are issued for construction.



(Ord. No. 196-B, § 5, 8-18-87)



Charter reference:



   Authority to require underground utility installations, see § 15.03



Cross reference:



   Provisions of "concrete ordinance" relative to sidewalks, see §§
8-242 et seq.;



   Sidewalks generally, see Ch. 31



ARTICLE VI.  COMPLIANCE STANDARDS



SECTION 6.01.  SURFACE DRAINAGE BUILDING PERMIT.



   No building permit shall be issued in any subdivision or for a building
or building site in the City of Sterling Heights unless the application for
such permit is accompanied by evidence in the form of plat diagrams showing
topography of such building site and the proposed surface drainage thereof
approved by the City Engineer. After the grade has been established and
approved by the City Engineer, it shall be unlawful for any person to impede,
block, change, alter or interfere with the natural flow of surface drainage
in any manner or maintain any such impediment or blockage in any manner in
any subdivision or building site unless an alternate plan for natural flow of
surface drainage is presented [to] and approved by the City Engineer. Such
alternate plan shall be implemented before any disruption to the existing
system is performed.



SECTION 6.02.  SURFACE DRAINAGE OCCUPANCY PERMIT.



   No final occupancy permit required under the provisions of the Sterling
Heights Zoning Ordinance shall be issued for a new building until
satisfactory evidence is furnished that the yard grading is complete for the
lot or parcel of land on which the building is located. "Satisfactory
evidence" shall be in the form of a survey prepared by and certified by a
registered land surveyor or registered professional civil engineer. When
weather conditions will not permit the required grading to be done, a
temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the Building Inspector.



SECTION 6.03.  IMPROVEMENTS AND FACILITIES REQUIRED BY THE CITY.



   All required improvements of the subdivision shall be completed prior
to the approval of a final plat. In lieu thereof, the City Council may
require a deposit by the subdivider with the Clerk of the municipality in the
form of cash, a certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit,
whichever the proprietor selects, or a surety bond acceptable to the
governing body in an amount sufficient to insure completion within the time
specified.



   The city shall rebate to the subdivider, as the work progresses,
amounts of any cash deposits equal to the ratio of the work completed to the
entire project.



   Prior to the acceptance of the improvements by the city, a two year
maintenance bond in an amount set by the city, based upon an estimate by the
City Engineer, shall be posted by the subdivider.



   After completion of construction of all required improvements, the
subdivider shall file with the city a complete copy of "as built" engineering
plans of each public improvement, which plans shall be of a quality to be
able to be reproduced. Until such plans are filed, building permits shall not
be issued to more than 25% of the platted lots within the subdivision.



   If the City Council approves modification of the sidewalk requirements
pursuant to section 5.03(A)(2), the landscaping, trees and/or improvements
required by the City Council to be installed in lieu of the sidewalk shall be
completed by the proprietor prior to issuance of permits for more than 25% of
the platted lots within the subdivision. The proprietor shall file a two year
maintenance bond in an amount established by the city to insure that the
landscaping and/or improvements will be in acceptable condition at the time
the lots within the subdivision are developed.



(Ord. No. 196-B, § 6, 8-18-87)



SECTION 6.04.  OTHER REQUIREMENTS.



   No building permit shall hereafter be issued for any new construction
unless and until the City of Sterling Heights has approved and accepted all
public improvements within the subdivision upon which the construction is to
take place. Provided, however, the city within its discretion may issue a
building permit for sales models prior to completion of mass grading and rear
yard drainage.



ARTICLE VII.  VARIANCES



SECTION 7.01.  [GENERALLY.]



   The City Planning Commission may recommend to the City Council a
variance from the provisions of this ordinance on a finding that undue
hardship may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or
requirements of the ordinance or that application of such provision or
requirement is impractical. The Planning Commission shall only recommend
variances that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. In
making its findings, as required herein below, the Planning Commission shall
take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use
of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable affect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. No variance shall be recommended unless
the Planning Commission finds after a hearing:



   A.   That there are such special circumstances or conditions
affecting said property that the strict application of the provisions of this
ordinance would clearly be impractical or unreasonable. In such cases the
subdivider shall first state his or her reasons in writing as to the specific
provision or requirement involved and submit them to the Planning Commission;



   B.   That the granting of the specific variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area
in which said property is situated;



   C.   That such variance will not violate the provisions of Public
Act 288 of 1967, as amended, the State Subdivision Control Act;



   D.   That such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the
interest and purpose of this ordinance and the Comprehensive Development Plan
of this city;



   E.   The Planning Commission shall include its findings and the
specific reasons therefor in its report of recommendations to the City
Council and shall also record its reasons and actions in its minutes.



   The City Council, upon receipt of the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may grant a variance in accordance with the requirements of this
section of the ordinance.



SECTION 7.02.  TOPOGRAPHICAL-PHYSICAL LIMITATION VARIANCE.



   Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision it can be shown
that strict compliance with the requirements of this ordinance would result
in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography,
other physical conditions or other such conditions which are not
self-inflicted or that these conditions would result in inhabiting the
achievement of the objectives of this ordinance, the Planning Commission may
recommend to the City Council that variance modification or a waiver of these
requirements be granted.



SECTION 7.03.  PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT VARIANCE.



   The developer may request a variance from specified portions of this
ordinance in the case of a planned unit development. If in the judgment of
the Planning Commission such a plan provides adequate public spaces and
includes provisions for efficient circulation, light and air and other needs,
it shall make findings as required herein below. The Planning Commission
shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land and existing
use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to reside or work in the
proposed subdivision and the probable affect of the proposed subdivision upon
traffic conditions in the vicinity. The Planning Commission shall report to
the City Council whether:



   A.   The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable
community development; or



   B.   The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas.



ARTICLE VIII.  PARCEL SPLITTING



SECTION 8.01.  SPLITTING PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS.



   A.   [Application.] Any person wishing to split an acreage parcel
into one or more parcels of land, any of which shall be ten acres or less in
size, or any person wishing to split a platted lot, outlot or other parcel of
land in a recorded plat shall submit to the City Assessor written application
for parcel splitting, along with any required fees, and five copies of the
proposed split and site plan for development of the property.



   B.   Duties of the Assessor. The City Assessor shall request a
review and recommendation of the resultant split and site plan by the City
Planner and City Engineer in order to determine its compliance with this
ordinance, all other applicable city ordinances, all city rules and
regulations and with Public Act 288 of 1967. If the resultant split is in
conformance with all regulations, ordinances and conditions, the Assessor
shall have the authority to authorize the requested split. The Assessor shall
inform the Building Department, Engineering Department and Planning
Department of his or her action.



   C.   [Taxes, assessments, etc., to be paid]. No lot or acreage
parcel shall be split until all taxes, special assessments and other
delinquent accounts on the land, including but not limited to weed cutting,
water bills and capital charges, have been paid in full. A receipt for said
payments must be submitted with the proposed split plan.



   D.   [Frontage on public streets.] No lot or acreage parcel in a one
family residential or two family residential zoning district shall be split
unless the resultant parcels have frontage on a public street to the extent
required by the zoning ordinance.



(Ord. No. 196-A, § 1, 10-16-79)



ARTICLE IX.  FEES AND CHARGES



   All fees and charges shall be paid by the proprietor as may be provided
by resolution of the City Council or other applicable ordinances and shall be
deposited with the City Treasurer immediately upon determination of said fees.



ARTICLE X.  PENALTIES



SECTION 10.01.  PENALTIES.



   Violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any
person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its
requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more [than] $500 or
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the City Council or any other public official or private
citizen from taking such lawful action as is necessary to restrain or prevent
any violation of this ordinance of the Subdivision Control Act.



ARTICLE XI.  AMENDMENTS



SECTION 11.01.  PROCEDURES.



   The City Council may from time to time amend, supplement or repeal the
regulations and provisions of this ordinance in the manner prescribed by
Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended. A proposed amendment, supplement or
repeal may be originated by the City Council or City Planning Commission. All
proposals not originating with the Planning Commission shall be referred to
it for a report thereon before any action is taken on the proposal by the
City Council.



ARTICLE XII.  SEVERABILITY



   This ordinance and the various parts, sections and clauses thereof are
hereby declared to be severable. If any part, section, paragraph, subsection
or clause is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid, it is hereby provided that
the remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby.



ARTICLE XIII.  REPEAL OF EXISTING SUBDIVISION REGULATION ORDINANCE



SECTION 13.01.



   The existing subdivision regulations, Ordinances 87, 87A, 87B, 87C,
87D, are hereby repealed.



ARTICLE XIV.  EFFECTIVE DATE



SECTION 14.01.



   This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon publication.



   That the above and foregoing ordinance was introduced at a regular
meeting of the Sterling Heights City Council on the third day of May, 1977
and duly adopted at a regular meeting of the Sterling Heights City Council on
July 19, 1977.



   By Order of the City Council



INTRODUCED:  May 3, 1977



ADOPTED:  July 19, 1977



PUBLISHED:  July 27, 1977



EFFECTIVE:  July 27, 1977



Zoning Comparative Table
Subdivision Comparative Table



ZONING COMPARATIVE TABLE



   This table shows the disposition of ordinances amending Zoning
Ordinance No. 278.



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date
 
Section
 
Disposition




278-A
 
4-17-90
 
1
 
3.04A2b


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.04A4


 
 
 
 
3
 
3.04A6a


 
 
 
 
4
 
4.04A4a


 
 
 
 
5
 
6.01B, B1


 
 
 
 
6
 
6.01B1b


 
 
 
 
7
 
6.02A3a


 
 
 
 
8
 
6.02A3a2


 
 
 
 
9
 
6.04C2


 
 
 
 
10
 
6.04D


 
 
 
 
11
 
6.04E


 
 
 
 
12
 
7.01C, C1


 
 
 
 
13
 
7.01C1b


 
 
 
 
14
 
7.04C2a


 
 
 
 
15
 
7.04E


 
 
 
 
16
 
8.04D1


 
 
 
 
17
 
8.05C


 
 
 
 
18
 
9.05C


 
 
 
 
19
 
10.04D1


 
 
 
 
20
 
10.05D


 
 
 
 
21
 
11.04D1


 
 
 
 
22
 
11.04D2


 
 
 
 
23
 
11.05D


 
 
 
 
24
 
12.01S


 
 
 
 
25
 
12.05K


 
 
 
 
26
 
13.02I1


 
 
 
 
27
 
13.04C1


 
 
 
 
28
 
13.05D


 
 
 
 
29
 
14.04D1


 
 
 
 
30
 
14.05


 
 
 
 
31
 
14.06H1


 
 
 
 
32
 
15.04D1


278-A
 
4-17-90
 
33
 
17.04D1


 
 
 
 
34
 
18.04E1


 
 
 
 
35
 
19.02J


 
 
 
 
36
 
19.04D1


 
 
 
 
37
 
20.04D1


 
 
 
 
38
 
23.02C4


 
 
 
 
39
 
23.02E4


 
 
 
 
40
 
23.02E17


 
 
 
 
41
 
23.02E21-23


 
 
 
 
42
 
24.01(table)


 
 
 
 
43
 
24.01B1i


 
 
 
 
44
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
45
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
46
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
47
 
(Sch. of Regs.)


 
 
 
 
48
 
Art. 29(note)


278-B
 
5-15-90
 
1
 
24.01A3


278-C
 
5-15-90
 
1
 
24.01A4a


278-D
 
5-15-90
 
1
 
24.03A1


278-E
 
7-3-90
 
1
 
3.02E3


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.02F2


 
 
 
 
3
 
3.04A10


 
 
 
 
4
 
9.04D 2, 3


 
 
 
 
5
 
11.01E,F,K,M


 
 
 
 
6
 
11.01Q


 
 
 
 
7
 
12.01K-M


 
 
 
 
8
 
12.04A1


 
 
 
 
9
 
13.01 C, E, F, H, K, M4, N, P, Q


 
 
 
 
10
 
24.01B3


278-F
 
8-8-90
 
1
 
6.04A1, 2


 
 
 
 
2
 
Rpld 6.04A3, E-N


 
 
 
 
3
 
6.05


 
 
 
 
4
 
Rpld 7.04E-K


 
 
 
 
5
 
7.05


 
 
 
 
6
 
11.026


 
 
 
 
7
 
19.02L


 
 
 
 
8
 
19.05C


 
 
 
 
9
 
20.021


 
 
 
 
10
 
20.05D


 
 
 
 
11
 
23.02F5


 
 
 
 
12
 
23.05B


278-F
 
8-8-90
 
13
 
24.02A3


 
 
 
 
14
 
24.05


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.10C4


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.17


278-G
 
9-18-90
 
1
 
6.04E


 
 
 
 
2
 
7.04E


 
 
 
 
3
 
9.04D1


 
 
 
 
4
 
11.02E2


 
 
 
 
5
 
12.04C1


 
 
 
 
6
 
13.021


 
 
 
 
7
 
13.02J5


 
 
 
 
8-10
 
13.02K-M


 
 
 
 
11
 
19.04B2


 
 
 
 
12
 
19.04D2


 
 
 
 
13
 
20.04B2


 
 
 
 
14
 
23.03O


 
 
 
 
15
 
25.03D


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.00B


 
 
 
 
17,18
 
28.00E, F


 
 
 
 
19
 
28.00G1


 
 
 
 
20
 
28.13C23


 
 
 
 
21
 
31.01


278-H
 
12-18-90
 
1
 
22.01C2


 
 
 
 
2
 
22.01C13-20


278-I
 
2-5-91
 
1
 
22.00E


 
 
 
 
2
 
22.01A, B


 
 
 
 
3
 
22.01C4


 
 
 
 
4
 
22.01C11c


 
 
 
 
5
 
22.01C11d


 
 
 
 
6
 
Rpld 22.01C11e


 
 
 
 
7
 
22.01C16


 
 
 
 
8
 
22.01C21,22


 
 
 
 
9
 
22.01E1a


 
 
 
 
10
 
22.01E1b-e


 
 
 
 
11
 
22.01E2


 
 
 
 
12
 
22.02A


 
 
 
 
13
 
22.02B3


 
 
 
 
14
 
Rpld 22.02B4


 
 
 
 
 
 
Rnbd 22.02B5 as B4


 
 
 
 
15
 
22.02B5


 
 
 
 
16
 
22.02C1


 
 
 
 
17
 
22.02C3a-c


278-I
 
2-5-91
 
18
 
Rnbd 22.02C3(4) as


 
 
 
 
 
 
22.02C3d Amd'd 22.02C3d


 
 
 
 
19
 
Rnbd 22.02C3 (4)-(7) as 22.02C3d-g


 
 
 
 
 
 
22.02C4


 
 
 
 
20
 
22.02D


 
 
 
 
21
 
22.02E1a-f


 
 
 
 
22
 
22.02E2b


278-J
 
6-18-91
 
 
 
32.06(note)


278-K
 
5-19-92
 
 
 
32.06(note)


278-L
 
6-2-92
 
1
 
24.01B4


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.12


 
 
 
 
3
 
28.13C26


 
 
 
 
4
 
28.13D


 
 
 
 
5
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
6
 
31.01


278-M
 
6-21-94
 
1
 
21.00-21.06


278-N
 
8-1-95
 
1
 
3.02G


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.02H-N


 
 
 
 
3
 
3.04A12


 
 
 
 
4
 
3.04A6a


 
 
 
 
5
 
3.04A6c


 
 
 
 
6
 
3.04A11


 
 
 
 
7
 
6.01B


 
 
 
 
8
 
6.02A


 
 
 
 
9
 
6.02F


 
 
 
 
10
 
6.04A


 
 
 
 
11
 
6.04C3,4


 
 
 
 
12
 
6.05A, D, F


 
 
 
 
13
 
7.01C


 
 
 
 
14
 
22.01B7


 
 
 
 
15
 
22.01B7,8


 
 
 
 
16
 
22.01C11a, c


 
 
 
 
17
 
22.01D


 
 
 
 
18
 
22.01E1e


 
 
 
 
19
 
22.02B5


 
 
 
 
20
 
22.02B6


 
 
 
 
21
 
22.02C3a


 
 
 
 
22
 
22.02E1f


 
 
 
 
23
 
31.00 8


 
 
 
 
24
 
31.01


278-O
 
9-5-95
 
1
 
11.00


 
 
 
 
2
 
11.01


 
 
 
 
3
 
11.02H


 
 
 
 
4
 
12.01


 
 
 
 
5
 
12.04A1


 
 
 
 
6
 
12.04C1


 
 
 
 
7
 
13.01


 
 
 
 
8
 
13.02A


 
 
 
 
9
 
13.02N


 
 
 
 
10
 
13.04C1


 
 
 
 
11
 
31.01


278-P
 
10-8-95
 
1
 
9.04D1


 
 
 
 
2
 
16.03


 
 
 
 
3
 
19.02M, N


 
 
 
 
4
 
26.01E, F


 
 
 
 
5
 
26.01H


 
 
 
 
6
 
26.02B


 
 
 
 
7
 
26.03


278-Q
 
8-20-96
 
1
 
3.02I, J


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.04A2c


 
 
 
 
3
 
6.01A


 
 
 
 
4
 
6.04C4


 
 
 
 
5
 
6.04D


 
 
 
 
6
 
7.01B


 
 
 
 
7
 
7.04C2


 
 
 
 
8
 
7.05C


 
 
 
 
9
 
19.02H


 
 
 
 
10
 
22.01C18


 
 
 
 
11
 
22.02C3c


 
 
 
 
12
 
23.01J


 
 
 
 
13
 
24.03C1


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.00F, G


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.10B


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.13B4-29


 
 
 
 
17
 
28.13C7, 8, 10


 
 
 
 
18
 
28.13D


 
 
 
 
19
 
28.13P


 
 
 
 
20-21
 
31.01


278-R
 
8-20-96
 
1
 
3.02I, J


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.04A2c


 
 
 
 
3
 
6.01A


 
 
 
 
4
 
6.04A4


278-R
 
8-20-96
 
5
 
6.04D


 
 
 
 
6
 
7.01B


 
 
 
 
7
 
7.04C2a


 
 
 
 
8
 
7.05C


 
 
 
 
9
 
19.02H


 
 
 
 
10
 
22.01C1, 8


 
 
 
 
11
 
22.02C3c


 
 
 
 
12
 
23.01J


 
 
 
 
13
 
24.03C1


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.00F, G


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.10B


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.13B4-29


 
 
 
 
17
 
28.13C7, 8, 10


 
 
 
 
18
 
28.13 (Table)


 
 
 
 
19
 
28.13 (Notes)


 
 
 
 
20
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
21
 
31.01


278-S
 
2-18-97
 
1
 
3.02O


278-T
 
6-3-97
 
1
 
3.02I


 
 
 
 
2
 
6.05E


 
 
 
 
3
 
8.02D


 
 
 
 
4
 
8.02E


 
 
 
 
5
 
9.02G


 
 
 
 
6
 
14.01D


 
 
 
 
7
 
14.01O


 
 
 
 
8
 
14.04B, C, D, E, F, G


 
 
 
 
9
 
14.06A


 
 
 
 
10
 
22.02C3c


 
 
 
 
11
 
23.02E10, 23


 
 
 
 
12
 
24.05C


 
 
 
 
13
 
28.11F


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.13C8


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.13D


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
17
 
28.14O


 
 
 
 
18
 
31.01


278-U
 
1-6-98
 
1
 
3.02A5


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.02N5


 
 
 
 
3
 
3.03D3-6


 
 
 
 
4
 
6.02B5


 
 
 
 
5
 
8.02B2


 
 
 
 
6
 
8.02B5


278-U
 
1-6-98
 
7
 
9.04A1,2


 
 
 
 
8
 
12.02H


 
 
 
 
9
 
22.02C3,c


 
 
 
 
10
 
24.01


 
 
 
 
11
 
24.01A4,c


 
 
 
 
12
 
24.01B1,d


 
 
 
 
13
 
26.02B


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.00


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.13B15


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.13C26-29


 
 
 
 
17
 
28.13D


 
 
 
 
18
 
29.00


 
 
 
 
19
 
30.02C5, 6


 
 
 
 
20
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
21
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
22
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
23
 
31.01


278-V
 
1-20-98
 
1
 
11.02I


278-W
 
11-30-98
 
1
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
2
 
33.00


 
 
 
 
3
 
33.04


278-Y
 
5-16-00
 
1
 
3.02I4


 
 
 
 
2
 
Rpld 3.02I5


 
 
 
 
3
 
Add 5.04


 
 
 
 
4
 
6.02D


 
 
 
 
5
 
Add 6.02G


 
 
 
 
6
 
7.02D


 
 
 
 
7
 
8.02D


 
 
 
 
8
 
8.02E


 
 
 
 
9
 
8.04B2


 
 
 
 
10
 
9.02H


 
 
 
 
11
 
9.02I


 
 
 
 
12
 
9.04D


 
 
 
 
13
 
10.02C


 
 
 
 
14
 
11.02E


 
 
 
 
15
 
12.02I


 
 
 
 
16
 
13.01E


 
 
 
 
17
 
Rpld 13.01L


 
 
 
 
18
 
Rnbd 13.01M-N


 
 
 
 
 
 
as 13.01L-M


 
 
 
 
19
 
13.02M


 
 
 
 
20
 
Add 13.02O


278-Y
 
5-16-00
 
21
 
14.02C


 
 
 
 
22
 
Add 15.02B


 
 
 
 
23
 
Add 16.05


 
 
 
 
 
 
Rnbd existing 16.05-16.07 as 16.06-16.08


 
 
 
 
24
 
17.02H


 
 
 
 
25
 
18.02A


 
 
 
 
26
 
19.02K


 
 
 
 
27
 
20.02F


 
 
 
 
28
 
22.00B4


 
 
 
 
29
 
22.01C11c


 
 
 
 
30
 
22.02C14


 
 
 
 
31
 
Add 23.02A5


 
 
 
 
32
 
23.02B3


 
 
 
 
33
 
23.02B8


 
 
 
 
34
 
23.03F


 
 
 
 
35
 
24.01A2-3


 
 
 
 
36
 
24.02A2


 
 
 
 
37
 
25.01


 
 
 
 
38
 
25.02F


 
 
 
 
39
 
25.03B


 
 
 
 
40
 
26.01H


 
 
 
 
41
 
28.01


 
 
 
 
42
 
28.13G


 
 
 
 
43
 
Add 28.18


 
 
 
 
44
 
30.03G


 
 
 
 
45-46
 
31.01


278-Z
 
11-8-00
 
1
 
28.13C


278-AA
 
3-20-01
 
1
 
11.04B2


 
 
 
 
2
 
13.01D


 
 
 
 
3
 
13.01K


 
 
 
 
4
 
13.02A


 
 
 
 
5
 
17.04B2


 
 
 
 
6
 
17.04D1


 
 
 
 
7
 
19.02J


 
 
 
 
8
 
19.04D


 
 
 
 
9
 
20.04D


 
 
 
 
10
 
28.00B, C


 
 
 
 
11
 
28.10B


 
 
 
 
12
 
28.10C4


 
 
 
 
13
 
31.01


278-BB
 
12-18-01
 
1
 
8.02B


 
 
 
 
2
 
9.02I, J


 
 
 
 
3
 
11.02B


 
 
 
 
4
 
19.01D1


 
 
 
 
5
 
20.04D1


278-CC
 
6-3-03
 
1
 
3.04A6b


 
 
 
 
2
 
6.05E


 
 
 
 
3
 
8.04D2


 
 
 
 
4
 
11.04D2


 
 
 
 
5
 
13.04D2


 
 
 
 
6
 
19.04D2


 
 
 
 
7
 
22.01A


 
 
 
 
8
 
22.01C1


 
 
 
 
9
 
22.01C12


 
 
 
 
10
 
22.02A


 
 
 
 
11
 
22.02C-1


 
 
 
 
12
 
27.02D


 
 
 
 
13
 
27.05C


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.10D


 
 
 
 
15
 
28.13B24


 
 
 
 
16
 
28.13C7


 
 
 
 
17
 
28.13C21


 
 
 
 
18
 
30.02


 
 
 
 
19
 
30.02C, D


 
 
 
 
20
 
30.02E


 
 
 
 
21
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
22
 
32.00C4


278-DD
 
7-6-04
 
1
 
11.01S


 
 
 
 
2
 
11.02A1


 
 
 
 
3
 
23.02E6


 
 
 
 
4
 
23.02E9


 
 
 
 
5
 
23.02E19


 
 
 
 
6
 
24.01


 
 
 
 
7
 
24.01A


 
 
 
 
8
 
24.02D


 
 
 
 
9
 
24.03A1


 
 
 
 
10
 
25.03B


 
 
 
 
11
 
28.00B


278-EE
 
10-5-04
 
1
 
25.03D-I


 
 
 
 
2
 
27.05B


 
 
 
 
3
 
27.05C


 
 
 
 
4
 
30.03G, H


 
 
 
 
5
 
30.03I


 
 
 
 
6
 
30.04


 
 
 
 
7
 
1.02, 5.04, 12.02, 14.00, 25.00 - 25.03, 28.00, 28.12, 31.00


 
 
 
 
8
 
25.03, 28.00, 28.18


278FF
 
5-3-05
 
1
 
22.03


 
 
 
 
2
 
25.01


 
 
 
 
3
 
26.01



 
 
 
4
 
32.00


 
 
 
 
5
 
32.04


278-GG
 
12-6-05
 
1
 
17.06


 
 
 
 
2
 
19.06


 
 
 
 
3
 
20.06


 
 
 
 
4
 
24.06


278-HH
 
12-20-05
 
1
 
28.13


278-II
 
3-19-08
 
1
 
22.04


 
 
 
 
2
 
24.02


 
 
 
 
3
 
24.06


 
 
 
 
4
 
24.06


278-JJ
 
3-4-08
 
1
 
3.04


 
 
 
 
2
 
3.04


 
 
 
 
3
 
6.04


 
 
 
 
4
 
13.04


 
 
 
 
5
 
13.04


 
 
 
 
6
 
23.02


 
 
 
 
7
 
24.02


 
 
 
 
8
 
26.01


 
 
 
 
9
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
10
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
11
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
12
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
13
 
28.14


278-KK
 
4-15-08
 
1
 
26.01


 
 
 
 
2
 
31.01


278-LL
 
7-1-08
 
1
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.13


278-MM
 
10-21-08
 
1
 
12.02


 
 
 
 
2
 
12.02


 
 
 
 
3
 
12.03


 
 
 
 
4
 
28.00


 
 
 
 
5
 
31.01


278-NN
 
1-6-09
 
1
 
Title


 
 
 
 
2
 
1.01


 
 
 
 
3
 
1.02


 
 
 
 
4
 
1.02


 
 
 
 
5
 
3.01


 
 
 
 
6
 
16.02


 
 
 
 
7
 
16.03


 
 
 
 
8
 
21.01


 
 
 
 
9
 
21.03


 
 
 
 
10
 
21.04


 
 
 
 
11
 
21.05


 
 
 
 
12
 
22.00


 
 
 
 
13
 
22.03


 
 
 
 
14
 
25.01


 
 
 
 
15
 
25.02


 
 
 
 
16
 
25.03


 
 
 
 
17
 
25.03


 
 
 
 
18
 
25.03


 
 
 
 
19
 
25.03


 
 
 
 
20
 
26.03


 
 
 
 
21
 
28.19


 
 
 
 
22
 
30.00


 
 
 
 
23
 
30.00


 
 
 
 
24
 
30.00


 
 
 
 
25
 
30.01


 
 
 
 
26
 
30.03


 
 
 
 
27
 
30.04


 
 
 
 
28
 
30.04


 
 
 
 
29
 
30.04


 
 
 
 
30
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
31
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
32
 
32.02


 
 
 
 
33
 
33.01


 
 
 
 
34
 
2.01, 16.08, 21.07, 22.01 - 22.03, 23.03, 24.06, 25.03, 27.00, 27.02, 27.04 -
27.06, 27.09, 28.00, 28.05, 28.10, 28.18, 30.00 -  30.04, 31.01


 
 
 
 
35
 
20.01, 31.01


278-QQ
 
2-16-10
 
1
 
3.03


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
3
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
4
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
5
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
6
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
7
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
8
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
9
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
10
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
11
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
12
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
13
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
14
 
28.14


278-SS   
 
7-17-12
 
1
 
22.06


 
 
 
 
3
 
25.01


 
 
 
 
4
 
25.04


 
 
 
 
5
 
26.02


278-TT
 
4-16-13
 
1
 
28.13


278-UU
 
4-16-13
 
1
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.13


278-VV
 
4-1-14
 
1
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
3
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
4
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
5
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
6
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
7
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
8
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
9
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
10
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
11
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
12
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
13
 
28.13


278-XX
 
7-19-16
 
1
 
28.13


 
 
 
 
2
 
31.01


278-YY
 
10-4-16
 
1
 
23.01


 
 
 
 
2
 
24.02


 
 
 
 
3
 
24.03


 
 
 
 
4
 
24.03


 
 
 
 
5
 
24.05


 
 
 
 
6
 
24.07


 
 
 
 
7
 
24.08


 
 
 
 
8
 
24.09


 
 
 
 
9
 
24.10


 
 
 
 
10
 
24.11


 
 
 
 
11
 
24.12


 
 
 
 
12
 
29.05


 
 
 
 
13
 
28.14


 
 
 
 
14
 
31.01


278-ZZ
 
12-20-16
 
1
 
28.20


 
 
 
 
2
 
28.19


 
 
 
 
3
 
33.00


278-AAA
 
5-3-17
 
1
 
28.01


 
 
 
 
2
 
31.01


 
 
 
 
3
 
12.02


 
 
 
 
4
 
13.02


278-CCC
 
4-2-19
 
1
 
12.01A-12.04A


 
 
 
 
 
 
 




 



SUBDIVISION COMPARATIVE TABLE



   This table shows the disposition of ordinances amending Subdivision
Ordinance No. 196.



 

Ordinance Number
 
Date
 
Section
 
Disposition


196-A
 
10-16-79
 
1
 
8.01(C)


196-B
 
8-18-87
 
2-4
 
5.02 A.1(b)(4),


 
 
 
 
 
 
4.(b)(2)c., 5.(b)(2)e


 
 
 
 
5
 
5.03A


 
 
 
 
6
 
6.03


196-C
 
6- 2-92
 
1
 
4.03B.4



 



APPENDIX



Code Comparative Table



   The Code Comparative Table provides a reference to assist in locating
sections from the 1978 Code as they are codified in the 1992 Code.



 

1978 Code
 
1992 Code




1-1
 
1-1


1-2
 
1-2


1-3
 
1-3


1-4
 
1-4


1-5
 
1-5


1-6
 
1-6


1-7
 
1-7


1-8
 
1-8


1-9
 
1-9


1-10
 
1-10


1-11
 
1-11


2-1
 
2-1


2-2
 
2-2


2-3-2-15
 
2-3-2-15


2-16
 
2-16


2-17
 
2-17


2-18
 
2-18


2-19
 
2-19


2-20
 
2-20


2-21-2-94
 
2-21-2-94


2-95
 
2-95


2-96-2-100
 
2-96-2-100


2-101
 
2-101


2-102
 
2-102


2-103-2-107
 
2-103-2-107


2-108
 
2-108


2-109
 
2-109


2-110
 
2-110


2-111
 
2-111


2-112
 
2-112


2-113
 
2-113


2-114-2-118
 
2-114-2-118


2-119
 
2-119


2-120
 
2-120


2-121
 
2-121


2-122
 
2-122


2-123-2-127
 
2-123-2-127


2-128
 
2-128


2-129
 
2-129


2-130
 
2-130


2-131
 
2-131


2-132
 
2-132


2-133-2-137
 
2-133-2-137


2-138
 
2-138


2-139
 
2-139


2-140
 
2-140


2-141
 
2-141


2-142
 
2-142


2-143
 
2-143


2-144
 
2-144


2-145
 
2-145


2-146
 
2-146


2-147
 
2-147


2-148
 
2-148


2-149
 
2-149


2-150
 
2-150


2-150.1
 
2-150.1


2-150.2
 
2-150.2


2-150.3
 
2-150.3


2-150.4
 
2-150.4


2-150.5
 
2-150.5


2-150.6
 
2-150.6


2-150.7-2-150.9
 
2-150.7-2-150.9


2-150.10
 
2-150.10


2-150.11
 
2-150.11


2-150.12
 
2-150.12


2-150.13
 
2-150.13


2-150.14
 
2-150.14


2-150.15-2-150.20
 
2-150.15-2-150.20


2-150.21
 
2-150.21


2-150.22
 
2-150.22


2-150.23
 
2-150.23


2-150.24
 
2-150.24


 
 
2-150.25-2-150.29


2-150.30
 
2-150.30


2-150.31
 
2-150.31


2-150.32
 
2-150.32


2-150.33
 
2-150.33


2-150.34
 
2-150.34


2-150.35
 
2-150.35


2-151
 
2-151


2-152
 
2-152


2-153
 
2-153


2-154
 
2-154


2-155
 
2-155


2-156
 
2-156


2-157
 
2-157


2-158
 
2-158


2-159
 
2-159


2-160-2-169
 
2-160-2-169


2-170-2-202
 
2-170-2-202


2-203
 
2-203 Repealed


2-204
 
2-204 Repealed


2-205
 
2-205 Repealed


2-206
 
2-206 Repealed


2-207
 
2-207 Repealed


2-208
 
2-208 Repealed


2-209
 
2-209 Repealed


2-210
 
2-210 Repealed


2-211
 
2-211 Repealed


2-212
 
2-212 Repealed


2-213
 
2-213 Repealed


2-214
 
2-214 Repealed


2-215
 
2-215 Repealed


2-216
 
2-216 Repealed


2-217
 
2-217 Repealed


2-218
 
2-218 Repealed


2-219
 
2-219 Repealed


2-220
 
2-220 Repealed


2-221
 
2-221 Repealed


2-222
 
2-222 Repealed


2-223
 
2-223 Repealed


2-224-2-249
 
2-224-2-249 Repealed


2-250
 
2-250


3-1-3-15
 
3-1-3-15


3-16
 
3-16


3-17
 
3-17


3-18
 
3-18


3-19-3-28
 
3-19-3-28


3-29
 
3-29


3-30
 
3-30


3-31
 
3-31


3-32
 
3-32


3-33
 
3-33


3-34
 
3-34


3-35
 
3-35


3-36
 
3-36


3-37
 
3-37


3-38
 
3-38


3-39
 
3-39


4-1-4-20
 
4-1-4-20


4-21
 
4-21


4-22
 
4-22


4-23
 
4-23


4-24
 
4-24


5-1
 
5-1


5-2
 
5-2


5-3
 
5-3


5-4
 
5-4


5-5-5-15
 
5-5-5-15


5-16
 
5-16


5-17
 
5-17


5-18
 
5-18


5-19
 
5-19


5-20
 
5-20


5-21-5-29
 
5-21-5-29


5-30
 
5-30


5-31
 
5-31


5-32
 
5-32


5-33
 
5-33


5-34
 
5-34


5-35
 
5-35


5-36
 
5-36


 
 
Chapter 6


 
 
Reserved


5-5.1
 
7-1


5-5.2
 
7-2


5-5.3
 
7-3


5-5.4
 
7-4


5-5.5
 
7-5


5-5.6
 
7-6


5-5.7
 
7-7


5-5.8
 
7-8


5-5.9
 
7-9


5-5.10
 
7-10


5-5.11
 
7-11


5-5.12
 
7-12


6-1
 
8-1


6-2
 
8-3


6-3
 
8-31


6-4
 
8-9


6-5
 
8-21


6-6
 
8-22


6-7
 
8-7


6-8
 
8-4


6-9
 
8-4


6-10
 
8-11


6-11
 
8-20


6-12
 
8-10


6-13
 
8-23


6-23
 
8-41, 8-44


6-24
 
8-9


6-25
 
8-30


6-37
 
8-27, 8-32


6-48
 
8-10


6-49
 
8-10


6-50
 
8-29


6-51
 
8-10


6-52
 
8-10


6-53
 
8-49


6-64
 
8-71


6-65
 
8-72


6-77
 
8-14


\
 
6-808-61


7-1
 
9-1


7-2
 
9-2


7-3
 
9-3


7-4
 
9-4


7-5
 
9-5


7-6
 
9-6


7-7
 
9-7


7-8
 
9-8


 
 
Chapter 10


 
 
Reserved


8-1
 
11-1


8-2
 
11-2


8-3
 
11-3


8-4
 
11-4


8-5-8-20
 
11-9-11-20


8-21
 
11-21


8-22
 
11-22 Repealed


8-23
 
11-23 Repealed


8-24
 
11-24 Repealed


8-25
 
11-25 Repealed


8-26-8-33
 
11-26-11-33 Repealed


8-34
 
11-34


8-35
 
11-35 Repealed


8-36
 
11-36 Repealed


8-37
 
11-37 Repealed


8-38
 
11-38 Repealed


8-39
 
11-39 Repealed


8-40
 
11-40 Repealed


8-41
 
11-41 Repealed


8-42
 
11-42 Repealed


8-43
 
11-43 Repealed


8-44
 
11-44 Repealed


8-45
 
11-45 Repealed


8-46
 
11-46 Repealed


8-47
 
11-47 Repealed


8-48
 
11-48 Repealed


8-49
 
11-49 Repealed


8-50-8-57
 
11-50-11-51 Repealed


 
 
11-52-11-57


8-58
 
11-58


8-59
 
11-59 Repealed


8-60
 
11-60 Repealed


8-61-8-70
 
11-61-11-70


8-71
 
11-71


8-72
 
11-72 Repealed


8-73
 
11-73 Repealed


8-74
 
11-74


8-75-8-83
 
11-75-11-83


8-84
 
11-84 Repealed


8-85
 
11-85 Repealed


8-86-8-93
 
11-86-11-93


8-95
 
11-95 Repealed


8-96
 
11-96 Repealed


8-97
 
11-97 Repealed


8-98
 
11-98 Repealed


8-99
 
11-99 Repealed


8-100
 
11-100 Repealed


8-101-8-180
 
11-101-11-104


 
 
11-107-11-180


8-181
 
11-84


8-182
 
11-86


8-183
 
11-87


8-184-8-193
 
11-184-11-193


8-194
 
11-194


8-195
 
11-195


8-196
 
11-196


8-197
 
11-197


8-198
 
11-198


8-199
 
11-199


8-200
 
11-200


8-201
 
11-201


8-202
 
11-202


8-203
 
11-203


8-204
 
11-204


8-205
 
11-205


8-206
 
11-206


8-207
 
11-207


8-208
 
11-208


8-209-8-218
 
11-209-11-218


8-219
 
11-219


8-220
 
11-220


8-221
 
11-221


8-222
 
11-222


8-223
 
11-223


8-224
 
11-224


8-225
 
11-225


8-226
 
11-226


8-227
 
11-227


8-228
 
11-228


8-229
 
11-229


8-230
 
11-230


8-231
 
11-231


8-232
 
11-232


8-233
 
11-233


8-234-8-241
 
11-234-11-241


8-242
 
48-60


8-244
 
48-62


8-245
 
48-63


8-246
 
11-48-64


8-247
 
48-65


8-248
 
48-66


8-249
 
48-67


8-250
 
48-68


8-252
 
48-69


8.2-1
 
12-1


8.2-2
 
12-2


8.2-3
 
12-3


8.2-4
 
12-4


8.2-5
 
12-5


8.2-6
 
12-6


8.2-7
 
12-7


8.2-8
 
12-8


8.2-9
 
12-9


8.2-10-8.2-20
 
12-10-12-20


8.2-21-8.2-40
 
12-21-12-40


8.2-41
 
12-41


8.2-42
 
12-42


8.2-43
 
12-43


8.2-44
 
12-44


8.2-45
 
12-45


8.2-46
 
12-46


8.5-1
 
13-1


8.5-2
 
13-2


8.5-3
 
13-3


8.5-4
 
13-4


8.5-5
 
13-5


8.5-6
 
13-6


8.5-7
 
13-7


8.5-8
 
13-8


8.5-9
 
13-9


8.5-10
 
13-10


8.5-11
 
13-11


8.5-12
 
13-12


8.5-13
 
13-13


8.5-14
 
13-14


8.5-15
 
13-15


8.5-16
 
13-16


8.5-17
 
13-17


8.5-18
 
13-18


8.5-19
 
13-19


8.5-20
 
13-20


8.5-21
 
13-21


8.5-22
 
13-22


8.5-23
 
13-23


8.5-24
 
13-24


8.5-25
 
13-25


8.5-26
 
13-26


8.5-27
 
13-27


8.5-28
 
13-28


9-1
 
14-1


10-1
 
15-1 Repealed


10-2
 
15-2 Repealed


10-3
 
15-3 Repealed


10-4
 
15-4 Repealed


10-5
 
15-5 Repealed


10-6
 
15-6 Repealed


10-7
 
15-7 Repealed


10-8
 
15-8 Repealed


10-9
 
15-9 Repealed


10-10
 
15-10 Repealed


10-11
 
15-11 Repealed


10-12
 
15-12 Repealed


10-13
 
15-13 Repealed


10-14
 
15-14 Repealed


 
 
Chapter 16


 
 
Reserved


11-1
 
17-1


11-2
 
17-2


11-3
 
17-3


11-4
 
17-4


11-5
 
17-5


11-6
 
17-6


11-7
 
17-7


11-8
 
17-8


11-9
 
17-9


11-10
 
17-10


11-11
 
17-11


11-12
 
17-12


11-13
 
17-13


11-14
 
17-14


11-15
 
17-15


11-16
 
17-16


11-17
 
17-17


11-18
 
17-18


11-19
 
17-19


11-20-11-43
 
17-20-17-43


11-44
 
17-44


11-45
 
17-45


11-46
 
17-46


11-47
 
17-47


11-48
 
17-48


11-49
 
17-49


11-50
 
17-50


11-51
 
17-51


11-52
 
17-52


11-53
 
17-53


11-54
 
17-54


11-55
 
17-55


11-56
 
17-56


11-57
 
17-57


11-58
 
17-58


11-59
 
17-59


11-60
 
17-60


11.5
 
Chapter 18


 
 
Reserved


12-1
 
19-1


12-2
 
19-2


12-3
 
19-3


12-4
 
19-4


12-5
 
19-5


12-6
 
19-6


12-7
 
19-7


12-8
 
19-8


12-9
 
19-9


12-10
 
19-10


12-11
 
19-11


12-12
 
19-12


12-13
 
19-13


12-14
 
19-14


12-15
 
19-15


13-1-13-20
 
20-1-20-20


13-21
 
20-21


13-22
 
20-22


13-23
 
20-23


13-24-13-27
 
20-24-20-27


13-28
 
20-28


13-29
 
20-29


13-30
 
20-30


13-31
 
20-31


13-32
 
20-32


13-33
 
20-33


13-34
 
20-34


13-35
 
20-35


13-36
 
20-36


13-37
 
20-37


13-38
 
20-38


13-39
 
20-39


13-40
 
20-40


13-41
 
20-41


13-42
 
20-42


13-43
 
20-43


13-44
 
20-44


13-45
 
20-45


14-1-14-15
 
22-1-22-15


14-16
 
22-16


14-17
 
22-17


14-18-14-20
 
22-18-22-20


14-21
 
22-21


14-22
 
22-22


14-23
 
22-23


14-24
 
22-24


14-25
 
22-25


14-26
 
22-26


14-27-14-28
 
22-27-22-28


14-29-14-38
 
22-29-22-38


14-39
 
22-39


14-40
 
22-40


14-41
 
22-41


14-42
 
22-42


14-43
 
22-43


14-44
 
22-44


14-45
 
22-45


15-1
 
23-1


15-2
 
23-2


15-3
 
23-3


15-4
 
23-4


15-5
 
23-5


15-6
 
23-6


15-7
 
23-7


15-8
 
23-8


15-9
 
23-9


15-10
 
23-10


15-11
 
23-11


15-12
 
23-12


15-13
 
23-13


15-14
 
23-14


15-15
 
23-15


15-16
 
23-16


15-17
 
23-17


15-18
 
23-18


15-19
 
23-19


15-20
 
23-20


15-21
 
23-21


15-22
 
23-22


15-23
 
23-23


15-24
 
23-24


15-25
 
23-25


15-26.1
 
23-26.1


15-27
 
23-27


15-28
 
23-28


15-29,15-30
 
23-29, 23-30


15-31
 
23-31


15-32
 
23-32


15-33
 
23-33


15-34
 
23-34


15-35
 
23-35


15-36
 
23-36


15-37
 
23-37


15-38
 
23-38


15-39
 
23-39


15-40
 
23-40


15-41
 
23-41


15-42
 
23-42


 
 
Chapter 24


 
 
Reserved


17-1
 
26-1


17-2
 
26-2


17-3
 
26-3


17-4
 
26-4


17-5
 
26-5


17-6
 
26-6


17-7
 
26-7


17-8
 
26-8


17-9
 
26-9


17-10
 
26-10


17-11
 
26-11


17-12
 
26-12


17-13
 
26-13


17-14
 
26-14


17-15-17-24
 
26-15-26-24


17-25
 
26-25


17-26
 
26-26


17-27
 
26-27


17-28
 
26-28


17-29
 
26-29


 
 
Chapter 18


 
 
Reserved


 
 
Chapter 27


 
 
Reserved


19-1
 
28-1


19-2
 
28-2


19-3
 
28-3


19-4
 
28-4


19-5
 
28-5


19-6
 
28-6


19-7
 
28-7


19-8
 
28-8


19-9
 
28-9


19-10
 
28-10


19-11
 
28-11


20-1
 
29-1


20-2
 
29-2


20-3
 
29-3


20-4
 
29-4


20-5
 
29-5


20-6
 
29-6


20-7
 
29-7


20-8
 
29-8


20-9
 
29-9


20-10
 
29-10


20-11
 
29-11


20-12
 
29-12


20-13
 
29-13


20-14
 
29-14


20-15
 
29-15


 
 
Chapter 21


 
 
Reserved


 
 
Chapter 30


 
 
Reserved


22-1
 
31-1


22-2
 
31-2


22-3
 
31-3


22-4
 
31-4


22-5
 
31-5


22-6
 
31-6


 
 
Chapter 32


 
 
Reserved


23-1
 
33-1


23-2
 
33-2


23-3
 
33-3


23-4
 
33-4


23-5
 
Reserved


23-6
 
Reserved


23-7
 
Reserved


23-8
 
Reserved


23-9-23-18
 
Reserved


23-19
 
Reserved


23-20
 
Reserved


23-21
 
Reserved


23-22
 
Reserved


23-23
 
Reserved


24-1
 
34-1


24-2
 
34-2


24-3
 
34-3


24-4
 
34-4


24-5
 
34-5


24-6
 
34-6


25-1
 
35-1


25-2
 
35-2


25-3
 
35-3


25-4
 
35-4


25-5-25-13
 
35-5-35-13


25-14
 
35-14


25-15
 
35-15


25-16
 
35-16


25-17
 
35-17


25-18
 
35-18


25-19
 
35-19


25-20
 
35-20


25-21
 
35-21


25-22
 
35-22


25-23
 
35-23


25-24
 
35-24


25-25
 
35-25


25-26
 
35-26


25-27
 
35-27


25-28
 
35-28


25-29
 
35-29


25-30
 
35-30


25-31
 
35-31


25-32
 
35-32


25-33
 
35-33


25-34
 
35-34


25-35
 
35-35


25-36-25-49
 
35-36-35-49


25-50
 
35-50


25-51
 
35-51


25-52
 
35-52


25-53
 
35-53


25-54-25-63
 
35-54-35-63


25-64
 
35-64


25-65
 
35-65


25-66
 
35-66


25-67
 
35-67


25-68
 
35-68


25-69
 
35-69


25-70
 
35-70


25-71-25-80
 
35-71-35-80


25-81
 
35-81


25-82
 
35-82


25-83
 
35-83


 
 
Chapter 36


 
 
Reserved


25.5-1-25.5-10
 
37-1-37-10


25.5-11
 
37-11


25.5-12
 
37-12


25.5-13
 
37-13


25.5-14
 
37-14


25.5-15
 
37-15


25.5-16
 
37-16


25.5-17-25.5-20
 
37-17-37-20


25.5-21
 
37-21


25.5-22
 
37-22


25.5-23
 
37-23


25.5-24
 
37-24


25.5-25
 
37-25


25.5-26
 
37-26


25.5-27
 
37-27


25.5-28
 
37-28


25.5-29-25.5-30
 
37-29-37-30


25.5-31
 
37-31


25.5-32
 
37-32


26-1
 
38-1


26-2
 
38-2


26-3
 
38-3


26-4
 
38-4


26-5
 
38-5


26-6, 26-7
 
38-6, 38-7


26-8
 
38-8


26-9
 
38-9


26-10
 
38-10


26-11
 
38-11


26-12
 
38-12


26-13
 
38-13


26-14
 
38-14


26-15
 
38-15


26-16, 26-17
 
38-16, 38-17


26-18
 
38-18


26-19
 
38-19


26-20
 
38-20


26-21
 
38-21


26-22
 
38-22


26-23
 
38-23


26-24
 
38-24


26-25, 26-26
 
38-25, 38-26


26-27
 
38-27


26-28-26-37
 
38-28-38-37


26-38
 
38-38


26-39
 
38-39


26-40
 
38-40


26-41
 
38-41


26-42
 
38-42


26-43
 
38-43


26-44
 
38-44


26-45
 
38-45


27-1
 
39-1


27-2
 
39-2


27-3
 
39-3


27-4
 
39-4


27-5
 
39-5


27-6
 
39-6


27-7
 
39-7


27A-1
 
40-1


27A-2
 
40-2


27A-3
 
40-3


27A-4
 
40-4


27A-5
 
40-5


27A-6
 
40-6


28-1
 
41-1


28-2-28-15
 
41-2-41-15


28-16
 
41-16


28-17
 
41-17


28-18
 
41-18


28-19
 
41-19


28-20
 
41-20


28-21
 
41-21


28-22
 
41-22


28-23
 
41-23


28-24
 
41-24


28-25
 
41-25


28-26
 
41-26


28-26.1
 
deleted


28-27
 
41-27


28-28
 
41-28


28-29
 
41-29


28-30
 
41-30


28-31
 
41-31


28-32
 
41-32 Repealed


28-33
 
41-33


28-34
 
41-34


28-35
 
41-35


28-36
 
41-36


28-37
 
41-37


28-38
 
41-38


28-39
 
41-39


28-40
 
41-40


28-41
 
41-41


28-42
 
41-42


28-43
 
41-43


28-44
 
41-44


28-45
 
41-45


28-46
 
41-46


28-47
 
41-47


28-48
 
41-48


28-49
 
41-49


28-50
 
41-50


28-51
 
41-51


28-52
 
41-52


28-53
 
41-53


28-54
 
41-54


28-55
 
41-55


28-56-28-64
 
41-56-41-64


28-65
 
41-65


28-66
 
41-66


28-67
 
41-67


 
 
Chapter 42


 
 
Reserved


28.5-1
 
43-1


28.5-2
 
43-2


28.5-3
 
43-3


28.5-4
 
43-4


28.5-5
 
43-5


28.5-6
 
43-6


28.5-7
 
43-7


28.5-8
 
43-8


28.5-9
 
43-9


28.5-10
 
43-10


29-1
 
44-1


29-2
 
44-2


29-3
 
44-3


29-4
 
44-4


29-5
 
44-5


29-6
 
44-6


29-7
 
44-7


29-8
 
44-8


29-9
 
44-9


29-10
 
44-10


29-11
 
44-11


29-12
 
44-12


29.5-1
 
45-1


29.5-2
 
45-2


29.5-3
 
45-3


29.5-4
 
45-4


 
 
Chapter 46


 
 
Reserved


30-1
 
47-1


30-2
 
47-2


30-3
 
47-3


30-4
 
47-4


30-5
 
47-5


30-6
 
47-6


30-7
 
47-7


30-8
 
47-8


30-9
 
47-9


30-10
 
47-10


30-11
 
47-11


30-12
 
47-12


30-13
 
47-13


30-14
 
47-14


30-15
 
47-15


30-16
 
47-16


30-17
 
47-17


30-18
 
47-18


30-19
 
47-19


30-20
 
47-20


30-21
 
47-21


30-22
 
47-22


30-23
 
47-23


30-24
 
47-24


30-25
 
47-25


30-26
 
47-26


30-27
 
47-27


31-1
 
48-1


31-2
 
48-2


31-3
 
48-3


31-4
 
48-4


31-5
 
48-5


31-6
 
48-6


31-7
 
48-7


31-8
 
48-8


31-9
 
48-9


31-10
 
48-10


31-11
 
48-11


31-12
 
48-12


31-13-31-15
 
48-13-48-15


31-16
 
48-16


31-17
 
48-17


31-18
 
48-18


31-19
 
48-19


31-20
 
48-20


31-21
 
48-21


31-22
 
48-22


31-23
 
48-23


31-24
 
48-24


31-25
 
48-25


31-26-31-31
 
48-26-48-31


31-32
 
48-32


31-33
 
48-33


31-34
 
48-34


31-35
 
48-35


31-36
 
48-36


31-37
 
48-37


31-38
 
48-38


31-39
 
48-39


33-1
 
51-1


33-2
 
51-2


33-3
 
51-3


33-4
 
51-4


33-5
 
51-5


33-6
 
51-6


33-7
 
51-7


33-8
 
51-8


33-9
 
51-9


33-10
 
51-10


33-11
 
51-11


33-12
 
51-12


33-13
 
51-13


33-14
 
51-14


33-15
 
51-15


33-16
 
51-16


33-17-33-26
 
51-17-51-26


33-30-33-35
 
51-30-51-35


33-36
 
51-36


33-37
 
51-37


33-38
 
51-38


33-39
 
51-39


33-40
 
51-40


33-41
 
51-41


33-42
 
51-42


33-43
 
51-43


33-44
 
51-44


33-45
 
51-45


33-46
 
51-46


33-47
 
51-47


33-48
 
51-48


33-49
 
51-49


33-50
 
51-50


34-1-34-15
 
52-1-52-15


34-16
 
52-16


34-17
 
52-17


34-18
 
52-18


34-19
 
52-19


34-20
 
52-20


34-21
 
52-21


34-22
 
52-22


34-23
 
52-23


34-24
 
52-24


34-25
 
52-25


34-26
 
52-26


34-27
 
52-27


34-28
 
52-28


34-29
 
52-29


34-30
 
52-30


34-31
 
52-31


34-32
 
52-32


34-33
 
52-33


34-34
 
52-34


34-35-34-44
 
52-35-52-44


34-45
 
52-45


34-46
 
52-46


34-47
 
52-47


34-48
 
52-48


34-49
 
52-49


34-50
 
52-50


34-51
 
52-51


34-52
 
52-52


34-53-34-57
 
52-53-52-57


34-58
 
52-58


34-59
 
52-59


34-60
 
52-60


34-61
 
52-61


34-62
 
52-62


34-63
 
52-63


34-64
 
52-64


34-65
 
52-65


34-66
 
52-66


34-67
 
52-67


35-1
 
53-1


35-2
 
53-2


35-3
 
53-3


35-4
 
53-4


35-5
 
53-5


35-6
 
53-6


35-7
 
53-7


35-8
 
53-8


35-9
 
53-9


35-10
 
53-10


35-11
 
53-11


35-12
 
53-12


35-13
 
53-13


35-14
 
53-14


35-15
 
53-15


35-16-35-25
 
53-16-53-25


35-26
 
53-26


35-27
 
53-27


35-28
 
53-28


35-29
 
53-29


35-30
 
53-30


35-31
 
53-31


35-32
 
53-32


35-33
 
53-33


35-34
 
53-34


35-35
 
53-35


35-36-35-45
 
53-36-53-45


35-46
 
53-46


35-47
 
43-47


35-48
 
53-48


35-49
 
53-49


35-50
 
53-50


35-51
 
53-51


35-52
 
53-52


35-53
 
53-53


35-54
 
53-54


35-55
 
53-55


35-56
 
53-56


35-57
 
53-57


35-58
 
53-58


35-59
 
53-59


35-60
 
53-60


35-61
 
53-61


35-62
 
53-62


35-63
 
53-63


36-64
 
53-64


35-65-35-74
 
53-65-53-74


35-75
 
53-75


35-76
 
53-76


35-77
 
53-77


35-78
 
53-78


35-79
 
53-79


35-80
 
53-80


35-81
 
53-81


35-82
 
53-82


35-83
 
53-83


35-84
 
53-84


35-85
 
53-85


35-86
 
53-86


35-87
 
53-87




 



ORDINANCE DISPOSITION LIST



      This Ordinance Disposition List provides a listing of the ordinances
adopted by the City Council commencing with Ordinance No. 132-J, adopted
February 16, 1993.



 

Ordinance No.
 
Date of Adoption
 
Description




117-G
 
6-16-92
 
Amends section 49-314, accident reports


132-J
 
2-16-93
 
Amends sections 41-19(e), 41-20(b)(3), 41-20(c) and 41-25, repeals section
41-19(f), General Employees Retirement System


272-A
 
3-16-93
 
Amends section 2.150.10, members of Board of Review


278-8
 
3-16-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


307
 
3-16-93
 
Adds Chapter 30, massage establishments


278-9
 
4-20-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-10
 
6-1-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-11
 
6-1-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


64-C & 286-B
 
6-1-93
 
Amends section 33-2, definition; amends sections 53-52(b), 53-56, discharge
of non-storm water to storm sewer system


278-12
 
7-6-92
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-13
 
7-20-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-14
 
7-20-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-15
 
8-3-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-16
 
8-3-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-17
 
9-7-93
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


182-M
 
9-21-93
 
Amends sections 53-5(b), 53-26; adds sections 53-30.5, 53-36, water and sewer
rates


270-B
 
10-19-93
 
Amends sections 12-1-12-9, business registration


293-A
 
10-19-93
 
Amends 12-43, 12-44, cigarette vending machines


309
 
10-19-93
 
Adds sections 35-36-35-59, sale and use of tobacco by minors (35-36 - 35-38
repealed)


222-J
 
11-3-93
 
Adds sections 13-29-13-32, cable television rate regulations


179-I, 117-H,


& 218-A
 
11-3-93
 
Amends sections 35-16, disturbing the peace, 39-18, cruising and loitering,
35-22, giving false information to a police officer, 35-24, dangerous weapons
prohibited, 35-52, unlawful sale or possession of paraphernalia, 49-97,
driving without license or with revoked or suspended license or registration;
adds section 35-54, attempt to commit offense; repeals section 35-23,
possession of certain weapons prohibited


190-D
 
12-21-93
 
Amends section 2-209 (b), competitive bidding, waiver by City Council
(Repealed)


278-18
 
2-1-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


222-K
 
2-20-94
 
Adds Article II to Chapter 13, cable communications system


278-19
 
3-6-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


310
 
3-6-94
 
Amends sections 20-22 and 20-23 BOCA National Fire Prevention


278-20
 
3-27-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-21
 
4-5-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


135-B
 
4-5-94
 
Adds sections 44-13, 44-14, use of tobacco on school property


222-L
 
5-17-94
 
Adds sections 13-33, 13-34, cable television for mobile home parks


278-22
 
5-17-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


201-H
 
6-7-94
 
Amends sections 2-17, 2-19, administrative offices


201-I
 
6-7-94
 
Amends section 2-250, authority to issue and serve appearance tickets


278-23
 
6-7-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


311
 
6-7-94
 
Amends sections 11-34, 11-35, National Electrical Code


312
 
6-21-94
 
Amends sections 11-86, 11-87 International Property Maintenance Code


313
 
6-21-94
 
Amends sections 11-71, 11-73, 11-74, BOCA National Mechanical Code


314
 
6-21-94
 
Amends sections 11-58, 11-59, 11-60, BOCA National Plumbing Code


315
 
6-21-94
 
Amends sections 11-36-11-49, adds Section 11-50, installation, repair,
maintenance, etc. of electrical equipment; licensing of electricians and
electrical contractors; provide for Electrical Examining and Appeals Board


316
 
6-21-94
 
Amends sections 11-21, BOCA National Building Code


278-M
 
6-21-94
 
Amends Article 21 of the Zoning Ordinance, PCD Planned Center District


310-A
 
8-8-94
 
Amends section 20-37(a); fire hydrants


278-25
 
9-6-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


209-C
 
9-20-94
 
Adds sections 5-50-5-54, serving of alcoholic beverages to minors at parties


278-26
 
9-20-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-27
 
9-20-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-28
 
10-4-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-29
 
10-18-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-30
 
11-1-94
 
Amends zoning material (Special)


170-J
 
11-15-94
 
Amends section 35-33, prohibits public nudity


226-D
 
12-6-94
 
Amends sections 49-156, 49-157, 49-157.1, 49-157.2; adds sections 49-156.1,
49-156.2, 49-156.3, driving under the influence of alcohol


317
 
 
 
1994-1995 Appropriations Ordinance (Special)


318
 
12-6-94
 
Adds Chapter 13A, regulation of carnivals


278-31
 
12-20-94
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


314-A
 
1-17-95
 
Amends section 11-59, Plumbing Code


278-32
 
1-3-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


201-J
 
4-18-95
 
Amends sections 2-17, 2-19, administrative departments and offices


314-B
 
5-2-95
 
Amends section 11-60, amendments to BOCA National Plumbing Code


177-E
 
5-16-95
 
Amends section 48-63(d), waiver of permit fees for homeowner replacing
damaged or defective sections of public sidewalk adjacent to his or her
property


278-33
 
6-11-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-34
 
7-9-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-35
 
7-9-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


218-N
 
8-1-95
 
Amends sections 3.02, 3.04, 6.01, 6.02, 6.04, 6.05, 7.01, 22.01, 22.02,
31.00, 31.01 of the zoning ordinance


278-36
 
8-15-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-37
 
8-15-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-38
 
8-15-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-O
 
9-5-95
 
Amends sections 11.00, 11.01, 11.02, 12.01, 12.04, 13.01, 13.02, 13.04, 31.01
of the zoning ordinance


278-P
 
10-3-95
 
Amends sections 9.04, 16.03, 19.02, 26.01, 26.03 of the zoning ordinance


278-Q
 
9-5-95
 
Amends sections 23.01, 23.02, 24.01, 24.05, 27.02, 28.00, 28.03, 28.08,
28.13, 30.00 and table following 33.05 of the zoning ordinance


278-39
 
10-3-95
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


210-B, 226-E,


117-I
 
10-17-95
 
Amends sections 49-2, 49-194, 49-207, handicapper policy offenses


226-F
 
10-17-95
 
Amends sections 49-156, 49-158, 49-159, adds sections 49-16049-163, drunk
driving


278-40
 
1-16-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-41
 
2-6-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-42
 
2-20-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-43
 
3-5-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-44
 
6-4-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


286-C
 
6-4-96
 
Amends Chapter 48, Article I, streets, sidewalks and rights-of-way


179-K & 209-D
 
6-18-96
 
Amends sections 5-1, 5-2(d) and 5-4, penalties for persons under 21
possessing alcoholic beverages


187-G
 
6-18-96
 
Amends section 2-95(b), compensation of Planning Commission and Zoning Board
of Appeals


279-A
 
7-2-96
 
Adds Chapter 2, Division 12, Board of Code Appeals, amends Chapter 11,
Article II, BOCA Building Code, Article IV, BOCA Plumbing Code, Article V,
BOCA Mechanical Code, Article VII, BOCA Property Maintenance Code, Chapter
20, BOCA Fire Prevention Code


187-H
 
8-7-96
 
Amends section 2-95(b), compensation of members of boards and commissions


222-M
 
8-7-96
 
Amends Chapter 13, cable communications


278-R
 
8-20-96
 
Amends sections 3.02, 3.04, 6.01, 6.04, 7.01, 7.04, 7.05, 19.02, 22.01,
22.02, 24.03, 28.00, 28.10, 28.13, 31.01, zoning


278-45
 
9-3-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-46
 
9-3-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


321
 
9-17-96
 
Grant right-of-way to cable television franchise (Special)


179-L
 
10-1-96
 
Adds section 35-16a, picketing of residences


278-47
 
12-3-96
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


159-D
 
12-17-96
 
Amends section 38-3(a), park regulations, hours


115-E
 
1-7-97
 
Amends section 23-1, 23-2(f), (g), 23-4(f), 23-9, 23-10, 23-11, 2312(a),
23-20(f), 23-21(a), (b), refuse collection


117-J & 210-C
 
1-21-97
 
Amends section 49-330, disposition of abandoned vehicles


177-F
 
1-21-97
 
Amends section 48-67, driveways


181-D
 
1-21-97
 
Amends Ch. 15, emergency management


278-48
 
1-21-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-S
 
2-18-97
 
Amends section 3.02, zoning


278-49
 
3-4-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-50
 
3-4-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


322
 
4-15-97
 
Adds sections 41-1, 41-2, 41-3, Defined Contribution Pension Plan


324
 
6-3-97
 
Adds Ch. 48A, telecommunications


278-T
 
6-3-97
 
Amends sections 3.02, 6.05, 8.02, 9.02, 14.01, 14.04, 14.06, 22.02, 23.02,
24.05, 28.11, 28.13, 28.14, 31.01, zoning


278-51
 
6-17-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


325
 
6-24-97
 
Grants cable television franchise to Comcast Cablevision of Sterling Heights,
Inc. (Special)


170-B
 
7-1-97
 
Amends section 17-60, variances and appeals, Board of Ordinance Appeals


132-K
 
7-15-97
 
Amends sections 41-22, 41-24, 41-27, 41-29, 41-30, 41-37(b), 4139(c),
41-41(a), (b), 41-42(a), (c), 41-43, 41-44, 41-46, 41-55, pensions and
retirement


327
 
8-5-97
 
Adds Article V to Chapter 2, personnel polices and procedures for employees
of 41-A District Court


278-52
 
10-7-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


243-B
 
10-7-97
 
Amends section 5-34(d), (e), (f)(3), (g)(13), (i), (j), (k), (1), application
for liquor licenses


326
 
10-21-97
 
Grants limited natural gas franchise to West Bay Exploration Company (Special)


117-K
 
10-21-97
 
Amends sections 49-128, 49-130(a), (b), traffic regulations passing through a
funeral procession; overtaking a school bus flashing red lights


328
 
11-5-97
 
Amends sections 1-3, 1-9, 1-10, 2-250, 28-11, adds sections 1-21-1-26, 2-251,
35-101; deletes sections 8-76, 11-23 subsection 116.4, 11-60, subsection
P-116.4, 11-74 subsection M116 and M-117.2, 11-182, subsection PM-106.2,
11-183, subsection PM-101.6.2, 12-9, 12-46, 23-27, 31-6, 35-54, 35-70, 3583,
51-49(a), 53-57(b), penalties


278-53
 
11-18-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


Z-951
 
12-16-97
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


329
 
12-12-97
 
Amends sections 11-86, 11-87, International Property Maintenance Code


330
 
12-16-97
 
Amends sections 11-34, 11-35, amends National Electrical Code


331
 
12-16-97
 
Amends sections 11-59, 11-60, amends International Plumbing Code


332
 
12-16-97
 
Amends section 11-36, definitions and adds section 11-51, administrative
requirements for enforcement of National Electrical Code


333
 
12-16-97
 
Amends sections 11-72, 11-73, 11-74, International Mechanical Code


278-U
 
1-6-98
 
Amends sections 3.02, 3.03, 6.02, 8.02, 9.04, 12.02, 22.02, 24.01, 26.02,
28.00, 28.13, 29.00, 30.02, 31.01, zoning


278-V
 
1-20-98
 
Amends section 11.02, zoning


278-55
 
3-17-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-56
 
3-17-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


117-L,  179-M & 218-B
 
4-21-98
 
Amends sections 49-2, 49-10, valid registration plates and tabs


182-N
 
4-21-98
 
Deletes section 53-7, water and sewer billing during September, October and
November


278-57
 
4-21-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-58
 
5-5-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


328-A
 
5-18-98
 
Amends sections 1-9(c), 1-26, civil fines


278-59
 
6-2-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


326-A
 
7-7-98
 
Amends Ordinance No. 326 awarding a limited natural gas franchise to West Bay
Exploration Company (Special)


278-60
 
7-21-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-61
 
7-21-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


 
 
 
 
Amends sections 20-22 and 20-23 adoption and amendments to BOCA National Fire
Prevention Code/1996 Tenth Edition


278-62
 
9-15-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-63
 
9-15-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


145-B
 
9-15-98
 
Amends sections 2-120(a), 2-121, Beautification Commission


337
 
9-15-98
 
Adds Article III, sections 12-51 to 12-70, hotels and motels


278-64
 
10-6-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-65
 
11-4-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


211-E
 
11-4-98
 
Amends section 19-5, fence and privacy screen construction


222-N
 
11-4-98
 
Amends sections 13-9(b)(3) and 13-30(h), change of channel positions used by
Utica Community Schools and Warren Consolidated Schools


278-W
 
11-30-98
 
Amends sections 31.01, 33.00, 33.04, zoning


278-66
 
12-15-98
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-67
 
1-5-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


292-B
 
1-5-99
 
Adds paragraphs (g) and (h) to section 51-49, additional penalties for
violations


209-E
 
1-19-99
 
Amends paragraphs (a)(1) and (g) to section 5-4, penalty; miscellaneous
provisions regarding minors and substance abuse


338
 
1-19-99
 
Add Chapter 27, land division and combination


339 & 328-B
 
1-19-99
 
Adds section 35-39, use of non-motorized wheeled vehicles


243-C
 
1-19-99
 
Amends Chapter 5, Article III, liquor licensing


270-C
 
1-19-99
 
Amends section 12-8, privacy regulation


278-68
 
1-19-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


132-L
 
3-2-99
 
Amends sections 41-19(x)(4), 41-24, adds section 41-23(b)(5), employees’
retirement system


278-69
 
3-2-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-70
 
3-2-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-71
 
3-16-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-72
 
3-16-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


179-N & 222-O
 
4-6-99
 
Adds section 13-21(b)(c), unauthorized telecommunications tampering or fraud;
amends sections 35-26 - 35-32, theft and property destruction


278-X
 
4-6-99
 
Amends sections 3.02, 6.04, 7.04, 12.02, 19.04, 20.04, 22.01, 22.02, 23.01,
23.02, 24.01, 24.02, 28.00, 28.01, 28.13, 32.03 of the zoning ordinance


278-73
 
4-6-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-74
 
4-6-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-75
 
4-20-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


340
 
4-20-99
 
Amends sections 11-72, 11-73, 11-74,  International Mechanical Code


341
 
4-20-99Amends sections 11-59, 11-60, International Plumbing Code


342
 
4-20-99
 
Amends sections 11-21, 11-23, BOCA National Building Code/1996 Edition


278-76
 
5-4-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-77
 
5-4-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-78
 
5-4-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


117-M
 
5-18-99
 
Amends section 49-19, obstruction of traffic by trains


284-A
 
5-18-99
 
Amends Chapter 53, Article VI, wastewater pollution control


187-I
 
6-1-99
 
Amends section 2-95(b), Board of Appeals


278-79
 
6-1-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-80
 
6-1-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


117-9, 210-D,


226-G & 233-A
 
6-15-99
 
Amends sections 49-8(c), 49-9, 49-86(b), 49-87(c), (d), (e), 4996(e), (fl,
49-97, 49-100, 49-103, 49-104, 49-105(c), (d), (e), (f), 49-173(b),
49-207(c), update city traffic regulations to conform to state law


278-81
 
7-20-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-82
 
8-3-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-83
 
8-3-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


201-K
 
8-17-99
 
Amends sections 2-17, 2-18, 2-19, administrative services


243-D
 
8-17-99
 
Amends section 5-34(i), restrictions on licenses and permits for liquor
licenses and related permits


278-84
 
8-17-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-85
 
9-21-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-86
 
9-21-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-87
 
10-19-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


211-F
 
11-3-99
 
Amends sections 19-5 and 9-8, fences


230-B
 
11-3-99
 
Amends section 53-52(k), floor drains in basements


324-A
 
11-3-99
 
Adds section 48A-10(b)(6), telecommun- ications services, fee considerations


344
 
11-23-99
 
Adds section 2-224, purchasing cards


117-O
 
11-23-99
 
Adds section 49-194(d), (e), (f), prohibits use of special registration
plates, placards or tabs for persons with disabilities by persons who do not
qualify


117-P
 
11-23-99
 
Adds section 49-100(e), distinguish between intentionally and unintentionally
altered driver's license


327-A
 
12-7-99
 
Amends sections 2-187, 2-188, retirement program for administrative staff
employees of the 41A District Court


278-88
 
12-7-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-89
 
12-7-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-90
 
12-21-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-91
 
12-21-99
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


345
 
1-18-00
 
Amends Ch. 20, adds Division 3, maintenance, testing and certification of
private water supply systems available for fire suppression


278-92
 
2-1-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-93
 
3-7-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-94
 
3-21-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-95
 
4-4-01
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


346
 
4-4-00
 
Amends section 2-101, appointment and removal of Planning Commission members


278-Y
 
5-16-00
 
Amends sections 3.02, 5.04, 6.02, 7.02, 8.02, 8.04, 9.02, 9.04, 10.02, 11.02,
12.02, 13.01, 13.02, 14.02, 15.02, 16.05, 16.06, 16.07, 16.08, 17.02, 18.02,
19.02, 20.02, 22.00, 22.01, 23.02, 23.03, 24.01, 24.02, 25.01, 25.02, 25.03,
26.01, 28.01, 28.13, 28.18, 30.03, 31.01, wireless communication towers,
antennas and facilities


278-96
 
6-6-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-97
 
7-18-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


117-G
 
8-15-00
 
Amends section 48-69, concrete ordinance


234-C
 
9-19-00
 
Amends section 7-3 and subsection 7-12(x)(3), gambling and redemption games


278-98
 
9-5-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-99
 
9-5-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-100
 
10-17-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-101
 
10-17-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


278-102
 
10-17-00
 
Amends zoning map (Special)


348
 
10-17-00
 
Grants limited electrical franchise to DTE Energy Marketing (Special)


349
 
10-17-00
 
Amends sections 1-9 and 1-26, general penalty and municipal civil infraction
fines


350
 
10-17-00
 
Amends sections 5-1, 5-2, 5-4, 13-21, 23-32, 23-43, 23-44, 35-2, 35-4, 35-16,
35-19, 35-20, 35-23, 35-26, 35-26a, 35-27, 35-28, 35-29, 35-30, 35-31,
35-31a, 35-32, 35-32a, 35-33, 35-35, 35-40, 35-41, increase penalties for
certain offenses and update prohibited conduct to conform to state law


351
 
10-17-00
 
Repeals and replaces Chapter 49, Traffic, in its entirety


278-Z
 
11-8-00
 
Amends section 28.13C, zoning


352
 
12-19-00
 
Amends Ch. 11, adds sections 11-5, 11-6, 11- 7, 11-8, amends sections 11-21,
11-34, 11-35, 11-58, 11-71, repeals sections 11-22, 11-23, 11-35-11-46,
11-47-11-49, 11-50-11-51, 11-59-11-60, 11-72-11-73, 11-84-11-85,
11-94-11-100, amends sections 11-181, 11-182


353
 
3-6-01
 
Replaces Ch. 15, emergency management


278-AA
 
3-20-01
 
Amends sections 11.04B, 13.01D, 13.01K, 13.02A, 17.04B, 17.04D, 19.02J,
19.04D, 20.04D, 28.00B, C, 28.10B, 28.10C, 31.01


346-A
 
6-5-01
 
Amends section 2-101


355
 
6-19-01
 
Adds sections 48-50, 48-51, 48-52


278-BB
 
12-18-01
 
Amends sections 8.02, 9.02, 11.02, 19.03, 20.04, zoning


357
 
12-18-01
 
Amends sections 2-17, 2-18, 2-19, 2-20


358
 
12-18-01
 
Amends section 41-19


359
 
1-2-02
 
Amends sections 51-3, 51-4, 51-6, 51-7, 51-8, 51-9, 51-10, 51-11, 51-12,
51-13, 51-14, 51-15


346-B
 
1-2-02
 
Amends section 2-101


361
 
5-7-02
 
Amends section 20-23; adds sections 20-100 through 20-125


362
 
6-4-02
 
Amends section 2-150.10(A), (C)


363
 
7-16-02
 
Amends sections 41-22, 41-26, 41-28, 41-49; adds sections 41-56 through 41-61


364
 
8-20-02
 
Amends sections 35-4(A), (B), 35-16; adds 35-19(C); amends 35-23, 35-33(A)


365
 
10-15-02
 
Amends Chapter 48A, Telecommunications, sections 48A-1 through 48A-14


366
 
11-6-02
 
Amends section 1-9; repeals and replaces Chapter 20, Fire Prevention and
Protection


367
 
12-17-02
 
Amends sections 1-9, 1-26, 2-150.30, 2-150.31, 2-150.34, 2-150.35, 2-150.40,
2-150.41, 2-150.44, 2-150.45, 11-81 through 11-102, 11-141 through 11-180,
11-181 through 11-193, 33-1 through 33-4


368
 
3-18-03
 
Amends section 1-9; repeals and replaces Chapter 8, Animals and Fowl


278-CC
 
6-3-03
 
Amends sections 3.04, 6.05, 8.04, 11.04, 13.04, 19.04, 22.01, 22.02, 27.02,
27.05, 28.10, 28.13, 30.02, 31.01, 32.00, zoning


370
 
1-20-04
 
Amends sections 2-183, 2-184, 2-187, 2-188


278-DD
 
7-6-04
 
Amends sections 11.01, 11.02, 23.02, 24.01 through 24.03, 25.03, 28.00, zoning


278-EE
 
10-5-04
 
Amends sections 1.02, 5.04, 12.02, 14.00, 25.00 through 25.03, 27.05, 28.00,
28.12, 28.18, 30.03, 30.04, 31.00, zoning


372
 
10-19-04
 
Amends section 5-1


373
 
10-19-04
 
Amends section 2-173


374
 
12-21-04
 
Amends section 1-9; repeals and replaces Chapter 20, Fire Prevention and
Protection


375
 
3-1-05
 
Amends section 23-4


376
 
3-15-05
 
Amends section 1-9; adds Chapter 36, False Alarms


378
 
5-3-05
 
Amends section 1-9; adds sections 37-51 through 37-62; amends sections 48-32
through 48-40


278FF
 
5-3-05
 
Amends Zoning Code, sections 22.03, 25.01, 26.01, 32.00, and 32.04


292-C
 
5-17-05
 
Amends sections 51-36 through 51-41, 51-44, 51-46


379
 
8-2-05
 
Amends Chapter 41, sections 41-1 through 41-67


380
 
10-4-05
 
Amends Chapter 31, sections 31-1 through 31-05


278-GG
 
12-6-05
 
Amends Zoning Code, sections 17.06, 19.06, 20.06, and 24.06


278-HH
 
12-20-05
 
Amends Zoning Code, section 28.13


384
 
8-15-06
 
Amending sections 1-9, 1-26 and 17-1 - 17 - 51


385
 
8-15-06
 
Creates a new Chapter 2, Division 8, sections 2-150 - 2-150.9


386
 
10-3-06
 
Amending section 11-7 and repealing Chapter 21


387
 
12-19-06
 
Amends Chapter 2, Division 8, creating sections 2-150.9A and 2-150.9B


388
 
1-3-07
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 7-7, 8-42, 11-244, 11-245, 12-4, 14-45, 12-56, 12, 63,
19- 4, 19-11, 22-41, 23-16, 23-21, 23-42, 26, 26, 26-27, 27-4, 39-5, 48-6,
48-7, 48-21, 48, 4.3, 48A-5, 51-41, 52-49, 52-64, 52-66, 53-5, 53-30,  and
53-52


389
 
4-3-07
 
Amending 2-18 and 2-19


391
 
4-17-07
 
Amending 1-26, 38-1, 38-14


392
 
12-18-07
 
Amending 23-1. Creating new sections 23-51 - 23.56


393
 
1-2-08
 
Amending 20-22, 20-23, 20-116, 20-21,  20-122, 20-125


394
 
3-18-08
 
Amending 26-2, 26-9, 26-11, 26-12, 26-25


278-II
 
3-19-08
 
Amending Zoning Code, sections 22.04, 24.02, 24.06


278-KK
 
4-15-08
 
Amending Zoning Code, sections 26.01, 31.01


396
 
5-6-08
 
Amends sections 1-26, 11-21 through 11-232, 22-22, 33-1 through 33-5, 47-19,
48-37, 48-61 through 48-69,  51-15


397
 
6-3-08
 
Creates a new Chapter 53, Article VII, 53-101 - 53-108


278-LL
 
7-1-08
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections 28.13 and 31.01


278-MM
 
10-21-08
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections 12.02, 28.00 and 31.01


398
 
10-21-08
 
Creating new Articles IV and V in Chapter 12, sections 12-81 - 12-149


399
 
12-16-08
 
Amending sections 8-12 and 8-13


278-NN
 
1-6-09
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections Title, 1.01, 1.02, 2.01, 3.01, 16.02,
16.03, 16.08, 20.01, 21.01 - 21.05, 21.07, 22.00, 22.01 - 22.03, 23.04,
24.06, 25.01 - 25.03, 26.03, 27.00, 27.02, 27.04 - 27.06, 27.09, 28.00,
28.05, 28.10, 28.18, 28.20, 30.00 - 30.04, 31.01, 32.02


370-A
 
1-6-09
 
Amending sections 2-174, 2-183, 2-184,  2-186, and 2-188


400
 
1-6-09
 
Amending sections 2-101 and 2-102


401
 
3-2-09
 
Amending section 1-9; Creating new Article VI in Chapter 12, sections 12- 150
- 12-199


402
 
4-21-09
 
Amending sections 53-77 - 53-79, 53-86 and adding Appendix B and C


404
 
6-16-09
 
Amending sections 2-203 - 2-230


405
 
7-15-09
 
Creates new Article VII - Article IX in Chapter 12, sections 12-200 - 12-269


406
 
7-21-09
 
Amending sections 2-17 - 2-19


407
 
7-21-09
 
Amending sections 1-9, 5-1, 5-2, 35-2, 35-16, 35-22, 35-24, 35-28, 35-34,
43-9, 44-7 and adding sections 5-4, 20-17, 35-5, 35-6, 35-7, 35-17A, 35-23A,
35-28A, 35-42, 44-8, 44-8A


278-OO
 
8-5-09
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections 8.05, 9.05, 11.05, 12.02, 12.05, 13.05,
14.06, 17.05, 18.05, 19.05, 20.05, 21.07, 26.01, 28.13, 29.00, 29.01, 29.02,
29.03, 31.01


408
 
11-17-09
 
Amending sections 12-202, 12-205, 12-231, 12-232, 12-234, 12-235, 12-252,
12-253


278-PP
 
12-1-09
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections 19.01, 20.01, 22.05, 31.01


278-QQ
 
2-16-10
 
Amending the Zoning Code, sections 3.03, 28.13, 28.14


411
 
2-1-11
 
Amending sections 2-150.30, 2-150-34, 1-9, 1-26, 8-10, 8-28, 8-29, 8-55 and
adding 8-28A


413
 
5-17-11
 
Amending sections 1-9, 1-26, 20-22, 20-23


414
 
6-12-11
 
Amending sections 11-86, 11-87


415
 
7-5-11
 
Amending 2-17 - 2-19


416
 
7-5-11
 
Amending 2-173, 2-186 and 2-189, repealing 2-180 and renumbering 2-181 -
2-191 as 2-180 - 2-190


278-RR
 
10-18-11
 
Amending 25.03, 26.02, 28.00, 28.13, 28.14, 30.02 and 32.04


417
 
3-6-12
 
Adding new Article IV in Ch. 23 sections 23-61 - 23-69


419
 
6-19-12
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 20-100 - 20-103, 20-111, 20-116, 20-117, 20-121 - 20-125,
and adding 20-115 and 20-131


278-SS
 
7-17-12
 
Amending the Zoning Code, adding sections 22.06 and 25.04, amending sections
25.01 and 26.02


420
 
10-16-12
 
Amending 2-17 and 2-19


421
 
11-7-12
 
Amending 15-1 through 15-24


422
 
12-4-12
 
Amending 49-4, adding 49-6, repealing 49-12


423
 
1-2-13
 
Amending 2-179, 2-183, 2-186, 2-187, 2- 189, 2-190, 2-191


424
 
2-5-13
 
Amending 1-87, 33-1, 33-2, repealing 51- 27 - 51-35


425
 
3-5-13
 
Amending 1-9 and adding 12-21


426
 
3-5-13
 
Adding 11-88


278-TT
 
4-16-13
 
Amending 28.13, zoning


278-UU
 
4-16-13
 
Amending 28.13, zoning


428
 
6-18-13
 
Amending 2-186, 2-190, 41-30


429
 
7-16-13
 
Amending 20-23


430
 
8-6-13
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 20-115


431
 
10-1-13
 
Adding 8-36, Amending 1-9 and 8-41


432
 
11-6-13
 
Amending 2-18, 2-19


278-VV
 
4-1-14
 
Amending 28.13, zoning


434
 
5-20-14
 
Amending 2-150.9A and 2-150.9B


435
 
6-17-14
 
Repealing Ch. 25, Art II, Adding 25-1 - 25-17, Amending 1-9 and 1-26


436
 
8-19-14
 
Amending 1-9, 35-50 - 35-52, 35-64 - 35-66, Adding 35-67 - 35-69


437
 
10-7-14
 
Repealing Ch. 25, Art I, Re-enacting 25-16 - 25-22, Amending 1-9 and 1-26


438
 
12-16-14
 
Repealing 30-1 - 30-20, Adding 30-1 - 30-16


439
 
2-17-15
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, Repealing 35-36 - 35-38, Adding 35-91 - 35-97, 35-101


440
 
3-3-15
 
Amending 2-138 - 2-142


442
 
8-18-15
 
Amending 20-100, 20-115


443
 
1-5-16
 
Amending 20-23


444
 
2-2-16
 
Amending 2-17 - 2-19


445
 
3-1-16
 
Amending Ch. 26-1 - 26-14, 26-25 - 26-29, Adding 26-15, 26-30 - 26-32


447
 
6-21-16
 
Amending 8-9


448
 
8-3-16
 
Amending 37-23 and 37-24


449
 
8-16-16
 
Amending 8-28 and 8-28A


450
 
12-20-16
 
Amending 1-9 and 1-26, Adding 12-46 - 12-50B


278-ZZ
 
12-20-16
 
Amending 28.19, 28.20, 33.00, zoning


278-AAA
 
5-3-17
 
Amending 12.02, 13.02, 28.01, 31.01, zoning


452
 
6-20-17
 
Amending 1-9, 20-23, Adding 49-101 - 49-106


453
 
5-3-17
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 7-1 - 7-14


278-BBB
 
7-18-17
 
Amending 3.03, 12.02, 12.03, 13.02, 13.03, 14.02, 14.03, 31.01, zoning


454
 
7-18-17
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 12-259, Adding 12-270 - 12-277


278-186-A
 
2-20-18
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


278-187
 
9-19-17
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


278-188
 
9-19-17
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


209-F
 
12-5-17
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 5-1


278-190
 
12-5-17
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


278-191
 
12-5-17
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


455
 
12-19-17
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 20-22, 20-23


278-192
 
2-20-18
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


457
 
6-19-18
 
Amending 2-18, 2-19


278-193
 
6-19-18
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


278-194
 
6-19-18
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


278-195
 
7-17-18
 
Amending zoning map (Special)


458
 
8-8-18
 
Granting franchise to Consumers Energy Company (Special)


459
 
9-18-18
 
Amending 2-173, 2-179, 2-182, 2-183, 2-185, 2-187, 2-189


460
 
12-4-18
 
Adding 35-70


461
 
12-18-18
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 35-52, 35-64, 36-65


462
 
3-18-19
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 11-86, 11-87, Adding 11-116 - 11-127


278-CCC
 
4-2-19
 
Adding 12.01A - 12.04A, zoning


463
 
4-16-19
 
Amending 1-9, 1-26, 20-100, 20-101, 20-115


 
 
 
 
 




 



 


