CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2008 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 
Adopted: February 25, 2008 
Effective: April 1, 2008 
____________ 

> 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
David Krueger 
Mayor 
____________ 
Dennis Pinkston 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
John Gilbert 
Rae Lynn Hicks 
Jentery Farmer 
Dennis Cramer 
Angie Root 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Michael Gildner 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Connie Eskew 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Adam Zettel 
City Manager 
____________ 
Deanna Korth 
City Treasurer 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Richard Abrams 
Mayor 
____________ 
Jason Christie 
Mayor Pro Tem 
____________ 
Donald Adams 
Rae Lynn Hicks 
C. David Hurt 
Curtis A. Porath 
Michael Shumaker 
Councilmembers 
____________ 
Richard Figura 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Juanita Aguilar 
City Clerk 
____________ 
Paul Bueche 
City Manager 
____________ 
Deanna Korth 
City Treasurer 
PREFACE 
    This Code is a codification of the ordinances of Swartz Creek of a general and permanent nature. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances adopted by the council through August 24, 1987. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of this volume, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 4 is numbered 4-1 and the third section of Chapter 1 is 1-3. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by municipal officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within each index which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code to which the attention of the user is especially directed is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Successfully keeping this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of W. Eric Grant, Vice President, Anne Wilson and Janet Cramer, Editors, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to Ms. Mary Jo Clark, City Clerk, and Mr. Adam Zettel, Assistant City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publishers have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the City readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the City's affairs. 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK
SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN
CITY COUNCIL
CERTIFIED RESOLUTION NO. 080225-06
Adopt Ordinance #399, Codification of the City's Code of Ordinances 
I Move the City of Swartz Creek adopt Ordinance #399, An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing Penalties and sanctions for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective, as follows: 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
Ordinance No. 399 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances for the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing Penalties and sanctions for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
The City of Swartz Creek Ordains: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of the City Charter Sections 1 to 15, City Ordinances Chapters 1 to 20 and Appendices A & B, each inclusive, is hereby adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before June 30, 2007, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, and except for those provisions the violation of which is designated to be a municipal civil infraction, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided shall apply to the amendment of any Code section whether or not such penalty is enacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. As to those provisions of the Code the violation of which is a municipal civil infarction, the penalties and sanctions for such violation are those set forth in said Code and/or those provided by state law. In addition to such penalties and sanctions, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief, and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 6. Any and all additions and amendments to the Code, when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of the Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code shall be understood and intended to include the additions and amendments. 
    Section 7. Ordinances adopted on or after July 01, 2007, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code being adopted hereby 
    Section 8. This ordinance shall take effect on April 1, 2008 
Moved: Councilmember Hurt 
Second: Mayor Pro-Tem Christie 
Voting For: Shumaker, Abrams, Adams, Christie, Hicks, Hurt, Porath 
Voting Against: None 
Absent: None 
The Mayor declared the ordinance adopted. 
/s/   
      Richard Abrams 
      Mayor   /s/   
      Juanita Aguilar 
      City Clerk   CERTIFICATION 
    The foregoing is a true copy of Ordinance No. 399 which was enacted by the Swartz Creek City Council at a regular meeting held on the 25 TH day of February, 2008. 
/s/   
      Juanita Aguilar 
      City Clerk   Publish Date: 
Paper: The Swartz Creek News 
Effective Date: April 1, 2008 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Include/Omit Supp. No. Supp. No. 1 400  5-11-2009 Include 1 401  5-11-2009 Include 1 402  7-27-2009 Include 1 403  7-27-2009 Include 1 404  9-28-2009 Omit 1 405 11-23-2009 Omit 1 405 11-23-2009 Omit 1 406  2- 8-2010 Include 1 407  5-24-2011 Include 1 408  7-11-2011 Include 1 409  4-23-2012 Include 1 410  3-25-2013 Include 1 411  3-24-2014 Include 1 412  3-10-2014 Include 1 413  3-10-2014 Include 1 414  4-28-2014 Include 1 415 11-10-2014 Include 1 416 11-10-2014 Include 1 417 11-24-2014 Include 1 418 11-24-2014 Include 1 419  1-26-2015 Include 1 Supp. No. 2 420  6-22-15 Include 2 421  7-13-15 Include 2 422 10-12-15 Include 2 423 10-12-15 Omit 2 424 12- 7-15 Include 2 425 12- 7-15 Include 2 426 12-14-15 Include 2 427  1-11-16 Omit 2 428  3-14-16 Include 2 429  3-14-16 Include 2 Supp. No. 3 430  8-22-16 Include 3 431 12-12-16 Include 3 Supp. No. 4 Res. No. 171023-05 10-23-17 Include 4 Supp. No. 5 432  7-23-18 Omit 5 433  8-13-18 Include 5 434 10- 8-18 Include 5 435 11-26-18 Include 5 436 12- 3-18 Include 5 437 12- 3-18 Include 5 438 12- 3-18 Include 5  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Home Rule Charter of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, adopted by the electors on September 22, 1959. Amendments are indicated by history notes in parentheses following the amended sections. Obvious misspellings have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are enclosed by brackets. 
State Law reference- Home rule cities generally, MCL 117.1 et seq.; powers to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

PREAMBLE 
We, the people of the City of Swartz Creek, grateful to God for the blessings of freedom, peace, health, safety and justice, and desirous of further securing these blessings to ourselves and our posterity, and to provide for the public peace and health and for the safety of persons and property, do hereby ordain and establish this charter for the City of Swartz Creek. 
CHAPTER 1. - BOUNDARIES OF THE CITY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Incorporation, consolidation of territory and alteration of boundaries of home rule cities, MCL 117.6 et seq. 

Section 1.1. - Boundaries. 
    The following described territory, together with all territories that may be annexed thereto, shall constitute the territory of the City of Swartz Creek, and shall be subject to the municipal control thereof: 
Beginning at the interior 1/4 corner of Section 29, T7N, R6E, Flint Township, Genesee County, Michigan, thence south along the north-south 1/4 line of Section 29, the center of Dye Road, to the intersection thereof with the west branch of the Swartz Creek, so-called; thence southwesterly along the meandering course of the said west branch of the Swartz Creek to the center line of Raubinger Road; thence south along the center line of Raubinger Road to the north right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Railroad; thence southwesterly along the said right-of-way line to a point that is directly north of a point that is 1,320 feet east of the west 1/4 corner of Section 1 of T6N, R5E, Gaines Township; thence south to the latter of the said points; thence west along the east-west 1/4 line of Sections 1 and 2 of Gaines Township to the north right-of-way line of the Grand Trunk Railroad; thence southwesterly along the said right-of-way line to the north-south 1/4 line of Section 3; thence north along the north-south 1/4 line of Section 3 to the north line of Section 3, Miller Road, thence east along the north line of Section 3, Miller Road, to the intersection thereof with the center line of Seymour Road, more specially being the south-west corner of Section 35, T7N, R5E, Clayton Township; thence north along the center line of Seymour Road to a point that is 2,000 feet south of the northwest corner of Section 35, T7N, R5E, Clayton Township; thence east to a point in the west line of the "Supervisor's Plat of Swartz Creek," a recorded plat, and 2,000 feet south of the north line of Section 35; thence north along the west line of said plat to the northwest corner of the said plat; thence north to a point on the center line of Bristol Road that is 1,340 feet of the northeast corner of Section 35; thence east along the center line of Bristol Road to a point that is 910 feet west of the southeast corner of Section 25; thence north 250 feet along the west line of Bristol Elms Park Subdivision[;] thence east 660 feet; thence north 1,200 feet; thence east 250 feet along the north line of Bristol Elms Park Subdivision to the west section line of Section 30 of Flint Township; thence north along the west line of Section 30, T7N, R6E, Flint Township, to the west 1/4 corner of said section; thence east along the east-west 1/4 lines of Sections 30 and 29 to the point of beginning. 
Section 1.2. - Annexation or detachment of territory. 
    Upon the annexation or detachment of territory, the boundaries of the city shall be changed without amendment of this section. 
Section 1.3. - Clerk to maintain description of boundaries. 
    The Clerk shall maintain and keep available in his office for public inspection and distribution copies of the official boundary description and map of the current boundaries of the city. Such copies, when certified by him, shall be prima facie evidence of the boundaries of the city for all purposes. 
Section 1.4. - Ward. 
    The city shall consist of and constitute one single ward. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for one or more wards, MCL 117.3(e). 
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 2.1. - Records to be public. 
    All records of the city shall be public, unless otherwise provided by law; shall be kept in city offices, except when required for official reasons or for purposes of safekeeping to be elsewhere; and shall be available for inspection during the regular office hours of the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(1); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Section 2.2. - Definitions and interpretations. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided or indicated by the context of this charter: 
(a)  The word "city" shall mean the City of Swartz Creek; 
(b)  The word "council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Swartz Creek; 
(c)  The word "law" shall denote applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of Michigan, the applicable common law, and this charter; 
(d)  The word "officer" shall include, but shall not be limited to the Mayor, the members of the Council and, as hereinafter provided, the administrative officers, deputy administrative officers, and members of the city boards and commissions created by or pursuant to this charter; provided, that city representatives on the Board of Supervisors [3] of Genesee County shall not be officers of the city within the meaning of this charter by virtue of being such representatives; 
(e)  The word "person" may extend and be applied to bodies politic and corporate and to partnerships and associations, as well as to individuals; 
(f)  The words "printed" and "printing" shall include printing, engraving, stencil duplicating, lithographing, typewriting, photostating, or any similar method; 
(g)  The words "publish" or "published" shall include publication of any matter, required to be published, in the manner provided by law or, where there is no applicable law, in one or more newspapers of general circulation in the city, qualified by law for the publication of legal notices, or, as an alternate therefor, shall be posted in at least one public place in each election precinct; 
(h)  The words "public utility" shall include all common carriers in the public streets; water, sewage disposal, electric light, gas, electric power, telephone and telegraph lines and systems, garbage collection, garbage disposal and reduction plants, and such other and different enterprises as the Council may, from time to time, determine or designate; 
(i)  Except in reference to signatures, the words "written" and "in writing" shall include handwritten script, printing, typewriting, and teletype and telegraphic communications; 
(j)  All words indicating the present tense shall not be limited to the time of the adoption of this charter, but shall extend to and include the time of the happening of any event or requirement to which any provision of the charter is applied; 
(k)  The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the singular, and the masculine gender shall extend to and include the feminine gender and the neuter. 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- There are no longer any so-called city representatives on the board of supervisors since MCL 46.401 et seq., now provides for the election of supervisors by appointed districts within the county. 

Section 2.3. - Official performance. 
    Whenever this charter requires the performance of an act by an officer, the act may be performed by a deputy or by a subordinate, under the officer's direction, unless otherwise provided by law. 
Section 2.4. - Public records as evidence. 
    All papers, books, or other records of any matter required to be kept by any of the several departments of the municipal government, either by law or by the provisions of any ordinance, shall be deemed public records of such department, and they, or copies, duly certified by the custodian thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of their contents in all suits at law or in equity, or in other proceedings. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all records of the municipality shall be public, MCL 117.3(l); freedom of information act, MCL 15.231 et seq. 
Section 2.5. - Quorum. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, a quorum of any board created by or under authority of this charter shall consist of a majority of the number of its members as established by this charter, or by the ordinance creating such commission or board. The concurring vote of a majority of such established number of members of each such board shall be necessary for official action by it. 
Section 2.6. - Sundays and holidays. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided in this charter, whenever the date fixed by law or ordinance for the doing or completion of any act falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, such act shall be done or completed on the next succeeding day which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. 
Section 2.7. - Estoppel. 
    No estoppel may exist or be created against the city. 
Section 2.8. - Penalties for violation of charter. 
    Any person found guilty of any violation of this charter may be punished by a fine which, in addition to court costs charged to him, shall not exceed five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. Imprisonment for violations of this charter may be in the city or the county jail, or in any workhouse of the State which is authorized by law to receive prisoners of the city. This section shall not operate to limit or prejudice the power to remove officers or discharge employees as provided in this charter. 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, MCL 117.4i. 
Section 2.9. - Chapter and section headings. 
    The chapter and section headings used in this charter are for convenience only, and shall not be considered as part of this charter. 
Section 2.10. - Amendments. 
    This charter may be amended at any time in the manner provided by law. Should two or more amendments adopted at the same election have conflicting provisions, the amendment receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
State Law reference- Power to adopt and amend Charter, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22; Charter amendment procedure, MCL 117.21 et seq. 
Section 2.11. - Severability of charter provisions. 
    If any provision, section, or clause of this charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect any remaining portion or application of the charter, which can be given effect without the invalid portion or application, and, to this end, this charter is declared to be severable. 
CHAPTER 3. - MUNICIPAL POWERS AND LIABILITIES 

Section 3.1. - General powers. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided or limited in this charter, the city shall possess and be vested with all the powers, privileges, and immunities, expressed or implied, which cities are, or hereafter may be, permitted by law to exercise or to include in their charters. The enumeration of particular powers, privileges, or immunities in this section or elsewhere in this charter shall not be held to be exclusive. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide that the city may exercise all municipal powers in the management and control of municipal property and in the administration of the municipal government, MCL 117.4j(3). 
(b)  The city shall have power to manage and control its finances, rights, interests, buildings, and property, to enter into contracts, to do any act to advance the interest, good government, and prosperity of the city and its inhabitants, to protect the public peace, morals, health, safety, and general welfare, and to restrain and prevent crime, vice, and immorality. In the exercise of such powers, the city may enact ordinances, rules, and regulations and take such other action as may be required, not inconsistent with law. The power of the city shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following: 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the public peace and health, and for the safety of persons and property, MCL 117.3(j). 
(1)  To declare as a hazard or nuisance any act or condition, upon public or private property, or both, including, but not limited to, the accumulation of rubbish and the growing of noxious weeds, which is, or may be dangerous to the health, safety, morals, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city; to provide for the abatement thereof, and to provide that the cost of such abatement shall be charged as a special assessment against the real property on which the hazard or nuisance is located. 
(2)  To provide for the public welfare by: 
(a)  Regulating trades, occupations, and amusements within the city, and prohibiting trades, occupations, and amusements which are detrimental to the safety, health, morals or welfare of its inhabitants; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of trades, occupations and amusements, MCL 117.4i(4). 
(b)  Regulating the preparation, storage, transportation, and sale of foods, drugs, and beverages for human consumption; 
(c)  Collecting and disposing of garbage and rubbish; 
(d)  Regulating and restricting the locations of oil and gasoline stations; 
(e)  Licensing, and regulating the number of vehicles, which carry persons or property for hire, fixing the rates of fare and charges, and determining the location of stands for such vehicles; 
(f)  Licensing and regulating billboards and advertising signs and the locations thereof; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of billboards, MCL 117.4i(5). 
(g)  Regulating the construction, erection, alteration, equipment, repair, moving, removal, and demolition of buildings and structures and their appurtenances and service equipment; 
(h)  Establishing zones within the city and regulating therein the use and occupancy of lands or structures; the height, area, size, and location of buildings; the required open spaces for light and ventilation of buildings, and the density of population; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for zoning, MCL 117.4i(3). 
(i)  Regulating, limiting, and prohibiting the construction and use of buildings and lands in order to promote the public safety and to prevent fires; 
(j)  Regulating and controlling the use of streams, waters, and water courses within the city in any manner consistent with the provisions of law. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of watercourses, MCL 117.4h(4). 
(3)  To establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, and the space above and beneath them, and the use thereof by: 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for regulation of public ways, MCL 117.4h(1). 
(a)  Creating and vacating the same and acquiring and disposing of land, or any interest in land, required therefor, including any surplus land which may be incidental to or necessary for the purchase of land required; 
(b)  Providing a plan of streets and alleys within and for a distance of not more than three miles beyond the limits of the city; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for plan of streets and alleys within three miles of city, MCL 117.4h(3). 
(c)  Requiring the owners of real property to build and maintain public sidewalks in the area of streets immediately adjacent to such property, and, upon the failure of any owner to do so, constructing and maintaining such sidewalks and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(d)  Compelling all persons to care for the untraveled portions of streets lying between the curbs and property line which abut upon premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, and to keep the same free from weeds and from objects which are offensive or hazardous to public health and safety, and, upon the failure to do so, cutting and removing such weeds and removing such objects and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(e)  Compelling all persons to keep sidewalks which are in the area of streets immediately adjacent to the premises owned, controlled, or occupied by them, free from snow, ice, dirt, wood, weeds, shrubbery, or any other object which obstructs such sidewalks, or which makes the same offensive or hazardous to the public health or safety, and upon failure to do so, to cutting and removing such weeds and remove such objects and assessing the cost thereof against such property as a special assessment; 
(f)  Providing for the grade of streets and requiring public utility users of the streets to conform thereto with respect to their tracks or facilities located on, above, or under the streets, requiring railroads to keep their tracks and the street surface between their tracks, and for a distance of one and one-half feet on each side of them, in reasonable repair at all times; 
(g)  Regulating the speed of vehicles, trains, and locomotives upon or across the streets within the provisions and limitations of law, and the stopping and parking of the same upon the streets and at street crossings; 
(h)  Providing for and regulating the lighting of streets and alleys, whether such lights be located on public or private property; 
(i)  Preventing and abating the encumbering of streets and alleys or any part thereof; 
(j)  Regulating the location of buildings and structures and of trees and shrubbery at and near street corners and street intersections with alleys, so as to provide for the public safety and welfare in the use of streets and alleys; 
(k)  Providing for and regulating the numbering of buildings upon property abutting the streets and alleys and compelling the owners and occupants thereof to affix numbers thereto; 
(l)  Providing for the use by other than the owner, of property located on, above, or under the streets, alleys, and public places, in the operation of a utility, upon the payment of a reasonable compensation therefor to the owner thereof; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for joint use of public property, MCL 117.4h(2). 
(m)  Providing for the planting and general care and protection of trees and shrubbery within the streets and public places of the city and preventing the cutting of limbs and branches for the placing and maintenance of utility wires without the consent of the designated officer or agency of the city. 
(4)  To undertake any public work or make any public improvement or any repair or replacement thereof, either directly or by contract with public bodies or private persons; and to participate in any public work or public improvement under any lawful plan by which the whole or partial support of such work or improvement is provided by another governmental unit or agency; 
(5)  To construct, provide, maintain, extend, operate, and improve: 
(a)  Within the city: a city hall; city office buildings; community buildings; police stations; fire stations; civic auditoriums; public libraries; and polling places; and, 
(b)  Either within or without the corporate limits of the city or Genesee County: public parks; recreation grounds and stadiums; municipal camps; public grounds; zoological gardens; museums; airports and landing fields; cemeteries; levees, embankments, and structures for flood control and other purposes related to the public health, safety, and welfare; electric light and power plants and systems; gas plants and systems; public heating plants and system[s]; waterworks and water treatment plants and systems; sewage disposal plants and systems; storm sewers; garbage collection and disposal facilities; refuse and rubbish collection and disposal facilities; market house and market places; facilities for the storage and parking of vehicles; hospitals; facilities for the landing of helicopters and air vehicles having like landing characteristics; and any other structure or facility which is devoted to or intended for public purposes within the scope of the powers of the city; 
(6)  To acquire by purchase, gift, condemnation, lease, or otherwise, real and personal property, and interests in property, either within or without the corporate limits of the city or of Genesee County, for any public use or purpose within the scope of its powers, including, but not by way of limitation, the uses and purposes set forth in this section; 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for condemnation, MCL 117.4e(2). 
(7)  To join with any municipal corporation or with any other unit or agency of government, or with any number or combination thereof, by contract, or otherwise, as may be permitted by law, in the ownership, operation, or performance, jointly or by one or more on behalf of all, of any property, facility, or service which each would have the power to own, operate, or perform separately. 
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING OFFICERS OF THE CITY 

Section 4.1. - Officers to be elected, terms of office. 
    The elective officers of the city shall be the seven Councilmen and a Justice of the Peace. 
Editor's note- Justices of the peace were abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of such officers as may be deemed necessary, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 4.2. - Officers to be appointed, terms of office. 
    The appointive officers of the city shall be a City Manager, a City Attorney, a Clerk, a Treasurer, a Finance Officer, if there be one, an Assessor, a Health Officer, a Chief of Police, a Fire Chief, a City Engineer, a Building Inspector and a Constable. Upon the recommendation of the City Manager, for the purpose of assuring or providing for the proper administration of city affairs, the Council may combine any administrative offices in any manner not inconsistent with law, or may create additional appointive offices of the city and prescribe the duties thereof. The creation of any additional administrative office or combination thereof shall not directly or indirectly abolish or diminish the office of City Manager, or the responsibilities of that office as set forth in this charter. The Council shall appoint the City Manager and the City Attorney, who in each case shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the City Manager shall appoint and remove all other appointive officers of the city: Provided, that any such appointment or removal from the office of Clerk, Treasurer, Assessor, or Health Officer shall be effective only when formally approved by resolution of the Council. Unless provided otherwise in this charter, each appointive officer of the city shall hold office for an indefinite term. The Council shall set the compensation of the City Attorney and the City Manager. The compensation of all other appointive officers shall be determined by the City Manager, with the advice and approval of the Council. 
Editor's note- The health officer's functions are now performed by the county. The position of constable was abolished pursuant to MCL 117.32. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for appointment of certain officers as may be deemed necessary, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 4.3. - City employees. 
    All personnel employed by the city, who are not elected officers or declared to be appointive officers by or under authority of this charter, shall be deemed to be employees of the city. Each member of the police and fire forces of the city shall take and subscribe to the oath prescribed by Section 2 of Article XVI of the State Constitution, but shall not, because of such fact, be an officer of the city. 
Section 4.4. - Eligibility for office in the city. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, an elector of the city whose name appears on the assessment roll and who is the owner in his own right of the property assessed in his name, either solely or jointly with one or more others, shall be eligible to hold elective or appointive office if he shall have been a resident of the city or of any territory annexed to the city, or both, for not less than one year immediately prior to his election or appointment to office, and is not in default to the city. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Councilman from any district unless he has similarly been a resident of the district from which he seeks to be elected. The requirements of residence and that one's name appear on the assessment roll shall not apply to the City Attorney, and may be waived as to persons appointed to other offices, other than elective offices and members of boards of the city, by resolution concurred in by not less than five members of the Council. When such requirement is waived, the appointment shall be provisional, until the appointee becomes a registered elector of the city. No person shall hold office under a provisional appointment after one year from the date of his first appointment. 
Editor's note- Requirement that officeholders be property owners is of doubtful constitutionality. See Turner v. Fouche, 396 U.S. 346 (1969). 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for qualifications of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 4.5. - Vacancies in office. 
(a)  Any city office shall become vacant upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
(1)  Expiration of the term of office; 
(2)  Death of the incumbent; 
(3)  Resignation; 
(4)  Removal from office; 
(5)  Ceasing to be an inhabitant of the city, or, in the case of a Councilman elected from a district, ceasing to be an inhabitant of the district from which he was elected; 
(6)  Conviction of an infamous crime or of an offense involving a violation of his oath of office; 
(7)  Default to the city, unless such default is eliminated within thirty days after written notice thereof by the Clerk upon the direction of the Council, or, unless the officer, in good faith, contests his liability for the default in a court of competent jurisdiction or shows that another person is primarily liable; 
(8)  A decision of a competent tribunal declaring the officer's election or appointment void; 
(9)  Failure to take the oath or file the bond required for the office within ten days from the date of election or appointment, or within such other time as the Council may fix; 
(10)  Failure to meet the requirements for eligibility for office as set forth in Section 4.4; 
(11)  In the case of Mayor and Councilmen, absence from four consecutive regular meetings of the Council, unless such absences be for confining illness or be excused by the Council at the time they occur, or from ten regular meetings in any calendar year; 
(12)  In the case of other elective officers, absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of such office for sixty days, unless such absence from the city or failure to perform the duties of office shall be excused by the Council prior to the expiration of such sixty day period; or 
(13)  Any other event which, by law, creates a vacancy. 
(b)  In any case, absence from Council meetings or from the city on city business at the direction or with the approval of the Council shall not be included in the number of meetings or duration of absence set herein for creating a vacancy. 
Section 4.6. - Resignations. 
    Resignations of elective officers shall be made in writing and filed with the Clerk and shall be acted upon by the Council at its next regular meeting following receipt thereof by the Clerk. Resignations of appointive officers shall be made in writing to the City Manager in the case of appointees of the City Manager, and to the Mayor in the case of appointees of the Mayor, and shall be immediately acted upon by him. All resignations shall be reported to the Council at its next meeting following receipt thereof. 
Section 4.7. - Filling vacancies. 
(a)  If a vacancy occurs in any elective city office, the Council shall, within thirty days after such vacancy occurs, appoint a person who possesses the qualifications required of holders of said office. Each such appointee to an elective office shall hold office under such appointment until the Monday following the next regular city election. 
(b)  If a vacancy occurs in any appointive office, such vacancy shall be filled in the manner provided by law for making the original appointment. 
Section 4.8. - Term of office cannot be shortened or extended. 
    Except by procedures provided in this charter, the term of the elective officials of the city and of officers of the city appointed for a definite term shall not be shortened. The terms of officers of the city may not be extended beyond the period for which any officer was elected or appointed. 
Section 4.9. - Increase or decrease of compensation. 
    The Council shall not grant or authorize extra compensation to any city officer, elective or appointive, or to any employee, agent, or contractor, after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. Nor shall the salary of any officer, elective or appointive, be increased or decreased after his election or appointment during any fixed term of office for which he was elected or appointed. 
Section 4.10. - Oath of office. 
    Every officer, elected or appointed, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall take the oath of office prescribed by the State Constitution and shall file the same with the Clerk, together with any bond which he may be required by this charter or by the Council to give. In case of failure to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days after the date of his election or appointment, such office shall thereupon become vacant unless the Council shall, by resolution, extend the time in which such officer may qualify as above set forth. 
State Law reference- Oath of office, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. XI, § 1. 
Section 4.11. - Surety bonds. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the Council may require any officer or employee of the city to give a bond, to be approved by the Council, conditioned upon the faithful and proper performance of the duties of the office or employment concerned, in such sum as the Council shall determine. All such officers or employees who receive, distribute, or are responsible for city funds or investments shall be bonded. The resignation, removal, or discharge of any officer or employee, or appointment of another person to such office or employment, shall not exonerate such officer or employee or any sureties of such officer or employee from any liability incurred by such officer, employee or sureties. All official bonds shall be corporate surety bonds and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. Bonds required by this section shall not be renewed upon the expiration of the terms for which issued, but, in each case, a new bond shall be furnished. No official bond shall be issued for a term exceeding three years, unless the term of the officers concerned exceeds three years. The bonds of all officers and employees shall be filed with the Clerk, except that the Clerk's bond (unless he is covered within the scope of a blanket surety bond) shall be filed with the Treasurer. The requirements of this section may be met by the purchase by the city of one or more blanket corporate surety bonds covering all or any group or groups of the offices and employments of the city. Any officer or employee who is covered by a blanket surety bond need not be bonded individually for the purpose of qualifying for office. 
Section 4.12. - Giving surety or being agent for surety. 
    No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall become surety on the official bond of any city officer, agent, or employee, nor upon any bond or contract executed to or made with the city, nor except for himself or his immediate family, give or furnish any bail or recognizance in connection with any complaint or warrant charging the violation of this charter or of any ordinance of the city. No officer, agent, or employee of the city shall be the agent of any surety or insuror in connection with any license granted by the city or with respect to which the approval of the Council or any officer of the city is required. 
Section 4.13. - Delivery of office and its effects by officer to his successor. 
    Whenever any officer or employee shall resign, or be removed from office, or the term of office for which he has been elected or appointed, has expired, he shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in the office or to his superior, all books, papers, moneys, and effects in his custody as such officer or employee, and which in any way may appertain to his office or employment. Any person violating this provision may be proceeded against in the same manner as public officers generally for a like offense under the general laws of the state, now or hereafter in force and applicable thereto. Every officer and employee of the city shall be deemed an officer within the meaning and provisions of such general laws of the state for the purpose of this section. 
CHAPTER 5. - THE COUNCIL 

Section 5.1. - City governing body. 
    The seven Councilmen shall constitute the governing body of the city. One Councilman shall be elected from each of the four councilmanic districts of the city, and three shall be elected from the city at large. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for election of a body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 5.2. - Mayor and mayor pro tem. 
(a)  At the first meeting of the Council following each city election, the Council shall organize and elect one of its members to the office of Mayor, and one to the office of Mayor Pro Tem. 
(b)  The Mayor shall preside at Council meetings. He shall be the chief executive officer of the city insofar as required by law, and for all ceremonial purposes. He shall be a conservator of the peace, and shall have the powers conferred by law upon sheriffs in times of emergency to suppress disorder, preserve the public peace and health and the safety of persons and property. He shall authenticate by his signature such instruments as may require such authentication under the provisions of law. He shall have an equal voice and vote with other members of the Council on all matters before the Council, but shall not possess the veto power. He shall do all acts required of him by law. 
(c)  The Mayor Pro Tem shall act in the stead of the Mayor in case of the Mayor's absence or disability to act. He shall succeed to the office of Mayor in the case of a vacancy in that office, thereby creating a vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem. The Council shall fill any vacancy in the office of Mayor Pro Tem, but until such vacancy is filled, the senior member of the Council from the standpoint of continuous service shall act as Mayor Pro Tem. As between persons of equal seniority, the person who received the highest number of votes at the time of his last election shall act. 
Section 5.3. - Compensation of councilmen. 
    During the first five years of the existence of the city, each Councilman shall receive the sum of $5.00 for each meeting of the Council actually attended by him. After the said five year period, the Council shall fix the sum to be received by Councilmen per meeting actually attended, but such sum shall not exceed $15.00 per meeting. No Councilman shall be compensated for attendance at special meetings held in any fiscal year of the city in excess of one-half the number of regular meetings held in that year. The Mayor shall receive the sum of $200.00 per year in addition to such compensation. Councilmen may be reimbursed for expenses actually incurred by them on city business or in the interest of the city when such reimbursement is approved by the Council. 
Editor's note- Compensation of the council has been superseded by Code of Ordinances Section 2-474 et seq., which created the Local Officers Compensation Commission pursuant to MCL 117.5c. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for compensation of its officers, MCL 117.3(d). 
Section 5.4. - Powers, duties, and functions of the council. 
    The Council shall determine all matters of policy of the city and adopt ordinances and necessary rules and regulations to make the same effective. Further, the Council shall, subject to the limitations of law, raise revenue and make appropriations for the operation of the city government, provide for the public peace and health and the safety of persons and property, investigate municipal affairs and, when it deems necessary, any office or department of the city, and do and perform all acts required of it by this charter. In the event of any investigation by the Council, any officer or employee of the city who shall fail or refuse to obey any summons, or to give any evidence pertaining to such investigation, subject to such exceptions as are permitted by law, shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a violation of this charter. 
Section 5.5. - Meetings of the council. 
(a)  The Council shall provide by ordinance for the time and place of its regular meetings and shall hold at least two regular meetings each month. If any time set for the holding of a regular meeting of the Council shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. 
(b)  Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Clerk on the written request of the Mayor, the City Manager, or any two members of the Council on at least six hours' written notice to each member of the Council, designating the time, place, and purpose of such meeting, and served personally or left at his usual place of residence by the Clerk or someone designated by him. Notwithstanding the foregoing requirements for the calling of special meetings, any special meeting of the Council which is declared by resolution of all members present and at which all members of the Council are present or, in writing, waive the requirement that notice be given at least six hours prior to the time specified for the holding of such meeting and at which a quorum of the Council is present, shall be a legal meeting. 
(c)  No business shall be transacted at any special meeting of the Council unless the same has been stated in the notice or call of such meeting. 
(d)  All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and the rules of order of the Council shall provide that citizens shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard. 
(e)  Four members of the Council shall be a quorum for the transaction of business at all meetings of the Council, but, in the absence of a quorum, any number of members less than a quorum may adjourn any regular or special meeting to a later date. 
(f)  The Council shall determine its own rules and order of business, and shall keep a journal in the English language of all of its proceedings, which shall be signed by the Mayor and the Clerk. The vote upon the passage of all ordinances, and upon the adoption of all resolutions shall be taken by a "Yes" or "No" vote and entered upon the record, except that where the vote is unanimous, it shall only be necessary to so state. The people shall have access to the minutes and records of all regular and special meetings of the Council at all reasonable times. 
(g)  Each Councilman shall be required to attend all meetings of the Council. The Council may compel the attendance of its members and other officers of the city at its meetings in such manner, and may enforce such fines for non-attendance, as may, by ordinance, be prescribed. The refusal of any member of the Council, or other officer of the city to attend such meetings or to conduct himself in an orderly manner thereat shall be deemed a violation of this charter. The Police Chief shall serve as the sergeant-at-arms of the Council in the enforcement of the provisions of this section. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, a Councilman shall not vote on any question in which he shall have a direct personal financial interest, other than as a citizen of the community, but on all other questions he shall vote, unless excused therefrom by a vote of at least six of the members of the Council. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that all meetings of the council shall be open to the public, MCL 117.3(l); mandatory that Charter provide for keeping of a journal of every session, MCL 117.3(m); open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 
Section 5.6. - Health. 
    The Council shall constitute the Board of Health of the city. The Board of Health shall adopt rules and regulations for their own government and shall possess all powers, privileges, and immunities granted to boards of health by law. The Board of Health shall supervise all matters relating to the sanitary condition of the city and the preservation of the life, health, and welfare of its inhabitants. The Mayor shall be president and the Health Officer shall be the secretary and executive officer of the Board of Health. Insofar as the health functions of the city are performed by the County of Genesee, the city shall not compete with or duplicate the services performed by the county. 
Editor's note- The county now performs the health functions of the Board of Health and the Health Officer. 
Section 5.7. - Licenses. 
    The Council shall, by ordinance, prescribe the terms and conditions upon which licenses may be granted, suspended, or revoked, and may require and exact payment of such reasonable sums for any license as it may deem proper. 
Section 5.8. - Public works. 
    Except as otherwise provided in and subject to the provisions of this charter, the Council shall be charged and entrusted with all responsibility for the control of the streets, buildings, and structures, waterworks, parks, sewers, sewage system and plants, and other public improvements and works of the city. 
Section 5.9. - Cemetery regulations. 
    The Council shall have power to enact all ordinances deemed necessary for the establishment, maintenance, and protection of cemeteries, together with improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, owned or hereafter acquired by the city either within or without its corporate limits. A plan for the platting, sale, and perpetual care of all lots, plots, and lands therein shall be provided. All ordinances pertaining to public health and welfare in the regulation and protection of public cemeteries shall apply equally to all cemeteries within the city belonging to, or under the control of any church or religious society, or any corporation, company or association. 
Section 5.10. - Streets and alleys. 
    Except, insofar as limited by law, the Council shall have power, by ordinance or resolution, to establish, vacate, use, control, and regulate the use of its streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, (whether such public places be located within or without the limits of the city) and the space above and beneath them. Such power shall include, but not be limited to, the proper policing and supervision thereof; the licensing and regulation, or the prohibition of the placing of signs, awnings, awning posts, and other things which are of such nature as to impede or make dangerous the use of sidewalks or streets of the city; and the licensing and regulation of the construction and use of openings in the sidewalks or streets, and all vaults, structures, and excavations under the same. 
Section 5.11. - Trusts. 
    The Council may, in its discretion, receive and hold any property in trust for park, cemetery, or other municipal purposes. All such trusts shall be used and continued in accordance with the terms thereof, subject to the common law cy pres doctrine. 
Section 5.12. - Restrictions on powers of the council. 
(a)  The Council shall not have the power to make any contract with or give any official position to any person who is in default to the city. Further, the Council shall not have the power to sell any park, cemetery or any part thereof, except where such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, or engage in any business requiring an investment of money in excess of ten cents per capita, unless approved by three-fifths of the electors voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(b)  Neither the Council nor any committee or members thereof shall direct or demand the appointment of any person to, his promotion within or to, or his removal from, any office or employment in the city government. Except for purposes of inquiry authorized by it, the Council, its committees, and its members shall deal with the administrative officers and employees of the city solely through the City Manager concerning matters relating to the performance of their several official duties and employments. No action contrary hereto shall be valid or binding upon the City Manager or any officer or employee of the city. Any violation of the provisions of this paragraph shall constitute a violation of this charter. 
(c)  Except in those cases where a larger majority is required by law, no ordinance or resolution shall be adopted or passed, nor shall any appointment be made, nor any person removed from office as required or permitted by this charter, except by the affirmative vote of at least four members of the Council. 
(d)  There shall be no standing committees on the Council. 
CHAPTER 6. - CITY LEGISLATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for ordinances, MCL 117.3(k); general authority relative to adoption of ordinances, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, § 22. 

Section 6.1. - Legislative power. 
    The legislative power of the city is vested exclusively in the Council, except as otherwise provided by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for body vested with legislative power, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 6.2. - Introduction, consideration and style of ordinances. 
(a)  Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in written form. The style of all ordinances passed by the Council shall be, "The City of Swartz Creek Ordains:" 
(b)  Each ordinance, after adoption, shall be identified by a number. 
(c)  An ordinance or a part of an ordinance may be repealed or amended only by an ordinance passed in the manner provided in this section. An ordinance may be repealed by reference to its number only. 
(d)  If a section of an ordinance is amended, it shall be reenacted and published at length: Provided, that this requirement shall not apply to the schedules of stop streets, one-way streets, and of parking limitations contained in any traffic ordinance or the vehicular traffic regulating portion of the city's ordinance code. 
(e)  Each ordinance shall be recorded by the Clerk forthwith in the Ordinance Book, and the enactment of such ordinance and the effective date thereof shall be certified by him therein. 
(f)  The ordinances of the city shall be set forth in code form as soon as practicable after the city government is established. 
Section 6.3. - Publication of ordinances. 
(a)  Before an ordinance may become operative, it shall be published in at least one newspaper which is of general circulation in the city. The effective date of an ordinance shall be stated therein, but shall not be less than twenty days from the date of its adoption, unless it is declared by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Council to be an emergency ordinance. 
(b)  All codes and other ordinance subject matter, which are or may be permitted by law to be adopted by reference, shall be adopted and published in the manner permitted and required by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for the publication of all ordinances before they become operative, MCL 117.3(k); codification authority, MCL 117.5b; authority to adopt technical codes by reference, MCL 117.3(k). 
Section 6.4. - Penalties. 
    The Council shall provide in each ordinance for the punishment of violations thereof, but, unless permitted by law, no such punishment, including the costs charged, shall exceed a fine of five hundred dollars or imprisonment for not more than ninety days, or both, in the discretion of the court. Imprisonment for violations of ordinances may be in the city or the county jail or in any workhouse in the State which is authorized by law to receive prisoners from the city. 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, MCL 117.4i(10). 
Section 6.5. - Time limit for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
    No prosecution for the violation of an ordinance shall be commenced more than two years after the commission of the offense. 
Section 6.6. - Proceedings for prosecution of ordinance violations. 
    Except as may be inconsistent with or otherwise provided in Chapter 11 of this charter, all proceedings relative to the arrest, custody, and trial of persons accused of the violation of this charter and of ordinances shall be governed by and conform as nearly as may be, to the provisions of law relating to proceedings in criminal cases cognizable by justices of the peace. 
State Law reference- Criminal procedure for ordinance violations, MCL 764.9a et seq. 
Section 6.7. - Initiative and referendum. 
    An ordinance may be initiated by the electors of the city and a referendum on an ordinance may be had by them by the submission of a petition therefor as provided in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for initiative and referendum, MCL 117.4i(6). 
Section 6.8. - Initiative or referendary petitions. 
    An initiatory or a referendary petition shall be signed by not less than fifteen per cent of the registered electors of the city. No referendum shall be permitted respecting any ordinance required to be passed by the Council by law. Such petition may be the aggregate of two or more petition papers. Each signer of a petition shall sign his name, and shall place thereon, after his name, the date and his place of residence by street and number. To each petition paper there shall be attached a sworn affidavit by the circulator thereof, stating that each signature thereon is the genuine signature of the person whose name it purports to be, and that it was signed in the presence of the affiant. Such petition shall be filed with the Clerk who shall, within fifteen days, canvass the signatures thereon to determine the sufficiency thereof. Any signature obtained more than ninety days before the filing of such petition with the Clerk shall not be counted. If found to contain an insufficient number of signatures of registered electors of the city, or to be improper as to form or compliance with the requirements of this section, the Clerk shall notify forthwith the person filing such petition, and ten days from such notification shall be allowed for the filing of supplemental petition papers. When found sufficient and proper, the Clerk shall present the petition to the Council at its next regular meeting. 
Section 6.9. - Council procedure. 
    Upon receiving an initiatory or referendary petition from the Clerk, the Council shall, either: 
(1)  If it be an initiatory petition, adopt the ordinance as submitted in the petition within thirty days after the receipt thereof, or determine to submit the proposal to the electors; or 
(2)  If it be a referendary petition, repeal the ordinance to which the petition refers within thirty days after the receipt thereof or determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
Section 6.10. - Submission to electors. 
    Should the Council decide to submit the proposal to the electors, it shall be submitted at the next election held in the city for any purpose, or, in the discretion of the Council, at a special election. The result shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting thereon, except in cases where otherwise required by law. 
Section 6.11. - Status of ordinance adopted. 
    An ordinance adopted by the electorate through initiatory proceedings may not be amended or repealed by the Council for a period of two years after the date of the election at which it was adopted. Should two or more ordinances, adopted at the same election, have conflicting provisions, the one receiving the largest affirmative vote shall prevail as to those provisions. 
Section 6.12. - Ordinance suspended. 
    The certification by the Clerk of the sufficiency of a referendary petition within forty days after the passage of the ordinance to which such petition refers shall automatically suspend the operation of the ordinance in question, pending repeal by the Council or the final determination of the electors thereon. 
CHAPTER 7. - THE ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE 

Section 7.1. - The City Manager. 
(a)  The City Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city government, in conformity with the provisions of the charter. He shall be selected by the Council on the basis of training and ability alone, and shall serve at the pleasure of, and be subject to removal by the Council at any time. 
(b)  The Council shall designate a qualified person to perform the duties of City Manager during a vacancy in the office. With the consent and approval of the Council, the City Manager may designate an administrative officer or employee of the city to act as City Manager if he is temporarily absent from the city or unable to perform the duties of his office. No person who holds or has held any elective city office shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager or acting City Manager during a vacancy in that office until two years have elapsed following the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
Section 7.2. - Eligibility and duties of the City Manager. 
(a)  To be eligible for appointment as City Manager, a person must have had previous experience in governmental, industrial, or business administration, in which he was in responsible charge of the functions administered by him. 
(b)  The City Manager shall be the administrative agent of the Council, shall be vested with all administrative powers of the city not inconsistent with the provisions of this charter, and shall perform the duties of his office under the authority of and be accountable to the Council. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the City Manager to: 
(1)  Supervise and coordinate the work of the administrative officers and departments of the city, except the City Attorney and the Clerk so far as his work is that required of him by Section 7.3(a) hereof; 
(2)  Prepare the annual budget proposals of the city, together with supporting information in explanation thereof; 
(3)  Establish and maintain a central purchasing service for the city; 
(4)  Subject to any employment ordinance of the city, employ or be responsible for the employment of all city employees, and supervise and coordinate the personnel policies and practices of the city; 
(5)  Maintain an inventory of city-owned property; 
(6)  Keep informed and report to the Council concerning the work of the several offices and departments of the city and, to that end, he may secure from the officers and heads of all administrative departments such information and periodical or special reports as he or the Council may deem necessary; 
(7)  In case of conflict of authority between officers and administrative departments or, in case of absence of administrative authority occasioned by inadequacy of charter or ordinance provisions, resolve the conflict or supply the necessary authority so far as may be consistent with law and the ordinances of the city, and direct the necessary action to be taken in conformance therewith, making a full report immediately to the Council; 
(8)  Attend all meetings of the Council, with the right to be heard in all Council proceedings, but without the right to vote; 
(9)  Recommend to the Council, from time to time, such measures as he deems necessary or appropriate for the improvement of the city or its services; 
(10)  Prepare and maintain an administrative code defining the duties and functions of the several officers and departments of the city which, when adopted as an ordinance by the Council, shall supplement this charter in establishing the duties and functions, as established in this charter, of each officer and department of the city; 
(11)  Furnish the Council with information concerning city affairs and prepare and submit such reports as may be required or which the Council may request, including an annual report which shall consolidate the reports of the several departments; 
(12)  Possess such further powers and perform such additional duties as may be granted to or required of him, from time to time by the Council, so far as may be consistent with the provisions of law; 
(13)  Establish any rules necessary to carry out any of the foregoing duties. 
Section 7.3. - City Clerk. 
(a)  The Clerk shall be the clerk and clerical officer of the Council. He shall attend all meetings of the Council, and shall keep its journal. 
(b)  He shall keep a record of all actions of the Council at its regular and special meetings. 
(c)  He shall have power to administer all oaths required by law and the ordinances of the city. 
(d)  He shall be custodian of the city seal, and shall affix the same to documents required to be sealed. He shall also be custodian of all papers, documents, and records pertaining to the city, the custody of which is not otherwise provided for by this charter. 
(e)  He shall give to the proper officials ample notice of the expiration or termination of any official bonds, franchises, contracts, or agreements to which the city is a part. 
(f)  He shall notify the Council of the failure of any officer or employee required to take an oath of office or to furnish any bond required of him or to file any statement of election expenses required by law. 
(g)  He shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. 
(h)  Until the city attains population of 15,000 inhabitants and thereafter until the Council provides otherwise by ordinance, the Clerk shall be the finance officer of the city. 
(i)  He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may be required of him by law, the ordinance or resolution of the Council, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.4. - City Treasurer. 
(a)  The Treasurer shall have the custody of all moneys of the city, the Clerk's bond, and all evidences of value belonging to or held in trust by the city. 
(b)  He shall keep and deposit all moneys or funds in such manner and only in such places as the Council may determine, and shall report the same to the Finance Officer. 
(c)  He shall have such powers, duties, and prerogatives in regard to the collection and custody of state, county, school district, and city taxes and moneys as are provided by law. 
(d)  He shall perform such other duties in connection with his office as may be required of him by law, the ordinance or resolutions of the Council, or by the City Manager. 
Section 7.5. - Deputy Clerk or Treasurer. 
    The Clerk and the Treasurer may appoint and remove their deputies, subject to the budget allowances therefor and the approval of the City Manager in the case of appointments. Each deputy shall possess all the powers and authorities of his superior officer. 
Section 7.6. - Finance Officer. 
(a)  The Finance Officer shall be the general accountant of the city, shall keep the books of account of the assets, receipts, and expenditures of the city, and shall keep the Council and the City Manager informed as to the financial affairs of the city. The system of accounts of the city shall conform to such uniform systems as may be required by law. 
(b)  He shall examine and audit all accounts and claims against the city. No withdrawal shall be made from any city fund which, after deduction of previous withdrawals and outstanding claims, does not have a sufficient amount therein to pay such proposed withdrawal. 
(c)  He shall balance all the books of account of the city at the end of each calendar month, and shall make a report thereon to the City Manager. 
(d)  He shall, upon direction of the City Manager, examine and audit all books of account kept by any official or department of the city. He shall examine and audit the books of account of the Treasurer and the Municipal Court at least once each month. 
Section 7.7. - City Attorney. 
(a)  The City Attorney shall act as the legal advisor of and be responsible to the Council. He shall advise the City Manager concerning legal problems affecting the city administration and the Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor concerning their statutory and charter duties, when so requested, and shall file with the Clerk a copy of all written opinions given by him. 
(b)  He shall prosecute ordinance violations and shall represent the city in cases before courts and other tribunals. 
(c)  He shall prepare or review all ordinances, regulations, contracts, bonds, and such other instruments as may be required by this charter or by the Council, and shall promptly give his opinion as to the legality thereof. 
(d)  Upon request of the Council, he shall attend meetings of the Council. 
(e)  He shall defend all officers and employees in all actions arising out of the performance of their official duties. 
(f)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed for him by this charter or the Council. 
(g)  Upon the Attorney's recommendation, or upon its own initiative, the Council may retain special legal counsel to handle any matter in which the city has an interest, or to assist the City Attorney. 
Section 7.8. - Assessor. 
(a)  The Assessor shall possess all the power vested in and shall be charged with all the duties imposed upon assessing officers by law. 
(b)  He shall make and prepare all regular and special assessment rolls in the manner prescribed by law or the ordinances of the city. 
(c)  He shall perform such other duties as may be prescribed by law or the ordinances of the city. 
Section 7.9. - City Engineer. 
(a)  The City Engineer, if there be one, shall be qualified by law for performing engineering design and supervision of public works and by training and experience in the field of sanitary and public works engineering. He shall perform such duties on behalf of the city as are required by law to be performed by an engineer. 
(b)  The City Engineer shall preserve in his office records concerning the boundaries of the city, the location of city streets, alleys, and public places, and the location of all utility and sewer mains, lines, conduits, manholes, valves, junctions, and appurtenances located therein or thereon. 
(c)  If there be no City Engineer, the Council may secure the performance of necessary engineering services through the retaining of a competent engineer or engineering firm. In such event, the City Manager shall be responsible for the requirements of (b) of this section. 
Section 7.10. - Police Department. 
(a)  The Police Department shall be in charge of the Chief of Police who, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be appointed by and responsible to the City Manager. To be eligible for appointment as Chief of Police, a person must be qualified for such office by education, training or experience. 
(b)  Police officers shall have all the powers, immunities, and privileges granted to peace officers by law for the making of arrests, the preservation of order, and the safety of persons and property in the city and on any lands and premises owned by the city outside its corporate limits. Any person arrested shall be taken before the proper magistrate or court for examination or trial, without unnecessary delay. Police officers shall make and sign complaints to or before the proper officers and magistrates concerning violations of this charter and the ordinances of the city. For purposes of making arrests, violations of city ordinances shall be deemed to be misdemeanors. 
Section 7.11. - Fire Department. 
(a)  The Fire Department shall be in charge of the Fire Chief who, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be appointed by and responsible to the City Manager. To be eligible for appointment as Fire Chief, a person must be qualified for such office by education, training or experience. 
(b)  The Fire Department shall be responsible for the prevention and extinguishment of fires and the protection of persons and property against damage and accident resulting therefrom. The Fire Chief shall be responsible for the use, care, and management of the city's fire fighting apparatus and property. He shall conduct supervisory and educational programs to diminish the risk of fires within the city. He or any of his authorized subordinates may command any able-bodied person present at a fire to aid in the extinguishment thereof, and to assist in the protection of life or property. If any able-bodied person wilfully disobeys any such lawful requirement, he shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this charter. 
(c)  The Fire Chief or any of his authorized subordinates may cause any building to be pulled down or destroyed, when deemed necessary in order to arrest the progress of a fire. In such case no action shall be maintained against the city or any person therefor. If any person having an interest in such a building shall apply to the Council within three months after the fire for damages or compensation for such building, the Council may pay him such compensation as it may deem just. The Council may ascertain the amount of such damage or compensation by agreement with the owner of the property or by the appraisal of a jury selected in the same manner as in the case of juries selected to appraise damages for the taking of property for public use. In making any such appraisal, recovery from insurance shall be taken into consideration. No compensation shall be paid on account of any loss which would probably have occurred to a building if it had not been pulled down or destroyed under authority of this section. 
Section 7.12. - City library. 
(a)  The city shall have the power to create and make available to the inhabitants of the city the facilities and services of a city library. Such library and its facilities shall constitute a department of the city government. Until such time as shall be otherwise provided by law or by the Council under authority of law, the city library shall be under the direct management and supervision of a duly qualified librarian who shall be responsible to the City Manager for the conduct of the library and its facilities. 
(b)  The City Manager shall have the power and authority to make such rules, subject to Council approval, as may be necessary for the control of the Swartz Creek Library, and shall appoint and remove the City Librarian, subject to the confirmation of the Council as in the case of appointive officers of the city. If the Council shall provide that the city's library and library facilities be under any agency other than the City Manager, such agency shall supersede and act in the stead of the City Manager. 
(c)  The Council shall appropriate for library purposes not less than the amount which is required by law for participation in state or other library aid. 
(d)  On or before the first day of February in each year, the library department shall submit to the City Manager an estimate, in detail, of the expected expenditures of the department for the ensuing fiscal year, to be included in the budget proposal therefor. 
State Law reference- Libraries generally, MCL 397.201 et seq. 
Section 7.13. - City planning. 
(a)  The Council shall provide for and maintain a City Planning Commission which shall possess all of the powers and perform the functions of planning commissions as set forth in Act No. 285 of the Public Acts of 1931 [MCL 125.31 et seq.]. The Planning Commission shall consist of nine members who shall represent, insofar as possible, different professions or occupations and who shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by the Council. The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation. 
(b)  The City Manager may appoint a Planning Director, subject to budget appropriations and the confirmation of the Commission, who shall perform the duties prescribed by the established rules of the Commission. 
Section 7.14. - Zoning. 
    The zoning regulations of the Townships of Clayton, Flint, and Gaines, existing on the effective date of this charter shall remain in full force and effect in the areas to which they apply, until the 31st day of December, 1960. Within one year after the effective date of this charter, the Council shall adopt a zoning ordinance for the city and shall, thereafter, maintain such ordinance current and in effect. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate land use, MCL 125.581 et seq. 
Section 7.15. - Additional administrative powers and duties. 
    From time to time, upon the recommendation of the City Manager, the Council may, by ordinance, prescribe additional powers and duties or diminish any powers and duties in a manner not inconsistent with this charter, to be exercised and administered by appropriate officers and departments of the city. 
Section 7.16. - Merit system of personnel management. 
    The Council may provide by ordinance for a merit system of personnel management for the city. 
State Law reference- Permissible for Charter to provide for a system of civil service for employees, MCL 117.4i(7). 
Section 7.17. - Employee welfare benefits. 
    The Council shall have power to make available to the administrative officers and employees of the city and its departments and boards, an actuarial pension plan, and any recognized standard group plan of life, hospital, health, or accident insurance, or any one or more thereof. 
State Law reference- Permissible for Charter to provide for a system of compensation for its employees and their dependents in the case of disability, injury or death of such employees, MCL 117.4i(8). 
CHAPTER 8. - GENERAL FINANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 

Section 8.1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal and budget year of the city shall begin on the first day of July of each year. 
Section 8.2. - Budget procedure. 
    Not later than the first day of February of each year, each officer, department, and board of the city shall submit to the City Manager an itemized estimate of its expected income and expenditures during the next fiscal year for the department or activities under its control. The City Manager shall compile such information and list the same upon a budget proposal form. He shall review such budget requests, and in a column parallel to and adjacent to that containing such budget requests, shall enter his budgetary recommendations for each item requested by the several officers and departments, with such additions thereto and deletions therefrom as he shall deem proper. Not later than the first meeting of the Council in April of each year, he shall submit to the Council a recommended budget for the next fiscal year which, considering any anticipated unexpended balance or deficit at the end of the current fiscal year, is within the tax limit and other anticipated revenue of the city. In addition to the foregoing information, such recommended budget shall include therein at least the following information: 
(1)  The detailed estimates of the City Manager, with supporting explanation, of proposed expenditures for each office, department, and board of the city, with a comparison of the actual appropriations for corresponding items for the last preceding fiscal year, in full, and the appropriations for the current fiscal year, together with the expenditures for such year to January first, and estimated expenditures for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(2)  Statements of the bonded and other indebtedness of the city, showing the debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, and the condition of sinking funds, if any; 
(3)  Detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues of the city from sources other than taxes, with a comparative statement of the amounts established for and actually received from each of the same or similar sources for the last preceding fiscal year in full, for the current fiscal year to January first, and estimated revenues therefrom for the balance of the current fiscal year; 
(4)  A statement of the estimated accumulated cash and unencumbered balances, or deficits, at the end of the current fiscal year; 
(5)  An estimate of the amount of money to be raised from taxes to be levied, from delinquent taxes, and the amount to be raised from bond issues which, together with available unappropriated funds and any revenues from other sources, will be necessary to meet the proposed expenditures. 
Section 8.3. - Public inspection of budget proposal. 
    The budget proposal of the City Manager, together with his recommendations and its supporting schedules and information shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Clerk. 
Section 8.4. - Budget hearing. 
    A public hearing on the budget proposal shall be held not less than one week before its final adoption, at such time as the Council shall direct. Notice of the public hearing shall be published by the Clerk at least one week in advance thereof. 
Section 8.5. - Adoption of budget. 
(a)  At a regular meeting held not later than the third Monday in May of each year, the Council shall, by resolution, adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year and make an appropriation of the money needed therefor. Such resolution shall designate the sum to be raised by taxation for the general purposes of the city and for the payments of principal and interest on its indebtedness. Failure to adopt such resolution within the time herein set shall not invalidate either the budget or the tax levy therefor. 
(b)  A copy of the appropriations for each fiscal year, certified by the Clerk, shall be furnished to the Finance Officer within ten days after the date of the adoption of the budget resolution. 
(c)  In the event that the Council shall not adopt a budget for any fiscal year by the first Monday in June preceding the commencement of such fiscal year, the budget proposal for that year, as presented to the Council by the City Manager, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the budget for that fiscal year, and there shall be an appropriation therefor, without the necessity of Council action. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for an annual appropriation, MCL 117.3(h). 
Section 8.6. - Budget control. 
(a)  Except for purposes which are to be financed by the issuance of bonds or by special assessments, no money shall be drawn from the treasury of the city, except in accordance with an appropriation for such purpose, nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred without an appropriation covering all payments which will be due under such obligation during the fiscal year. The Council, upon the written recommendation of the City Manager and by the affirmative vote of not less than five of its members, may appropriate unappropriated funds or transfer any unencumbered appropriation balance, including the contingent account of the general fund of the city, or any portion thereof, from any budget item or account, department, or agency to another. 
(b)  Expenditures shall not be charged directly to any contingent or general account. Instead, the necessary amount of the appropriation from such account shall be transferred to the appropriate budget item or account and the expenditure then charged thereto. 
(c)  During each month, the City Manager shall submit to the Council data showing the relation between the estimated and actual revenues and expenditures to the end of the preceding month; and, if it shall appear that the revenues are less than anticipated, the Council may, by resolution, reduce appropriations, except amounts required for debt and interest charges, to such a degree as may be necessary to keep expenditures within the revenues. 
(d)  Within thirty days following the end of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall file with the Council a schedule of all encumbrances upon the budget appropriations existing at the end of the fiscal year, with his recommendations thereon, and the Council shall provide for the payment of such thereof as constitute valid claims against the city from corresponding budget items from the then current fiscal year. 
Section 8.7. - Special accounts. 
(a)  The Council may, by ordinance, establish and maintain accounts for accumulating moneys to be used for acquiring, extending, altering, constructing, or repairing public improvements and for the purchase of equipment of any type, in each case either for a specific item or items or for future unspecified public improvements or equipment, or both. 
(b)  Appropriations to such accounts may be made by the Council either in the annual appropriation resolution or, from time to time during the fiscal year, from available funds, from whatever source derived, which are not required for other appropriations or obligations of the city. Such accounts shall be continuing accounts and the balances therein at the end of each fiscal year shall remain a part thereof. 
(c)  Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of public improvements, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be used only at the direction of the Council, and only for the purpose provided in the original ordinance establishing such account, unless their use for some other municipal purpose be authorized by a majority vote of the electors of the city who vote on the proposition to amend such ordinance to provide for a change in the use of the moneys in such account. After the purpose of any such account has been fulfilled, any balance remaining therein may be transferred by the Council to any other special account or to the general fund of the city. 
(d)  Moneys which are accumulated for the purpose of purchasing equipment, as set forth in subsection (a) hereof, shall be expended only for the purpose provided in the ordinance establishing any such account, or as such ordinance may be amended from time to time, and, when no longer required for such purpose, such moneys or any part thereof, may be transferred to the general fund by a resolution adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than five members of the Council. 
Section 8.8. - Withdrawal of city moneys. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided by law or by ordinance, all moneys drawn from the treasury shall be drawn pursuant to the authority and appropriation of the Council. The Council, where necessary to expedite operating procedures, may authorize, in writing, other officers and employees of the city to make minor disbursements from petty cash accounts, which disbursements shall be accounted for and shall be audited by the Finance Officer. 
(b)  Checks or warrants for the disbursement of city funds shall be signed by the Finance Officer and countersigned by the Treasurer. 
(c)  Checks may be issued prior to authorization by the Council for such purposes and up to such amounts as the Council shall provide by ordinance. 
Section 8.9. - Notice to city for claim for injuries. 
    The City shall not be liable in damages for injury to person or property by reason of negligence of the city, its officers or employees, or by reason of any defective highway, public work, public service improvement, or facility of the city, or by reason of any obstruction, ice, snow, or other encumbrance thereone [thereon], unless, within sixty days after such injury occurred, the person damaged or his representative causes a written notice to be served upon an officer of the city upon whom process may be served by law. Such notice shall state that such person intends to hold the city liable for such damages, and shall set forth substantially the time and place of the injury, the manner in which it occurred, the nature of the act or defect complained of, the extent of the injury so far as known, and the names and addresses of witnesses known to the claimant. No person shall bring action against the city for damages to person or property arising out of any of the reasons or circumstances aforesaid, unless brought within the period prescribed by law, nor unless he has first presented to the Clerk a claim in writing and under oath, setting forth specifically the nature and extent of the injury and the amount of damages claimed. The Clerk shall present such claim to the Council for action. It shall be a sufficient bar to any action upon any such claim that the notice of injury and the claim in writing under oath, required by this section, were not filed within the time and in the manner herein provided. 
State Law reference- City liability for injury on public ways, MCL 691.1401 et seq. 
Section 8.10. - Municipal borrowing power. 
(a)  Subject to the applicable provisions of law, the city may borrow money for any purpose within the scope of its powers or which may be permitted by law, and may issue bonds or other evidence of indebtedness therefor. Such bonds or other evidences of indebtedness shall include, but not be limited to, the following types: 
(1)  General obligation bonds, the principal and interest of which are payable from taxes levied upon the taxable real and personal property in the city and for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged, upon authority of a three-fifths vote of the constitutionally qualified electors of the city voting thereon; 
(2)  Special assessment bonds which are issued in anticipation of the payment of special assessments for the purpose of defraying the cost of any one or more public improvements, which bonds shall be either solely or obligation of the special assessment district, or both an obligation of the special assessment district and a general obligation of the city as the Council may determine; 
(3)  Revenue bonds, as authorized by law, which are secured only by the revenues from a public improvement and do not constitute a general obligation of the city; 
(4)  Mortgage bonds, as authorized by law, for the acquiring, owning, purchasing, constructing, improving, or operating of any public utility which the city is authorized by law to finance in this manner; 
(5)  Bonds issued in anticipation of future payments from the Motor Vehicle Highway Fund or any other fund of the State which the city may be permitted by law to pledge for the payment of the principal and interest thereof; 
(6)  Water main extension bonds, in an amount not to exceed one percent of the assessed valuation of all real and personal property in the city, for the payment of which the full faith and credit of the city are pledged for the refunding from time to time of moneys advanced or paid on special assessments imposed for water main extensions as buildings are connected with such extensions, which bonds shall be payable in not more than thirty years, with interest thereon at a rate which shall not exceed six per cent per annum; 
(7)  Tax anticipation notes, which may be issued in anticipation of the collection of taxes in or during the current or next succeeding fiscal years of the city or any other years permitted by law, in the manner and subject to any limitations provided by law; 
(8)  Calamity bonds, issued in case of fire, flood, or other calamity for the relief of the inhabitants of the city and for the preservation of municipal property, in a sum not to exceed three-eighths of one percent of the assessed value of the real and personal property in the city, which shall become due in not more than five years. 
(b)  All collections on special assessment rolls or on any combination of such rolls shall be set apart in a separate fund and shall be used for the purpose for which levied, and for the payment of the principal of and interest on bonds issued in anticipation of such special assessments. As to such of said bonds as are also a general obligation of the city, if there is any deficiency in any special assessment fund to meet the payment of the principal or interest to be paid therefrom, moneys shall be advanced from the general funds of the city to meet such deficiency, and shall be placed in the general funds when the special assessment fund shall be sufficient therefor. 
(c)  Each bond or other evidence of indebtedness shall contain on its face a statement specifying the purpose for which the same is issued, and the proceeds thereof shall not be used for any other purpose, except that, whenever the proceeds of any bond issue, or a part thereof, remain unexpended and unencumbered for the purpose for which said bond issue was made, the Council may, by the concurring vote of not less than five members, authorize the use of such unexpended and unencumbered funds: 
(1)  For the retirement of such bond issue, or 
(2)  If such bond issue has been fully retired, then for the retirement of other bonds or obligations of the city provided for by this section: Provided, that in the case of special assessment bonds, such funds shall be refunded to the owners of property against which special assessments therefor were made, pro rata according to payments made toward the total cost of the improvement for which the bonds were issued, and 
(3)  If there be no other bonded indebtedness, other than for special assessment bonds, then for such other purposes as may be permitted by law, subject to the proviso in paragraph (2) above. 
(d)  No bond or other evidence of indebtedness, regardless of type or purpose, shall bear interest at a rate exceeding that fixed by law. 
(e)  All bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the Clerk, under the seal of the city. Interest coupons may be executed with the facsimile signatures of the Mayor and Clerk. A complete and detailed record of all bonds and other evidences of indebtedness shall be kept by the Finance Officer. Upon the payment of any bond or other evidence of indebtedness, the same shall be marked "Cancelled" or otherwise defaced by the Finance Officer to indicate payment. 
State Law reference- City authority to borrow money on the credit of the city and issue bonds therefor, MCL 117.4a(1); city authority to borrow money and issue bonds therefor in anticipation of the payment of special assessments, MCL 117.4a(2); municipal finance act, MCL 131.1 et seq. 
Section 8.11. - Limitations upon borrowing power. 
(a)  The net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes shall not at any time exceed ten per cent of the assessed value of all the real and personal property in the city: Provided, that in computing such net bonded indebtedness, there shall be excluded money borrowed under the provisions of Section 8.10(a), clauses (2) to (7), inclusive, of this chapter. The resources of the sinking fund pledged for the retirement of any outstanding bonds shall also be deducted from the amount of the bonded indebtedness. 
(b)  No bonds shall be sold to obtain funds for any purpose, other than that for which they were specifically authorized, and if such bonds are not sold within three years after authorization such authorization shall be null and void. 
State Law reference- Limitations on net bonded indebtedness incurred for all public purposes, MCL 117.4a(1). 
Section 8.12. - Depositories. 
    The Council shall designate depositories for city funds in accordance with law, and shall provide for the regular deposit of all city moneys. 
State Law reference- Designation of depositories, MCL 129.12; deposit of public moneys, MCL 211.43b. 
Section 8.13. - Independent audit. 
    An independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the city government at the close of each fiscal year, and shall be completed within ninety days thereafter. Special independent audits may be made at any time that the Council may designate. All such audits shall be made to the Council by a Certified Public Accountant designated by it. Each audit and reports supplemental thereto shall be made public in the manner that the Council determines and copies thereof shall be placed in the office of the Clerk, and the Swartz Creek Library. 
Section 8.14. - Annual report. 
    The City Manager shall prepare an annual report of the affairs of the city, after completion of the annual audit. The report shall include condensed financial statements showing the results of all city operations, including statements for each public utility owned or operated by the city. Copies of such report shall be made available for public inspection and distribution at the office of the Clerk and by such other method as the Council may determine. 
CHAPTER 9. - TAXATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

Section 9.1. - Power to tax-Tax limit. 
    The city shall have the power to assess taxes and to lay and collect rents, tolls, and excises. During the first five years of the existence of the city, the annual general ad valorem tax levy for municipal purposes shall not exceed one-half of one per cent (5 mills) of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city as determined by the City's Assessor and Board of Review, or one-quarter of one per cent (21/2 mills) of such assessed value, as equalized by the State of Michigan, as required by law, whichever basis of limitation will result in the lesser taxation upon the taxable property in the city. Thereafter, the levy shall not exceed one per cent of the said assessed value as determined by the City's Assessor and Board of Review, or one-half of one percent (5 mills) of such value as equalized by the State of Michigan, as required by law, whichever basis of limitation will result in the lesser taxation upon the taxable property in the city, unless the proposition to approve an increase above the tax rate so limited is first approved by the electors of the city. No such increase shall cause the total tax rate to exceed two per cent of the assessed value of all real and personal property in the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for annually levying and collecting taxes, MCL 117.3(g). 
Section 9.2. - Subjects of taxation-Tax procedure. 
(a)  The subjects of ad valorem taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county, and school purposes under the general law. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, city taxes shall be assessed, levied, and collected in the manner provided by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide that subject of taxation for municipal purposes shall be the same as for state, county and school purposes under general law, MCL 117.3(f); property subject to taxation, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 9.3. - Exemptions. 
    The power of taxation shall never be surrendered or suspended by any grant or contract to which the city shall be a party. No exemptions from taxation shall be allowed, except such as are expressly required or permitted by law. 
State Law reference- Property exempt from taxation, MCL 211.7 et seq. 
Section 9.4. - Tax day. 
    Subject to the exceptions provided or permitted by law, the taxable status of persons and property shall be determined as of the thirty-first day of December, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, which shall be deemed the tax day. Values on the assessment roll shall be determined according to the facts existing on the tax day for the year for which such roll is made, and no change in the status or location of any such property after that day shall be considered by the Assessor or the Board of Review. 
State Law reference- Designation of tax day, MCL 211.2; time, place and method of assessment, MCL 211.10 et seq. 
Section 9.5. - Personal property-Jeopardy assessment. 
    If the Treasurer finds or reasonably believes that any person who is, or may be, liable for taxes upon personal property, the taxable situs of which was in the city on tax day, intends to depart or has departed from the city; or to remove or has removed therefrom personal property which is, or may be, liable for taxation; or to conceal or conceals himself or his property; or does any other act tending to prejudice, or to render wholly or partly ineffectual the proceedings to collect such tax, he shall proceed to collect the same as a jeopardy assessment in the manner provided by law. 
State Law reference- Jeopardy assessment of personal property taxes, MCL 211.691 et seq. 
Section 9.6. - Preparation of the assessment roll. 
    Prior to the date of the meeting of the Board of Review in each year, the Assessor shall prepare and certify an assessment roll of all property in the city. Such roll shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of law, and may be divided into volumes, which the Assessor shall identify the number for purposes of convenience in handling the assessment roll and for locating properties assessed therein. The attachment of any certificate or warrant required by this chapter to any volume of the roll, either as an assessment roll or as a tax roll, shall constitute the attachment thereof to the entire roll, provided the several volumes are identified in such certificate or warrant. Values of property set forth on the assessment roll shall be determined according to recognized methods of systematic assessment. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for preparation of assessment roll, MCL 117.3(i); assessment roll, MCL 211.24 et seq. 
Section 9.7. - Board of Review. 
(a)  A Board of Review is hereby created, composed of three members who have the qualifications of holding elective city office as set forth in Section 4.4 of this charter. 
(b)  The members of the Board of Review shall be appointed by the Council, and may be removed for reasons of nonfeasance or misfeasance by the vote of five members of the Council. The first members shall be appointed during the month of January, 1960, for terms expiring on July 1, 1961, 1962, and 1963. Thereafter one member shall be appointed in the month of May of each year, for a term of three years, commencing on the following July first. 
(c)  The Board shall, annually, on the first day of its meeting, select one of its members chairman for the ensuing year. The Assessor shall be Clerk of the Board, and shall be entitled to be heard at its sessions, but shall have no vote on any proposition or question. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for a board of review, MCL 117.3(a). 
Section 9.8. - Duties and functions of Board of Review. 
    For the purpose of revising and correcting assessments, the Board of Review shall have the same powers and perform like duties, in all respects, as are, by law, conferred upon and required of boards of review in townships, except as otherwise provided in this charter. At the time, and in the manner provided in the following section, it shall hear the complaints of all persons considering themselves aggrieved by assessments. If it shall appear that any person or property has been wrongfully assessed or omitted from the roll, the Board shall correct the roll in such manner as it deems just. Except as otherwise provided by law, no person other than the Board of Review shall make any change upon, or addition or correction to, the assessment roll. The Board shall make no such changes, additions, or corrections after it has certified the roll as provided and required by Section 9.11 of this chapter. The Assessor shall make a permanent record of all proceedings of the Board and enter therein all resolutions and decisions of the Board. Such record shall be filed with the Clerk on or before the first day of September following the meeting of the Board of Review. 
Section 9.9. - Meetings of Board of Review. 
(a)  The Board of Review shall convene at 9:00 o'clock a.m. on the third Monday in March in each year at a place designated by the Council, or on such other date as may subsequently be required by law for the meeting of boards of review in cities, and shall meet at the same time and continue in session from day to day for not less than three days for the purpose of considering the assessment roll of the city. 
(b)  The Board of Review may examine on oath any person appearing before it respecting the assessment of property on the assessment roll. Any member of the Board may administer the oath. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for meeting of board of review, MCL 117.3(i). 
Section 9.10. - Notice of meetings. 
    Notice of the time and place of the annual meeting of the Board of Review shall be published by the Assessor not less than one week nor more than three weeks prior thereto. 
Section 9.11. - Certification of roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, and not later than the Tuesday following the fourth Monday in March, or such other date as may subsequently be required by law, the majority of its members shall sign a certificate to the effect that the same is the assessment roll of the city for the year in which it has been prepared, as approved by the Board of Review, which certificate, when attached to any volume of the roll shall constitute a conclusive presumption of the validity of the entire roll, as provided in Section 9.6 of this chapter. In the event that the Board of Review shall fail or refuse to so review the assessment roll of the city, such roll, as prepared and presented to the Board of Review by the Assessor shall be the assessment roll for the year for which it was prepared and shall stand as though it had been certified by the Board of Review. 
State Law reference- Completion of review of assessments prior to first Monday in April required, MCL 211.30a. 
Section 9.12. - Validity of assessment roll. 
    Upon the completion of the assessment roll, and from and after midnight ending the last day of the meeting of the Board of Review, or the first Monday in April, whichever date first occurs, it shall be the assessment roll of the city for county, school and city taxes, and for other taxes on real and personal property that may be authorized by law. It shall be presumed by all courts and tribunals to be valid, and shall not be set aside, except for cause set forth by law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i). 
Section 9.13. - Clerk to certify levy. 
    Within three days after the Council has made the appropriations for the ensuing year, the Clerk shall certify to the Assessor the total amount which the Council determines shall be raised by general ad valorem taxation, together with such other assessments and lawful charges and amounts which the Council requires to be assessed, reassessed, or charged upon the city tax roll against property or persons. 
Section 9.14. - City tax roll. 
    After the Board of Review has completed its review of the assessment roll, the Assessor shall prepare a tax roll, or a combined assessment and tax roll, to be known as the "City Tax Roll." Upon receiving the certification of the several amounts to be raised, assessed, and charged for city taxes, as provided in the preceding section, the Assessor shall proceed forthwith, (1) to spread the amounts of the general ad valorem tax according to and in proportion to the several valuations set forth in said assessment roll, and (2) to place such other assessments and charges upon the roll as are required and authorized by the Council. For convenience, the city tax roll may be divided into two or more volumes. 
Section 9.15. - Taxes a debt and lien. 
    The taxes on real and personal property shall become a debt to the city from the owner or person otherwise to be assessed, on the tax day provided by law. The amounts assessed on any interest in real property shall become a lien upon such real property on the first day of July next subsequent to the tax day, and shall so remain, until paid. Said tax liens shall take precedence over all other claims, encumbrances, and liens upon said personal property whatsoever, whether created by chattel mortgage, title retaining contract, execution, or upon any other final process of a court, attachment, replevin, judgment, or otherwise, and no transfer of personal property assessed for taxes shall operate to divest or destroy such lien, except where such property is actually sold in the regular course of retail trade. 
Section 9.16. - Tax roll certified for collection. 
    After spreading the taxes and placing other assessments and charges upon the roll, the Assessor shall certify the tax roll, and attach his warrant thereto directing and requiring the Treasurer to collect, prior to March first of the following year, from the several persons named in the roll the several sums mentioned therein opposite their respective names as a tax, charge, or assessment. Said warrant shall grant to and vest in the Treasurer, all the statutory powers and immunities possessed by township treasurers for the collection of taxes. The tax roll shall be delivered to the Treasurer on or before the thirtieth day of June. 
State Law reference- Collection of taxes, MCL 211.44 et seq. 
Section 9.17. - Tax payment date. 
    City Taxes shall be due and payable on July first of each year. 
(Amended by electors 4-3-67) 
Section 9.18. - Taxes due-Notification thereof. 
    The Treasurer shall not be required to make personal demand for the payment of taxes but, upon receipt of the city tax roll, he shall forthwith mail a tax statement to each person named in the tax roll, which mailed statement shall be a sufficient demand for the payment of all taxes assessed. Neither the failure on the part of the Treasurer to mail such statement, nor the failure of any person to receive the same, shall invalidate the taxes on the tax roll or release any person or property assessed from the liabilities in this chapter in case of nonpayment. 
Section 9.19. - Tax payment schedule. 
    The Council shall provide, by ordinance, the tax payment schedule for city taxes, the times when the same may be paid without the addition of collection fees or interest, and the amount of collection fees and interest to be added thereafter. All amounts collected as collection fees and interest shall be paid into the city's treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
Section 9.20. - Failure or refusal to pay personal property tax. 
    If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay any tax on personal property assessed to him, the Treasurer shall collect the same by seizing any personal property of such person, to an amount sufficient to pay such tax, together with any charges and interest added thereto, wherever the same may be found in the State. No property shall be exempt from such seizure. He may sell the property seized, to an amount sufficient to pay the taxes and all charges, fees, penalties, and interest, in accordance with statutory provisions. The Treasurer may also sue the person to whom a personal property tax is assessed, in accordance with the powers granted to him by law. 
State Law reference- Failure or refusal to pay tax, MCL 211.47. 
Section 9.21. - State, county and school taxes. 
    For the purposes of assessing and collecting taxes for state, county, and school purposes, the city shall be considered the same as a township and all provisions of law relative to the collection of, and accounting for, such taxes and the penalties and interest thereon shall apply. For the purpose of collection of state, county, and school taxes, the Treasurer shall perform the same duties and have the same powers as township treasurers under state law. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for levy, collection and return of state, county and school taxes, MCL 117.3(i); state law relative to the assessment, levy and collection of taxes, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
Section 9.22. - Protection of city lien. 
    The city shall have power, insofar as the exercise thereof shall not conflict with or contravene the provisions of law, to acquire such an interest in any premises within the city, by purchase at any tax or other public sale, or by direct purchase from or negotiation with the State of Michigan or the owner, as may be necessary to assure to the city the collection of its taxes, special assessments, charges, and any interest thereon which are levied against any lot or parcel of real property or to protect the lien of the city therefor, and may hold, lease, or sell the same. Any such procedure exercised by the city to assure the collection of its taxes or the protection of its tax or other liens shall be deemed to be for a public purpose. The Council may adopt any ordinance which may be necessary to make this section effective. 
Section 9.23. - Collection of delinquent taxes. 
    All taxes and charges, together with fees, penalties, and interest upon real property on the tax roll, remaining uncollected by the Treasurer on the first day of March following the date when the roll was received by him shall be subject to one of the following procedures: 
(1)  The real property against which such taxes and charges are assessed shall be subject to disposition, sale, and redemption for the enforcement and collection of the tax lien against the same in the method and manner which may be provided by ordinance. The Council may provide by ordinance the procedure for the sale and redemption of real property for such unpaid taxes and charges, together with fees, penalties, and interest, by judicial sale on petition filed in behalf of the city. Such procedure shall correspond substantially to the procedure provided by law for the sale by the State of tax delinquent real property and redemption therefrom, except that the acts performed by state and county officers shall be performed by appropriate city officers and that city tax sales shall be held not less than thirty nor more than ninety days prior to the date of corresponding tax sales under the general law. 
(2)  If no ordinance is in effect pursuant to subsection (1) of this section, such taxes shall be returned to the County Treasurer, to the extent and in the same manner and with like effect as provided by law for returns by township treasurers of township, school and county taxes. Such returns shall include all the additional assessments, charges, fees, penalties, and interest hereinbefore provided, which shall be added to the amount assessed in said tax roll against such property or person. The taxes thus returned shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes returned to the County Treasurer are collected, in accordance with law, and shall be and remain a lien upon the property against which they are assessed until paid. 
Section 9.24. - Disposition of real property held by city. 
    When the city has acquired any interest in property to protect the city's tax lien thereon, the owner of any interest therein by fee title, as mortgagee, or as vendor or vendee under a land contract, shall have the right to purchase the city's interest therein, upon payment to the city of the amount of money which the city has invested therein in the form of taxes, special assessments, charges, fees, penalties, interest, and costs, paid by the city to protect its title in such property. After the lapse of ninety days after the date that the city acquires title to any such property, the Council may remove the same from the market by determining that such property is needed for and should be devoted to public purposes, naming such purposes, or may sell the same at a price which shall be not less than the market value, as determined and certified to the Council by the Assessor. 
CHAPTER 10. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Power re assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.4d, 117.5. 

Section 10.1. - General power relative to special assessments. 
    The Council shall have the power to make public improvements within the city. As to public improvements which are of such a nature as to benefit especially any property or properties within a district, the Council shall have the power to determine, by resolution, that the whole or any part of the expense of any such public improvement shall be defrayed by special assessment upon such property, in proportion to the benefits derived or to be derived. During the first five years of the existence of the city, the cost of no improvement shall be defrayed by the special assessment method, unless a petition be first filed with the Clerk, requesting that such improvement be made and the cost thereof defrayed by special assessment upon the property benefited, and signed by the owners of more than one-half of the property to be assessed for such improvement. 
State Law reference- Permissible that Charter provide for assessing costs of public improvements, MCL 117.4d. 
Section 10.2. - Detailed procedure to be fixed by ordinance. 
    The Council shall prescribe, by ordinance, the complete special assessment procedure governing the initiation of public improvement projects, the preparation of plans and cost estimates, the creation of special assessment districts, notices, and hearings, making of special assessment rolls, the correction of errors in such rolls, the confirming of special assessment rolls, the number of installments in which special assessments may be paid, the collection of special assessments, the making of additional assessments where the original special assessment roll proves insufficient to pay the cost of the improvement or the cost of the repayment of the principal of and interest on money borrowed to pay for such improvement, refunds of excessive assessments: Provided, that, when such excess is less than five per cent of the total amount of the assessment roll, the excess may be placed in the general fund; and any other matters concerning the making and financing of improvements by the special assessment method. Such ordinances shall include provision for the following: 
(1)  The procedure for filing petitions for public improvements; 
(2)  A survey and report by the City Manager concerning the need for, desirable extent of, and probable cost of such proposed public improvement; 
(3)  A public hearing by Council on the necessity of the making of such public improvement: Provided, that no public hearing shall be required when a petition for a public improvement is signed by all of the owners of property to be assessed therefor; 
(4)  A resolution of the Council determining to proceed or not to proceed with the proposed public improvement; 
(5)  A public hearing by the Council on the special assessment roll for the project; publication of notice of such hearing required by this section to be given in a newspaper published within the city, not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing; 
(6)  A resolution of the Council confirming the special assessment roll for public improvements and stating the date upon which the special assessment therefor, or the first installment thereof, if installment payments be allowed, shall be due and payable, the number of annual installments, if allowed, in which the special assessment may be paid, and the rate of interest to be charged upon such deferred installment; 
(7)  No additional assessment for any public improvement which exceeds twenty-five percent of the original assessment shall be made, unless such additional assessment be reviewed at meeting of the Council, for which meeting notices shall be published as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll; 
(8)  If, under item (4) above, the determination be to proceed, determining the probable life of the improvement, finally fixing the special assessment district therefor, and ordering the Assessor to prepare a special assessment roll therefor: Provided, that if prior to the adoption of the resolution to proceed with the making of the public improvement, written objections thereto have been filed by the owners of property in the district, which, according to the City Manager's report, will be required to bear more than fifty per cent of the cost thereof, or by a majority of the owners of property to be assessed, no resolution determining to proceed with the improvement shall be adopted, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the Council. 
Code reference- See Code of Ordinances, Ch. 14. 
Section 10.3. - Condemnation costs. 
    The cost of condemning or otherwise acquiring property needed for any public improvement shall constitute a part of the cost of the improvement. Whenever one or more parcels of land will each be required to pay twenty-five percent of any public improvement, and any portion of one or more of such parcel or parcels of land is acquired by condemnation or otherwise for the purpose thereof, that part of the cost of the improvement represented by damages for injury to improvements on such property shall be assumed in full by the city, and shall not be included in the special assessment charged to any property benefited. 
Section 10.4. - Limitation on suits and actions. 
    No suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of any special assessment or additional special assessment, (1) unless, within thirty days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll, written notice be filed with the Clerk of intention to file such suit or action, stating the grounds on which it is claimed such assessment is illegal, and (2) unless such suit or action shall be commenced within ninety days after the confirmation of the roll. 
Editor's note- This type of Charter section was held invalid as in conflict with the general property tax law (MCL 211.53) and the statute of limitations for personal actions (MCL 600.5813). 
Section 10.5. - Lien and collection of special assessments. 
    Upon the confirmation of each special assessment roll, the special assessments thereon shall become a debt to the city from the persons to whom they are assessed and, until paid, shall be a lein [lien] upon the property assessed for the amount of such assessments and all interest and charges thereon. Such lien shall be of the same character and effect as created by this charter for city taxes. 
State Law reference- Specific authority to institute an action in assumpsit to recover unpaid assessments, MCL 211.501. 
Section 10.6. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Moneys raised by special assessment for any public improvement shall be credited to a special assessment account, and shall be used to pay the special assessment portion of the cost of the improvement for which the assessment was levied and of expenses incidental thereto, including the repayment of the principal of and interest on money borrowed therefor, and to refund excessive assessments, if refunds be authorized. 
Section 10.7. - Certain postponements of payments. 
    The Council may provide that any person who, in the opinion of the Assessor and Council, by reason of poverty is unable to contribute toward the cost of the making of a public improvement, may execute to the city an instrument creating a lien for the benefit of the city on all or any part of the real property owned by him and benefited by any public improvement, which lien will mature and be effective from and after the execution of such instrument, shall be recorded with the Register of Deeds of Genesee County, and shall not be discharged or released until the terms thereof are met in full. The Council shall establish the procedure for making this section effective. 
Section 10.8. - All real property liable for special assessments. 
    All real property, including such as is exempt from taxation by law, shall be liable for the cost of public improvements benefiting such property, unless specifically exempted from special assessments by law. 
Section 10.9. - Hazards and nuisances. 
    When any lot, building, or structure within the city, because of age or dilapidation, the accumulation of refuse or debris, the uncontrolled growing of noxious weeds, or because of any other condition or happening becomes, in the opinion of the Council, a public hazard or nuisance which is dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of the inhabitants of the city or of those residing or habitually going near such lot, building, or structure, the Council may, after investigation, give notice to the owner or owners of the land upon which such nuisance exists, or to the owner or occupant of the building or structure itself, by posting notice upon the premises, by publication, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail addressed to the address set forth in the current assessment roll of the city, or the records of the assessor, specifying the nature of the nuisance and requiring such owner or occupant to alter, repair, tear down, abate, or remove the nuisance within a time to be specified by the Council which shall be commensurate with the nature of the nuisance. If, at the expiration of the time limit in said notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, or in any case where the owner of the land or of the building or structure itself is not known or cannot be found, the Council may order such hazard or nuisance abated by the proper department or agency of the city which is qualified to do the work required, or may do the work by contract or by hire, and the cost of such abatement may be assessed against the lot, premises, or description of real property upon which such hazard or nuisance is located, by special assessment. 
CHAPTER 11. - JUSTICE COURT[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is now obsolete. The justice court was abolished by MCL 600.9921, which created the district court system. 

Section 11.1. - Justice of the Peace. 
    There shall be elected from the city at-large one Justice of the Peace who shall have and exercise the same jurisdiction and powers in all civil and criminal matters, causes, suits, and proceedings, and shall perform the same duties in all respects, so far as occasion may require, as are or may be conferred upon or required of justices of the peace in townships under the general laws of the state, except that the jurisdiction of the Justice of the Peace ex contractu and ex delicto shall be increased to five hundred dollars with such exceptions and restrictions as may be provided by law. 
(Amended by electors 4-3-67) 
Section 11.2. - Laws governing Justice Court. 
    The proceedings in all suits and actions before the Justice of the Peace and in the exercise of the powers and duties conferred upon and required of him shall be according to and governed by the general laws applicable to justice's courts; and in all suits and prosecutions arising under this charter and the ordinances of the city, the right of appeal or certiorari from the court to the circuit court of Genesee County, or to any court having jurisdiction, shall be allowed to the parties, or any or either of them, and the same recognizance or bond shall be given as is or may be required by law in case of certiorari from justice's court in analogous cases. 
Section 11.3. - Docket entries and disposition of money. 
    The Justice of the Peace shall enter in the docket kept by him the title of all suits and prosecutions commenced or prosecuted before him for violations of this charter and ordinances of the city, except such as are settled in the Violations Bureau created under the provisions of Section 11.6 hereof, and all the proceedings and the judgment rendered in such cause, and the items of all costs taxed or allowed therein, and also the amounts and date of payment of all fines, penalties, and forfeitures, moneys, and costs received by him on account of such suit or proceeding. Such docket shall be submitted by the Justice of the Peace at all reasonable times for examination by any person desiring to examine the same, and shall be produced by him for examination by the Council, the Finance Officer, and the auditors making the annual audit of the city whenever required. All fines, penalties, forfeitures, and moneys received by him for or on account of violations of this charter or the ordinances of the city shall be paid over to the Treasurer on or before the first day of the next month after the collection or receipt thereof, and the Justice of the Peace shall take the receipt of the Treasurer therefor, and file the same with the Clerk. The Justice of the Peace shall account for and remit all other moneys received by him in the manner provided and required by law. 
Section 11.4. - Constable. 
    The Mayor shall appoint a Constable, subject to the approval of the Council. The term of each such appointment shall be as nearly coincident with the terms of the Justice of the Peace as possible. The Constable shall have like powers and authority in matters of criminal and civil nature, and in relation to the service of process, civil and criminal, as are conferred by law on constables in townships. He shall also have power to serve all process issued for breaches or violations of this charter and the ordinances of the city. 
Editor's note- The office of constable was abolished pursuant to MCL 117.32. 
Section 11.5. - Compensation. 
    The compensation of the Justice of the Peace shall be the legal fees taxable or chargeable by justices of the peace under the general law pertaining to such offices. The Justice of the Peace shall be compensated by the city at the rate of five hundred dollars per year in lieu of any fees or costs which might otherwise be taxable or chargeable by him in cases settled in the violations bureau, created by Section 11.6. As to cases settled in the violations bureau, no fees or costs shall be charged or taxed by the Justice of the Peace or by the city. 
Section 11.6. - Violations bureau. 
[a]  There is hereby established a violations bureau within the justice court for the handling of cases involving violations of ordinances of the city regarding traffic on the streets or alleys or in the parks and public places of the city, other than driving while under the influence of intoxicating liquors or narcotics, failure to stop in the event of an accident, and reckless driving, and such other ordinances as the Council shall direct. The Justice of the Peace shall specify, by suitable schedules, the amount of such fines for first, second, and subsequent offenses and shall further specify what number of such offenses, not less than three, or other circumstances which shall require the appearance of the offender or violator in court. All notices and papers used in connection with offenses and violations which may be settled in the Violations Bureau shall advise all alleged violators of their right to a trial on the offense or violation charged, should such person so choose. 
(b)  In such bureau, any person who has received notice that he has violated any such ordinance may, prior to and without the necessity of the issuance of a warrant for his arrest for the alleged violation, and within the time specified in the notice, answer at the Violations Bureau to the violation set forth in such notice. Acceptance of the prescribed fine by the bureau shall be deemed to be a complete satisfaction for the violation, and the violator shall be given a printed receipt which clearly so states. 
(c)  Until otherwise provided by ordinance, upon the recommendation of the Justice of the Peace, the Treasurer shall conduct the Violations Bureau under the supervision of the Justice of the Peace. 
CHAPTER 12. - ELECTIONS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq.; mandatory that Charter provide for the time, manner and means of holding elections, MCL 117.3(c). 

Section 12.1. - Regular city elections. 
(a)  A regular city election shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November, in every even-numbered year. 
(b)  At each regular city election there shall be elected one member of the Council from each of the councilmanic districts of the city, and three councilmen from the city at-large. Commencing with the November, 1978 election councilmanic district council members shall be elected for four (4) years and city at-large council members shall be elected for two (2) years and that thereafter all council members shall be elected for four (4) year terms. 
(Amended by electors 8-2-77) 
(c)  At each regular city election held in every even-numbered year which is not devisible [divisible] by four, there shall be elected one Justice of the Peace. 
(Amended by electors 4-3-67) 
Editor's note- The office of Justice of the Peace is now obsolete since MCL 600.9921 created the district court system. 
Section 12.2. - Special elections. 
    Except as otherwise required by law, special city elections shall be held when called by resolution of the Council, adopted at least forty-five days in advance of such election. Any resolution calling a special election shall set forth the purpose of such election. Unless otherwise permitted by law, no more than two special city elections shall be held in any one calendar year. 
State Law reference- Special election approval, MCL 168.631, 168.639. 
Section 12.3. - Qualifications of electors. 
    Each person who has the constitutional qualifications of an elector in the State of Michigan, or who will have such qualifications at the next ensuing regular or special city election shall be entitled to register as an elector of the city. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for registration of electors, MCL 117.3(c); registration of electors generally, MCL 168.491 et seq. 
Section 12.4. - Election procedure. 
    The general election laws of the state shall apply to and control, as near as may be, all procedures relating to notices for, to registrations for, and to the conduct of city elections, except as such general laws are inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter. 
State Law reference- Michigan election laws, MCL 168.1 et seq. 
Section 12.5. - Election commission. 
    An Election Commission, consisting of the Clerk, the Assessor, and the Treasurer, is hereby created. The Commission shall have all the powers and perform all of the duties granted to and required of election commissions by law. In any case where election procedure is in doubt, the Election Commission shall prescribe the procedure to follow. The compensation of all election personnel shall be determined by the Council. 
Section 12.6. - Nominating petitions. 
    A person desiring to qualify as a candidate for any elective office under this charter shall file with the Clerk on official nominating petition thereof. Official blank nominating petitions, in substantially the same form designated by the Secretary of State for use in the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers, shall be prepared and furnished by the Clerk. Each such petition shall be signed by not less than fifty nor more than one hundred of the registered electors of the city. Such petitions shall be filed with the Clerk not later than 5:00 o'clock in the afternoon on the seventh Monday preceding the date of the primary for the regular city election. Before the Clerk shall furnish official blank nominating petitions to any person, he shall enter thereon with typewriter or in ink the name of the person who is to be nominated as a candidate, and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the Clerk for filing. Nominating petitions for the purpose of filling a vacancy shall so state in connection with the name of the office for which they are to be used. If any person signs his name to a greater number of nominating petitions for any office than there will be persons elected to that office, his signature shall be disregarded on all petitions for that office. 
Editor's note- Per Resolution No. 171023-05 , adopted Oct. 23, 2017, the Swartz Creek City Council hereby recognizes provisions of MCL 168.646a(1) as superseding the City Charter and affirms appropriate election nominating petition due time of 4:00 p.m. on the 15th Tuesday before the August primary. The city council hereby directs the city clerk to forward this resolution to the Michigan Municipal League and the Municode codification service provider, with instructions on the appropriate November of even-year election petition annotation information. 
State Law reference- Mandatory that Charter provide for nomination of elective officers, MCL 117.3(b); nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Section 12.7. - Approval of petitions. 
    The Clerk shall accept for filing only nominating petitions on official blanks furnished by him. At the time of, and as a prerequisite for, filing any nominating petition, there shall also be filed an affidavit, signed by the person named as a candidate in the petition, or by someone in his behalf, stating under oath that the person named in the petition possesses the qualifications required by law for eligibility to assume and hold the elective office for which the petition is filed. Such affidavit shall be on a form provided by the Clerk. Within five days after the filing of a petition, the Clerk shall determine the sufficiency of the number of genuine signatures on the petition. If he finds that any petition does not contain the required number of genuine signatures of registered electors of the city, he shall immediately notify the candidate in writing, of the insufficiency of his petition. No additional signatures on any petition shall be received by the Clerk after the final date and time fixed for filing nominating petitions. Each petition which is found by the Clerk to contain the required number of genuine signatures shall be marked "Valid", with the date thereof. 
State Law reference- Nonpartisan nominating petitions, MCL 168.544a. 
Section 12.8. - Form of ballots. 
    The form, printing, and numbering of ballots used in any city primary or election shall conform, as nearly as may be, to that prescribed by law. The names of qualified nominees for such office shall be listed on the ballot in the manner and form provided by law in the following order, where any of such offices are to be filled, to wit: Candidates for the office of Councilman from each of the councilmanic districts of the city in the numerical order of such districts, candidates for the office of Councilman at-large, and candidate for the office of Justice of the Peace. At elections at which Councilmen are to be elected from councilmanic districts, the ballots shall clearly indicate the districts from which candidates seek to be elected, and as to such candidates the votes cast shall be exclusively by the registered electors of the district from which the candidate seeks to be elected, who shall vote for one councilmanic district candidate and for three city at-large candidates. 
(Amended by electors 8-3-76) 
Section 12.9. - Primaries. 
(a)  A regular city primary shall be held on the date prescribed by law for the holding of general spring primaries except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  If, upon the expiration of the time for filing nominating petitions for any elective city office, valid petitions have been filed for no more than twice the number of candidates for an office to be filled at the following regular city election representing any councilmanic district or the city at large, then no primary shall be held with respect to such office in such councilmanic district or the city at-large, as the case may be. 
(c)  When a primary is held with respect to an office, the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes from each councilmanic district and for the office of Justice of the Peace, and the six candidates for the office of Councilman from the city at-large, as the case may be, shall be the nominees for such offices. In the case of Councilmen to be elected according to the councilmanic districts of the city, the votes cast for each candidate at the primary shall be exclusively by the registered electors of the district from which he seeks to be nominated. 
(d)  To be nominated for an office at a primary by write-in or sticker votes, a person must receive not less than fifty such votes. 
(e)  The names of candidates nominated at the primary, together with the names of candidates for each office for which no primary was required to be held, shall be certified by the Clerk to the Election Commission as nominees for election to the respective offices for which they are candidates at the following regular city election. 
Section 12.10. - Canvass of votes. 
    The Election Commission shall constitute the Board of Canvassers to canvass the votes cast at all elections. If any member of the Board is a candidate for office at an election to be canvassed, such person shall not be a member of the Board of Canvassers at such election, and the Council shall designate a person to act in his stead. A majority of the members of such board shall be a quorum for the transaction of the business of the board. The Board of Canvassers shall meet at the office of the Clerk at 10:00 o'clock in the forenoon on the second day following each city primary or election, shall publicly determine the vote upon all questions and propositions, and shall declare whether the same have been adopted or rejected and which persons have been nominated for or elected to office. 
State Law reference- Boards of election commissions and boards of canvassers, MCL 168.21 et seq. 
Section 12.11. - Recount. 
    A recount of the votes cast at any city primary or election for any office, or upon any proposition, may be had in accordance with the general election laws of the state. 
State Law reference- Recounts, MCL 168.861 et seq. 
Section 12.12. - Tie vote. 
    If, at any city primary or election, the outcome cannot be determined because two or more persons received an equal number of votes, the Election Commission shall name a date for the appearance of such persons for the purpose of determining the election of one of them by lot. Should any person fail or refuse to appear, in person or by representative, to determine the result of any tie at the time and place named, such determination shall be made by lot in his absence, at the direction and under the supervision of the Election Commission. Such determination shall be final. 
State Law reference- Determination of election by lot, MCL 168.851, 168.852. 
CHAPTER 13. - CONTRACTS 

Section 13.1. - Contracting authority of Council. 
(a)  The power to authorize the making of contracts on behalf of the city is vested in the Council and shall be exercised in accordance with the provisions of law. 
(b)  All contracts, except as otherwise provided by ordinance in accordance with the provisions of Section 13.2 hereof, shall be authorized by the Council and shall be signed on behalf of the city by the Mayor and the Clerk. 
Section 13.2. - Purchase and sale of personal property. 
    The Council shall establish, by ordinance, the procedures for the purchase and sale of personal property. Such ordinance shall provide for centralized purchasing on behalf of the city. The ordinance shall also provide the dollar limit within which purchases of personal property may be made without the necessity of securing competitive bids, and the dollar limit within which purchases may be made without the necessity of Council approval. No purchase of personal property shall be made unless a sufficient unencumbered appropriation is available therefor. 
Section 13.3. - Limitations on contractual power. 
(a)  The Council shall only have power to enter into contracts which, by the terms thereof, will be fully executed within a period of ten years, unless such contracts shall first receive the approval of a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon at a regular or special election. This qualification shall not apply to any contract for services with a public utility or one or more other governmental units, nor to contracts for debt secured by bonds or notes which are permitted to be issued by the city by law. 
(b)  The city shall not have power to purchase, sell, lease, or dispose of any real estate unless: 
(1)  Such action is approved by the affirmative roll call vote of five or more members of the Council, and unless, 
(2)  In the case of real estate owned by it, the resolution authorizing the sale, lease, or disposal thereof shall be completed in the manner in which it is to be finally passed and has remained on file with the Clerk for public inspection for thirty days before the final adoption or passage thereof, and unless, 
(3)  When the proposition is to sell any park, cemetery, or any part thereof, except when such park is not required under an official master plan of the city, the proposition to sell, lease, or dispose of the same shall also be approved by a three-fifths vote of the electors of the city voting thereon at any general or special election. 
(c)  Except as provided by ordinance authorized by Section 13.2 of this chapter, each contract for construction of public improvements or for the purchase or sale of personal property shall be let after opportunity for competitive bidding. All bids shall be opened in public in the Council room by the Finance Officer at the time designated in the notice of letting, and shall be reported by him to the Council at its next meeting. The Council may reject any or all bids, if deemed advisable. If, after two or more opportunities for competitive bidding, no bids are received or such bids as were received were not satisfactory to the Council, the Council may either endeavor to obtain new competitive bids or may authorize the City Manager or other proper official of the city to negotiate for a contract in the open market. 
(d)  No contract shall be made with any person who is in default to the city. 
(e)  No extra compensation shall be paid to any agent, employee, or contractor after the service has been rendered or the contract entered into. 
State Law reference- Restriction on making contracts with persons in default to city, MCL 117.5(f). 
Section 13.4. - Business dealings with city. 
    An officer or employee of the city who intends to have business dealings with the city, whereby he may derive any income or benefits, other than such as are provided as remuneration for his official duties, shall file with the Clerk a statement, under oath, setting forth the nature of such business dealings, and his interest therein. The statement shall be filed with the Clerk not less than ten days before the date when action may be taken by the Council or any other agency of the city upon the matter involved. The statement shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council for the meeting at which it is received and published in full therewith. In each case where the type of dealings with the city is on a continuing basis, involving more than one or a sequence of transactions described in the statement, each such statement shall stand for and apply to such transactions for a period of six months, and may be renewed at the end of each six months' period for so long as such transactions continue. Each such renewal shall be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and published as in the case of the original statement. In the event that the interest of any officer or employee of the city in any business dealings with the city changes at any time, he shall file a statement thereof as herein required, which statement shall also be spread upon the proceedings of the Council and published as herein required. Approval of any such business dealings shall require a concurring vote of at least five members of the Council, not including any member who is disqualified under Section 5.6(h) of this charter. Any business dealing made in violation of this section shall be void. 
Editor's note- This section has been preempted by MCL 15.321 et seq., on conflicts of interest as to contracts. 
CHAPTER 14. - SUPERVISORS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- This chapter is now obsolete. The election of supervisors is governed by MCL 46.401 et seq. 

Section 14.1. - Number of supervisors. 
    Until such time as the City of Swartz Creek shall be entitled by law to a different number of representatives upon the Board of Supervisors of County of Genesee, the city shall be entitled to two representatives upon such board. Such two representatives of the city upon the Board of Supervisors shall be comprised of the person designated as and performing the functions of Assessor in the city, and the Mayor, or, if he cannot serve regularly in such capacity, a member of the Council designated by the Council. When, by law, the city is entitled to any additional representative or representatives on such board, the Mayor shall appoint persons who are familiar with the city's business as such representatives, subject to the approval of each such appointment by the Council. 
Section 14.2. - Term of office. 
    Appointed Supervisors, if such there be, shall be appointed and confirmed during the month of February in odd-numbered years. The term of office of each appointed Supervisor shall be for two years, commencing on and dating from the first day of April following their appointment. 
(Amended by electors 4-3-67) 
Section 14.3. - Temporary absences or inability to serve. 
    In case of the necessary temporary absence or inability of any members of the Board of Supervisors representing the City of Swartz Creek to serve or perform the duties of his office, he shall notify the Mayor of such necessary absence or inability, and the Mayor shall designate an elector of the city having the qualifications required by this charter of elective officers to serve in his stead during the period of such absence or inability. 
Section 14.4. - Duties of city supervisors. 
    The Supervisors of the city shall perform the duties required to be performed by members of Board of Supervisors under the general laws of the state. 
Section 14.5. - Compensation of supervisors. 
    Each Supervisor of the city shall be entitled to retain any compensation and mileage paid to him by the County as a member of the Board of Supervisors of the County of Genesee. 
CHAPTER 15. - UTILITY FRANCHISES AND MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
State Law reference- Mandates relative to public utilities, Mich. Const. 1963, Art. VII, §§ 24, 25; permissible that Charter provide for operation of utilities, MCL 117.4c, 117.4f. 

Section 15.1. - Public utility franchises. 
    All public utility franchises granted after the adoption of this charter, whether it be so provided in the granting ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the city: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the public utility to which any franchise is granted to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the city by the city and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor; provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the public utility, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor; 
(7)  To pay such part of the cost of improvement or maintenance of the streets, alleys, bridges, and public places of the city, as shall arise from its use thereof, and to protect and save the city harmless from all damages arising from said use. 
Section 15.2. - General powers respecting municipal utilities and services. 
    The city shall possess and hereby reserves to itself all the powers granted to cities by law to acquire, construct, own, operate, improve, enlarge, extend, repair, and maintain, either within or without its corporate limits, a hospital, public utilities, including, but not by way of limitation, public utilities for treating and supplying water, and for supplying light, heat, power, gas, sewage treatment, and garbage disposal facilities, or any of them, to the city and its inhabitants, and also to sell and deliver water, light, heat, power, gas, and other public utilities and services without its corporate limits to an amount not exceeding the limitations set by law. The power to supply, as herein possessed and reserved, shall include the power to extract and process water, electricity, or gas from natural resources, to manufacture the same, or to purchase the same from others. 
Section 15.3. - Administration and operation of municipal utilities. 
    The Council shall be responsible for the care, protection, preservation, control, improvement, and extension of the utility plants and facilities of the city, and shall adopt such ordinances and resolutions as are required therefor. Such utility plants and facilities shall each be a department of the city, and the management thereof shall be the duty of the City Manager, who shall be responsible to the Council therefor. Such public utility department shall be subject to the provisions of this charter relating to departments of the city, including such as relate to annual budgets and financial accounting, and to the provisions of this chapter. The City Manager shall appoint a Superintendent of the city utilities and, with the approval of the Council, other administrative personnel as shall be required to carry out the operation, maintenance, improvement, and extension of the said city utilities and utility facilities. 
Section 15.4. - Utility charges-Collections. 
    The Council shall fix the rates to be charged for all public utility services of the city. The Council shall provide, by ordinance, for the collection of public utility charges, and for such purpose shall have all the powers granted to cities by Act No. 178 of the Public Acts of 1939 [MCL 123.161 et seq.]. When any person shall fail, or refuse to pay to the city any sum due on utility bills, the utility service or services upon which such delinquency exists may be shut off or discontinued by the city, and suit may be instituted by the city for the collection of the same in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 15.5. - Annual audit. 
    The cost of making the annual audit of the accounts of each public utility of the city shall be defrayed from the funds of the utility. 
Section 15.6. - Annual reports. 
    The annual audit of each public utility of the city shall show, as nearly as possible, the financial results of the city ownership and operation of the public service works of the city. 
Section 15.7. - Purchase of electricity, water, sewage disposal service. 
    The city may purchase and resell electricity, water, and sewage disposal services, or any one or more of them, from any person, municipal or private, if such purchase may be deemed by the Council to be in the best interests of the city and its inhabitants. 
Section 15.8. - Disposal of plants. 
    Except for purposes permitted by law, the city shall not sell, exchange, lease, or in any other way alien [alienate] or dispose of the property, easements, income, or other equipment, privileges, or assets belonging to and appertaining to any utility which it may own or acquire, unless and except such proposition shall first have been submitted, at an election held for that purpose in the manner provided in this charter, to the electors of the city and approved by them by a three-fifths majority vote of the electors voting thereon. All contracts, negotiations, leases, grants, or other forms of transfer in violation of this provision, shall be void and of no effect as against the city. The provisions of this section shall not, however, apply to the sale or exchange of any article of equipment of any city-owned utility that is obsolete, worn out, or useless, or which could, with advantage to the service, be replaced by new and improved machinery or equipment. 
SCHEDULE 

Section 1. - Status of schedule chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to inaugurate the government of the City of Swartz Creek under this charter and provide for the transition from the former governments of the Townships of Clayton, Flint, and Gaines over the territory comprising the city to the new city status under this charter. It shall constitute a part of the charter of the City of Swartz Creek only to the extent and for the time required to accomplish that end. 
Section 2. - Election to adopt charter. 
    This charter shall be submitted to a vote of the qualified electors of the territory comprising the proposed City of Swartz Creek, at a special election to be held on Tuesday, September 22, 1959, between the hours of 7:00 o'clock a.m. and 8:00 o'clock p.m. All provisions for such election shall be held in the manner provided by law, except as in this chapter provided. Proper and sufficient notice of such election and of the registration therefor shall be given by the Secretary of the Charter Commission, as provided by law. If, at such election, a majority of the qualified electors of the proposed city vote in favor of the adoption of this charter, the Secretary of the Charter Commission shall do and perform all other acts which are required by law to carry this charter into effect and to consummate the incorporation of the city. 
Section 3. - Form of ballot for charter adoption. 
    The form of the question on the adoption of this charter shall be as follows: 
Shall the proposed charter of the City of Swartz Creek which was framed by the Charter Commission elected August 5, 1958, be adopted: 
YES 
NO 
and shall be set forth on paper ballots in the usual manner therefor. 
Section 4. - Election of officers. 
(a)  At the election upon the adoption of this charter, the first elective officers of the city under this charter shall be elected, viz: one Councilman to be elected from each of the four councilmanic districts of the city, three Councilmen from the city at-large, and one Justice of the Peace. The nomination and election of such first elective officers shall be non-partisan, and no primary shall be held in connection therewith. 
(b)  Candidates for such offices shall be nominated by the filing of petitions signed by not less than fifty nor more than one hundred of the qualified electors of the territory comprising the proposed City of Swartz Creek, and filed with the Secretary of the Charter Commission not later than five o'clock p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on Monday, August 31, 1959. The Secretary of the Charter Commission shall publish notice of the last day and time for filing such nominating petitions, which notice shall be published in the SWARTZ CREEK NEWS on or before August 6, 1959. Such petitions shall be in the form designated by the Secretary of State for use in the nomination of non-partisan judicial officers. All petitions filed in connection with such election shall be furnished in the first place by the Secretary of the Charter Commission, and the said Secretary shall receive no other petitions. Before the said Secretary shall furnish a form of nominating petition to any person, she shall enter thereon with typewriter or in ink the name of the candidate and the name of the office for which he is to be a candidate. No petition which has been altered with respect to such entries shall be received by the Secretary for filing. If any person signs his name to a greater number of petitions for any office than there will be persons elected to that office, his signatures shall be disregarded on all petitions for that office. 
(c)  Within five days after the filing of a petition, the said Secretary shall determine the sufficiency of the number of genuine signatures on the petition. If she finds that any petition does not contain the required number of genuine signatures, she shall immediately notify the candidate, in writing, of the insufficiency of his petition. No additional signatures on any petition shall be received by the said Secretary after the final date and time fixed for filing nominating petitions. Each petition which is found by the said secretary to contain the required number of genuine signatures shall be marked, "Valid", with the date thereof. 
(d)  Mrs. Helen Tagge, the Secretary of the Charter Commission, Robert K. Bolan, and Trevelyn R. Rodgers shall constitute the Election Commission for such election, and shall perform the duties required by law respecting such election and the canvass of the votes cast thereat. 
(e)  Monday, the 24th day of August, 1959, shall be the last day of registration for such election. Each member of the Charter Commission shall be a registrar for the purpose of registering the electors of the proposed city for the special election to be held on the 22nd day of September, 1959. The Charter Commission may also appoint other persons to act as such registrars. 
Section 5. - Form of ballot for city officers. 
    At the election held for the election of the first city officers, the names of the several candidates for such offices shall be placed on ballots containing no party designation with respect to any candidate in the following order: candidates for the office of Councilman from each councilmanic district in the numerical order thereof, candidates for the office of Councilman from the city at-large, and candidates for the office of the Justice of the Peace. The names of candidates on such ballots shall be rotated so that the name of each candidate for an office will head the list of names of candidates for that office approximately an equal number of times. 
Section 6. - Voting at charter election. 
    Each person voting at the election on the adoption of this charter shall, in addition to voting on the adoption of this charter, vote for one Councilman from each of the four councilmanic districts of the city, three Councilmen from the city at-large, and one Justice of the Peace. 
Section 7. - Canvass of votes. 
(a)  The Election Commission appointed and designated in Section 4, acting as the Board of Canvassers of the election held for the submission of this charter to the electors of the proposed City of Swartz Creek shall meet at 4:00 o'clock p.m., at the polling place of the election held on September 22, 1959, on the day following the election on the adoption of this charter, and canvass the votes cast at such election. 
(b)  If the canvass of the votes cast at such election shows this charter to have been adopted, the votes cast for the several first city officers shall then be canvassed. The person receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office of Councilman from each of the four councilmanic districts respectively shall be declared to have been elected to those offices; the three persons receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office of Councilman from the city at-large shall be declared to have been elected to that office; and the person receiving the highest number of votes cast for the office of Justice of the Peace shall be declared to have been elected as Justice of the Peace of the city. 
(c)  If the canvass of the votes cast at such election shows this charter not to have been adopted, the votes cast for the office of Councilman from the city at-large only shall then be canvassed. The person receiving the highest number of votes cast for that office shall be declared to have been elected to the office of de facto Mayor in accordance with the provisions of law. 
Section 8. - Effective date of charter. 
    If the canvass of the votes thereon shows this charter to have been adopted, it shall take effect and become law as the charter of the City of Swartz Creek for all purposes on Tuesday, December 1, 1959, at 12:01 o'clock, a.m. at which time the control of the officers of the Townships of Clayton, Flint, and Gaines over any of that part of the township included within the city shall cease and be superceded by that of the officers of the City of Swartz Creek. 
Section 9. - Terms of office of first city officers elected. 
(a)  The term of office of each Councilman elected at such election shall commence at 12:01 o'clock a.m., on the effective date of this charter, and each such officer shall hold the office to which he has been elected until the Monday following the regular city election held in 1961, and until his successor has been elected and had [has] qualified for the office in accordance with the provisions of this charter. The Justice of the Peace shall hold office until the election, qualification, and assumption of office on July 4, 1963 of his successor, following the regular city election held in 1963. Thereafter, the successors of all such officers shall be elected at the regular city elections provided by this charter, and shall hold office for the terms established thereby. 
Section 10. - First meeting of city officers. 
    On or before the effective date of this charter, each person who is elected to an office of the city shall appear before the Clerk of either Clayton, Flint, or Gaines Townships, or a Justice of the Peace of the County of Genesee, and take and subscribe to his oath of office. The officer receiving such oath shall file the subscribed copy of each such oath with the City Clerk within ten days after the effective date of this charter. The first officers of the city shall assemble at 7:30 o'clock, p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on Tuesday, December 1, 1959. The meeting shall be called to order by the Chairman of the Charter Commission, who shall introduce the new city officials to the public, and call the meeting of the Council to order. The Mayor shall then assume the chairmanship of the meeting and the Council shall proceed with the business before it. At such meeting the Council shall determine and set the times of its regular meetings, and do and perform such acts as are required to establish the government of the city. 
Section 11. - First administrative officers of the city. 
    Within thirty days after the first meeting of the Council on December 1, 1959, as in this chapter provided, the Mayor shall appoint a person to perform temporarily the duties of the office of Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor, and such other officers and department heads as are required for the conduct of the government and affairs of the city under this charter, until the permanent officers are appointed and assume their duties. The office of City Manager shall be filled and the permanent Clerk, Treasurer, and Assessor under this charter shall be appointed and assume their respective offices as promptly as reasonably possible. 
Section 12. - Justice of the Peace. 
(a)  The Justice of the Peace who is elected at the election held on September 22, 1959, shall assume the duties of his office on December 1, 1959, and shall hold office subject to the provisions of this chapter. In all respects, he shall perform the functions of his office subject to this charter and the general law. 
(b)  After one year following the effective date of this charter, the Council shall provide and furnish the courtroom and all necessary dockets, books, stationery, equipment, and furnishings required for the proper operation of the court. Such dockets, books, stationery equipment, and furnishings shall be and remain the property of the city. 
Section 13. - First city budget. 
    Prior to the first day of March, 1960, the City Manager shall make an estimate of the financial needs of the city during the period between the first day of December, 1959, and June 30, 1960, and the Council shall provide for the same by an interim budget and appropriation. In the manner and at the time provided by this charter, the City Manager shall present his budget proposal for the fiscal year of the city commencing on July 1, 1960, and a budget shall be adopted by the Council as in this charter provided. 
Section 14. - Costs of incorporation. 
    The first Council shall provide for the defraying of the expenses of incorporating the city, including such as were incurred by the Charter Commission for the framing of this charter, by the County of Genesee, and any other agency, whether governmental or private, person or persons who or which has or have expended moneys to defray the cost of any legally required step or procedure in the incorporation of the city. 
RESOLUTION OF ADOPTION 
    At a meeting of the Charter Commission of the City of Swartz Creek, held on the 6th day of July at the usual meeting time and place of the Commission, the following members of the Charter Commission were present: Commissioners Blight, Bolan, Miller, Rodgers, Spaniola and Tagge; a quorum. 
    At such meeting, the following resolutions was offered by Commissioner Rodgers and seconded by Commissioner Miller. 
    Resolved, That the Charter Commission of the City of Swartz Creek does hereby adopt the foregoing instrument as the proposed revised charter of the City of Swartz Creek, and the Secretary of this Commission is hereby instructed to transmit the same to the Governor of the State of Michigan, in accordance with the provisions of Act No. 279 of the Public Acts of 1909 [MCL 117.1 et seq.], for his approval. 
    The vote on the adoption of the resolution was as follows: 
Ayes: Six. 
Nays: None. 
Absent: Three. 
/s/ HELEN TAGGE, 
Secretary of the Charter Commission 
of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan 
Attested by the following Commissioners: 
JOHN BLIGHT 
ROBERT K. BOLAN 
KENNETH HOAG 
WILLIAM M. MILLER 
TREVELYN R. RODGERS 
ELSTON W. VAN STEENBURGH 
ADOLPH M. WASCHA 
HELEN TAGGE, Secretary 
PAUL T. SPANIOLA, Chairman 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The original Charter, sections 1.1 through 15.8, including Schedule, is set out as adopted on September 22, 1959. The following table shows the disposition of amendments adopted at subsequent elections. 
Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Charter  9-22-59 1.1-Sched. 1.1-Sched.  4- 3-67 11.1 12.1 14.2  8- 3-76 12.8  8- 2-77 12.1(b) 10-23-17 12.6(note)  
PART II - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 1-1. - Citing Code. 
    This Code shall be cited as the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan." 
State Law reference- Codification authority, MCL 117.5b. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them when not inconsistent with other definitions in this Code: 
    Charter. The word "Charter" means the Charter of the City of Swartz Creek. 
    City. The word "city" means the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan. 
    Council. The word "council" means the legislative body of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan. 
    Code. The words "Code" or "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done, as provided in this Code or in any order issued pursuant to this Code, when expressed in days, shall be computed as prescribed by state statute. 
State Law reference- Computing period of days, MCL 8.6. 
    County. The word "county" means the County of Genesee. 
    Gender. Words importing masculine gender shall apply to firms, associations, partnerships and corporations, and may apply to females if the intent of the ordinance or Code provision so requires. 
    Health officer. The phrase "health officer" shall mean the director of the county health department or his authorized representative. 
    Joint authority. All words purporting to give joint authority to three or more public officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise expressly declared in the provision granting the authority. 
    MCL. The abbreviation "MCL" shall mean the Michigan Compiled Laws, as amended. 
    Month. The word "month" shall be construed to mean a calendar month. 
    MSA. The abbreviation "MSA" shall mean the Michigan Statutes Annotated, as amended. 
    Number. Words in either the singular or plural numbers shall include either or both numbers and may apply in any instance to a particular person or persons. 
    Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The word "oath" shall be construed to include the word "affirmation" in all cases where by law an affirmation may be substituted for an oath; and in like cases the word "sworn" shall be construed to include the word "affirmed." 
    Officers, departments, divisions, boards, commissions, employees or agencies. The several titles of any officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency shall mean such officer, department, division, board, commission, employee or agency of the city, or any authorized subordinate or designee. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part-owner, land contract vendee, joint-owner, tenant-in-common, tenant-in-partnership, joint tenant, or tenant-in-the-entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" includes firms, joint ventures, partnerships, corporations, clubs, and all associations or organizations of natural persons, either incorporated or unincorporated, however operating or named, and whether acting by themselves or by a servant, agent or fiduciary, and includes all legal representatives, heirs, successors and assigns thereof. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following," when used by way of reference to any title, chapter or section of any ordinance of the city, shall be construed to mean the title, chapter or section next preceding or next following that in which such reference is made, unless when some other title, chapter or section is expressly designated in such reference. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include real and personal property. 
    Public place. The words "public place" mean any street, alley, park, cemetery, public building, or any place of business or assembly, parking lot, parking area, or any other premises open to the public or frequented by the public. 
    References, history notes. The charter references, cross references, state law references, editor's notes and history notes are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Seal. In all cases in which the seal of any court or public office shall be required to be affixed to any paper issuing from such court or office, the word "seal" shall be construed to mean the impression of such seal on such paper alone, as well as the impression of such seal affixed thereto by means of a wafer or wax. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" means imperative or mandatory; the word "may" means permissive. 
    Signature, subscription. The words "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The word "state" means the State of Michigan. 
    Sundays, legal holidays. Whenever any act required to be done pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance or Code section falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, that act shall be performed on the next succeeding business day. 
    Tense. Words used in the present or past tense shall be construed as including the future as well as the present or past. 
    Time. Whenever time is referred to, it means Eastern Standard Time or the time officially in force in the city. 
    Titles, headings and catchlines. The key words used in the Code as headings, titles or catchlines for chapters, articles, divisions and sections are inserted for convenience and to facilitate the use of same, and such words shall not be construed to limit or affect the meaning of any of the provisions of this Code. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven days. 
    Written, in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" may include any form of reproduction or expression of language. 
    Year. The word "year" shall be construed to mean a calendar year; and the word "year," alone, shall be equivalent to the words "year of our Lord." 
    All ordinances of the city shall be interpreted and construed in accordance with the above provisions, unless such interpretation and construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council. 
State Law reference- Rules of construction, MCL 8.3 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Whenever an ordinance, or any part thereof, is repealed by a subsequent ordinance, such ordinance or any part thereof so repealed shall not be revived by the repeal of such subsequent repealing ordinance. 
(b)  Whenever an ordinance is adopted, all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict therewith, shall to the extent of such conflict, be repealed. 
(c)  The repeal of any ordinance or part thereof shall not release or relinquish any penalty, forfeiture or liability incurred under such ordinance or any part thereof, unless the repealing act shall so expressly provide, and such ordinance and part thereof shall be treated as still remaining in force for the purpose of instituting or sustaining any proper action or prosecution for the enforcement of such penalty, forfeiture or liability. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 8.4, 8.4a. 
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(b)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which shall read as follows:...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a section is to be repealed, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, is hereby amended by deleting section _______." 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the council. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, when necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations assumed by the city; 
(2)  Granting any right or franchise; 
(3)  Dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(4)  Making any appropriation; 
(5)  Levying or imposing annual taxes; 
(6)  Establishing or prescribing grades in the city; 
(7)  Providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; 
(8)  Dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city; 
(9)  Extending or contracting the boundaries of the city; 
(10)  Prescribing the number, classification, or compensation of any city officers or employees; 
(11)  Prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets; 
(12)  Affecting any specific urban renewal project; 
(13)  Pertaining to zoning; 
(14)  Any other ordinance, or part thereof, which is not of a general and permanent nature; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. The ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability. 
    If any part of this Code or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be found to be invalid by any court, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining parts or applications of this Code which can be given effect without the invalid part or application, provided such remaining parts are not determined by the court to be inoperable and to this end all provisions of this Code are declared to be severable. 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or such ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision by any person shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days, or both, except whenever a specific penalty is otherwise provided. 
(b)  Any person under the age of 17 years who violates any provision of this Code or any ordinance of the city shall be dealt with by the juvenile division of the probate court or as prescribed by the laws of the state. 
(c)  In addition to the penalties hereinabove provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this Code or any ordinance shall be deemed a new and separate offense for each day that such condition continues to exist. 
(d)  The penalty shall be in addition to the abatement of the violating condition, any injunctive relief, or revocation of any permit or license. 
Charter reference- Limitation on penalties, § 6.4. 
State Law reference- Limitation on penalties, MCL 117.4i; juveniles and juvenile division, MCL 712A.1 et seq. 
Secs. 1-9-1-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS 

Sec. 1-21. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    Act means Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
    Authorized city official means a police officer or other personnel of the city authorized by this Code or any ordinance to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices. 
    Bureau means the City of Swartz Creek Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as established by this article. 
    Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
    Municipal civil infraction citation means a written complaint or notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear in court regarding the occurrence or existence of a municipal civil infraction violation by the person cited. 
    Municipal civil infraction violation notice means a written notice prepared by an authorized city official, directing a person to appear at the City of Swartz Creek Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for the violation by the schedule of civil fines adopted by the city, as authorized for under Sections 8396 and 8707(6) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 1-22. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
    A municipal civil infraction action may be commenced upon the issuance by an authorized city official of (1) a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in court; or (2) a municipal civil infraction violation notice directing the alleged violator to appear at the City of Swartz Creek Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 1-23. - Same-Issuance and service. 
    Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized city officials as follows: 
(a)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(b)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(c)  Each citation shall be numbered consecutively and shall be in a form approved by the state court administrator. The original citation shall be filed with the district court. Copies of the citation shall be retained by the city and issued to the alleged violator as provided by Section 8705 of the Act. 
(d)  A citation for a municipal civil infraction signed by an authorized city official shall be treated as made under oath if the violation alleged in the citation occurred in the presence of the official signing the complaint and if the citation contains the following statement immediately above the date and signature of the official: "I declare under the penalties of perjury that the statements above are true to the best of my information, knowledge, and belief." 
(e)  An authorized city official who witnesses a person commit a municipal civil infraction shall prepare and subscribe, as soon as possible and as completely as possible, an original and required copies of a citation. 
(f)  An authorized city official may issue a citation to a person if: 
(1)  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
(2)  Based upon investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction and if the prosecuting attorney or city attorney approves in writing the issuance of the citation. 
(g)  Municipal civil infraction citations shall be served by an authorized city official as follows: 
(1)  Except as provided by section 6-3(g)(2), an authorized city official shall personally serve a copy of the citation upon the alleged violator. 
(2)  If the municipal civil infraction action involves the use or occupancy of land, a building or other structure, a copy of the citation does not need to be personally served upon the alleged violator, but may be served upon an owner or occupant of the land, building or structure by posting the copy of the land or attaching the copy to the building or structure. In addition, a copy of the citation shall be sent by first class mail to the owner of the land, building, or structure at the owner's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 1-24. - Same-Contents. 
(a)  A municipal ordinance citation shall contain the name and address of the alleged violator, the municipal civil infraction alleged, the place where the alleged violator shall appear in court, the telephone number of the court, and the time at or by which the appearance shall be made. 
(b)  Further, the citation shall inform the alleged violator that he or she may do one of the following: 
(1)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by mail, in person, or by representation, at or by the time specified for appearance. 
(2)  Admit responsibility for the municipal civil infraction "with explanation" by mail by the time specified for appearance or, in person, or by representation. 
(3)  Deny responsibility for the municipal civil infraction by doing either of the following: 
a.  Appearing in person for an informal hearing before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney, unless a formal hearing before a judge is requested by the city; 
b.  Appearing in court for a formal hearing before a judge, with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(c)  The citation shall also inform the alleged violator of all of the following: 
(1)  That if the alleged violator desires to admit responsibility "with explanation" in person or by representation, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time for an appearance. 
(2)  That if the alleged violator desires to deny responsibility, the alleged violator must apply to the court in person, by mail, by telephone, or by representation within the time specified for appearance and obtain a scheduled date and time to appear for a hearing, unless a hearing date is specified on the citation. 
(3)  That a hearing shall be an informal hearing unless a formal hearing is requested by the alleged violator or the city. 
(4)  That at an informal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge or district court magistrate, without the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(5)  That at a formal hearing the alleged violator must appear in person before a judge with the opportunity of being represented by an attorney. 
(d)  The citation shall contain a notice in boldfaced type that the failure of the alleged violator to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is a misdemeanor and will result in entry of a default judgment against the alleged violator on the municipal civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 1-25. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Bureau established. The city hereby establishes a municipal ordinance violations bureau ("bureau") as authorized under Section 8396 of the Act to accept admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infraction in response to municipal civil infraction violation notices issued and served by authorized city officials, and to collect and retain civil fines and costs as prescribed by this Code or any ordinance. 
(b)  Location; supervision; employees; rules and regulations. The bureau shall be located at the City of Swartz Creek City Hall and shall be under the supervision and control of the city treasurer. The treasurer, subject to the approval of the city council, shall adopt rules and regulations for the operation of the bureau and appoint any necessary qualified village employees to administer the bureau. 
(c)  Disposition of violations. The bureau may dispose only of municipal civil infraction violations for which a fine has been scheduled and for which a municipal civil infraction violation notice (as compared with a citation) has been issued. The fact that a fine has been scheduled for a particular violation shall not entitle any person to dispose of the violation at the bureau. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent or restrict the city from issuing a municipal civil infraction citation for any violation or from prosecuting any violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. No person shall be required to dispose of a municipal civil infraction violation at the bureau and may have the violation processed before a court of appropriate jurisdiction. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the bureau shall not prejudice the person or in any way diminish the person's rights, privileges and protection accorded by law. 
(d)  Bureau limited to accepting admissions or responsibility. The scope of the bureau's authority shall be limited to accepting admissions of responsibility for municipal civil infractions and collecting and retaining civil fines and costs as a result of those admissions. The bureau shall not accept payment of a fine from any person who denies having committed the offense or who admits responsibility only with explanation, and in no event shall the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged violation. 
(e)  Municipal civil infraction violation notices. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized city officials under the same circumstances and upon the same persons as provided for citations as provided in sections 6-3(f) and (g) of this chapter. In addition to any other information required by this Code or other ordinance, the notice of violation shall indicate the time by which the alleged violator must appear at the bureau, the methods by which an appearance may be made, the address and telephone number of the bureau, the hours during which the bureau is open, the amount of the fine scheduled for the alleged violation, and the consequences for failure to appear and pay the required fine within the required time. 
(f)  Appearance; payment of fines and costs. An alleged violator receiving a municipal civil infraction violation notice shall appear at the bureau and pay the specified fine and costs at or by the time specified for appearance in the municipal civil infraction violation notice. An appearance may be made by mail, in person, or by representation. 
(g)  Procedure where admission of responsibility not made or fine not paid. If an authorized city official issues and serves a municipal ordinance violation notice and if an admission of responsibility is not made and the civil fine and costs, if any, prescribed by the schedule of fines for the violation are not paid at the bureau, a municipal civil infraction citation may be filed with district court and a copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation filed with the court does not need to comply in all particulars with the requirements for citations as provided by Sections 8705 and 8709 of the Act, but shall consist of a sworn compliant containing the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. 
(Ord. No. 314, § 2, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 1-26. - Penalties and sanctions. 
(a)  Unless provided otherwise in a specific ordinance, and except as provided in subsection (b), below, for municipal civil infraction violation notices paid at the bureau, the sanction for a violation which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided below, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act, Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended [MCL 600.8701 et seq.], and other applicable laws. 
(1)  Unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by any other city ordinance, the civil fine for a violation shall be not less than $100.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
(2)  Increased civil fines may be imposed for repeated violations by a person of any requirement or provision of this or any other city ordinance. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal infraction violation of the same requirement or provision (i) committed by a person within any 12-month period (unless some other period is specifically provided by this Code or any other city ordinance) and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. Unless otherwise specifically provided by this or any other city ordinance for a particular municipal civil infraction violation, the increased fine for a repeat offense shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a repeat offense shall be no less than $200.00, plus costs. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $300.00, plus costs. 
(b)  Schedule of civil fines for municipal civil infraction violation notices payable at the bureau. 
(1)  Where a municipal civil infraction violation notice is issued, unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by any other city ordinance, the civil fine (including costs) for the violation payable at the bureau shall be $75.00. 
(2)  Where a municipal civil infraction violation notice is issued for the second violation of the same ordinance, unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by any other city ordinance, the civil fine (including costs) for the violation payable at the bureau shall be $150.00. 
(3)  Where a municipal civil infraction violation notice is issued for the third or subsequent violation of the same ordinance, unless otherwise specifically provided for a particular municipal civil infraction violation by any other city ordinance, the civil fine (including costs) for the violation payable at the bureau shall be $250.00. 
(c)  A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this Code or any other city ordinance; and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this Code or any other city ordinance. 
(d)  Each day on which any violation of this Code or any other city ordinance continues constitutes a separate offense and shall be subject to penalties or sanctions as a separate offense. 
(e)  In addition to any remedies available at law, the city may bring an action for an injunction or other process against a person to restrain, prevent or abate any violation of this Code or any other city ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 402, § 1, 7-27-09, eff. 9-1-09 ) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Municipal powers and liabilities, Ch. 3; administrative services, Ch. 7. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing the number, classification or compensation of any city officers or employees saved from repeal, § 1-6(10); community development, Ch. 6; downtown development authority, § 6-21 et seq.; offenses affecting governmental functions, § 10-26 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 11-21 et seq.; planning, Ch. 13; planning commission, § 13-21 et seq.; utilities, Ch. 19; zoning board of appeals, App. A, Art. 22; administration and enforcement of zoning, App. A, Art. 32; franchises, licenses and permits, App. B. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; freedom of information act, MCL 15-231 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Council, Ch. 5; city legislation, Ch. 6; elections, Ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meetings act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 

Sec. 2-21. - Regular meetings. 
(a)  The council of the city shall meet in regular session twice each month at 7:00 p.m. at the City Hall located at 5043 First Street, Swartz Creek, Michigan. 
(b)  If it becomes necessary to meet at a place other than at City Hall, the council shall designate the place of the meeting at the conclusion of the preceding meeting. 
(c)  The schedule of regular meetings of the council for the next ensuing fiscal year (July 1 through June 30) shall be adopted by the council no later than its regular meeting in the month of June immediately proceeding said fiscal year. 
(d)  If the date on which any regular meeting is scheduled shall be a holiday, then such regular meeting shall be held at the same time and place on the next secular day which is not a holiday. 
(Ord. No. 181, §§ 1-3, 9-8-81; Ord. No. 266, § 1, 2-12-90) 
Sec. 2-22. - Medical and hospitalization insurance benefits. 
    Each member of the city council may, at such member's option, elect to receive the same medical and hospitalization insurance benefits on such terms and conditions and at such coverage levels as are established from time to time by the city and the provider or providers of such medical and hospitalization benefits for general city employees. The receipt of such benefits by a member of the city council is subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  On or before the day on which a city council member signs up for such benefits, such member will pay to the city a sum equal to two months' premiums for said coverage. The days on which such sign up is permitted are those established by the provider or providers of such benefits. 
(2)  After signing up for such benefits, the city council member shall thereafter pay to the city the monthly premium for said coverage as established by the provider or providers of such benefits. Said monthly premium shall be paid on or before the first day of the month following the sign up day and shall be paid on or before the first day of each month thereafter. 
(3)  The city council member shall, in addition, be liable for and pay any other costs or expenses charged to the city by any provider in connection with the provision of such medical and hospitalization benefits and, upon presentation of a bill therefor, shall pay same within ten days of the date thereof. 
(4)  If the city has not received from a city council member any sum due as provided in subsections (1) through (3) above, the city manager shall forthwith terminate such medical and hospitalization insurance coverage for such city council member and shall advise the city council member of such termination. Any sums due and owing to the city as of such date shall be paid by the city council member forthwith. 
(Ord. No. 272, § 1, 8-27-90) 
Sec. 2-23. - Medical and hospitalization benefits; former city councilmembers. 
    Any former member of the city council who has served one or more full terms after November 1, 1994, may elect to receive the same medical and hospitalization insurance benefits on the same terms and conditions and at the same coverage levels as provided to city councilmembers by section 2-22 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 329, § 1, 12-15-97) 
Secs. 2-24-2-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- General provisions affecting officers of the city, Ch. 4. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 

Secs. 2-41-2-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq. 

Secs. 2-151-2-251. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Downtown development authority, § 6-21 et seq.; parks and recreation advisory board, § 11-21 et seq.; planning and commission, § 13-21 et seq.; zoning board of appeals, App. A, Art. 22. 
State Law reference- Standards of conduct and ethics, MCL 15.341 et seq.; open meeting act, MCL 15.261 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-252-2-273. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICERS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to create a local officers compensation commission, MCL 117.5c. 

Sec. 2-274. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a local officers compensation commission whose principal duty shall be to determine the salaries of all local elected officials. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 1, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 
Sec. 2-275. - Membership, eligibility. 
(a)  The local officers compensation commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of the city and shall be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the council. 
(b)  No member or employee of the legislative, judicial or executive branch of any level of government or any members of the immediate family of such member or employee shall be eligible to be a member of the local officers compensation commission. 
(Ord. No. 122, §§ 2, 4, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 
Sec. 2-276. - Terms. 
    The terms of office shall be five years, except the members first appointed shall each be individually appointed to the following terms: one for one year, one for two years, one for three years, one for four years, and one for five years. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 3, 6-23-75) 
Sec. 2-277. - Appointment, vacancies. 
    The members shall be appointed before October first of the year in which the vacancy occurs. When vacancies occur during the term, the appointment shall be for the unexpired term. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 3, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(a). 
Sec. 2-278. - Determination of salaries; rejection by legislative resolution; effective date; existing salary; expenses. 
    The local officers' compensation commission shall determine the salaries of local elected officials which determination shall be the salaries unless the council by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the council reject them. The determinations of the commission shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the city clerk unless rejected by the council. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of city business and accounted for to the city. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 5, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(b). 
Sec. 2-279. - Meetings and time of determination; quorum; chairman; session days; compensation and expenses. 
    The local officers' compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in every odd-numbered year and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. A majority of the members of the commission constitute a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. The commission shall take no action or make any determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. The commission shall elect a chairman from among its members. "Session days" means any calendar day on which the commission meets and a quorum is present. The members of the commission shall receive no compensation, but they shall en entitled to their actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 5, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(c). 
Sec. 2-280. - Compensation procedure. 
    The procedure for establishing the compensation of elected officials may be changed by charter amendment or revision. 
(Ord. No. 122, § 5, 6-23-75) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 117.5c(d). 
Secs. 2-281-2-380. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASING 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-381-2-400. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PURCHASING DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 2-401. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
(1)  Purchasing agent or agent means the city manager. 
(2)  Contract includes contracts for services, subject to the exclusions mentioned in this division, and shall include any type of service; lease for grounds, buildings, offices, or maintenance of equipment, machinery, and other city-owned personal property. The term "contract" shall not include professional and other contract services which may be unique and not subject to competition. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
DIVISION 3. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-402. - General purchasing policy. 
(a)  It is the intent of this policy to provide for competitive pricing involved in all purchases and contracts, except as specifically provided for in this division. The purchasing agent shall prepare rules concerning purchasing for the city. 
(1)  Transactions less than $5,000.00. The purchasing agent, subject to budgetary appropriations, is authorized to make purchases of materials and equipment and contract for labor or materials in an amount not to exceed $5,000.00, without further approval of the city council. 
    Except for those situations requiring the need for sealed bids, the purchasing agent, shall consider all circumstances surrounding the purchase to be made or the service to be provided. If it is in the best interest of the city, the purchasing agent shall deal with sources within the city. 
a.  Quotations. The purchasing agent shall secure or cause to be secured quotations from no less than two sources in all transactions involving expenditures of $2,500.00 or more and less than $5,000.00. The purchasing agent shall maintain a written record of the quotations received. 
b.  Other. Transactions involving expenditures less than $2,500.00 may be authorized by the purchasing agent in such manner and from such source as the purchasing agent may determine. 
(2)  Transactions of $5,000.00 or more. The purchasing agent shall secure sealed bids in all transactions involving an expenditure of $5,000.00 or more. 
a.  Sealed bids shall not be required in the following instances: 
1.  Where the subject of the purchase or contract is other than a public work or improvement and the product or material to be transacted for is not competitive in nature, provided that in no instance shall such product or material be transacted for without prior council approval. 
2.  The city council may, at the request of the city manager, authorize the city manager to negotiate a contract for the purchase of any product, material or service with a provider of such product, material or service without regard to the requirements of this section relative to purchases where the city council finds: 
i.  Due to circumstances beyond the control of the city, the market for such product, material or service is not competitive even though such product, material or service is normally competitive in nature; and 
ii.  The economic interests of the city are best served by negotiating a contract with a provider of the product, material or service without requesting sealed bids. 
3.  In the employment of professional services, provided that in no instance shall such professional service be contracted for without prior council approval. 
4.  If the city elects to use city personnel. 
(b)  Sealed bid requirements. 
(1)  Sealed bids shall be required by the purchasing agent by mailing a copy of the specifications or requirements to such qualified vendors as may be known to the purchasing agent or the agent's designee, and by filing a copy of the request with the office of the city clerk. 
(2)  Unless fixed by the council, the purchasing agent shall prescribe the amount of any security to be deposited with any bid and, in the case of construction contracts, the amounts of labor and materials or performance bond to be required of the successful bidder. Such security shall be in the form of a certified or cashier's check or bond written by a surety company authorized to do business in the state. 
(3)  Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place designated in the bid notice. Bids shall be opened by either the purchasing agent, the city clerk or their designee and at least one other city employee. Immediately following the opening, the bids shall be examined, tabulated, and made available for public inspection. 
(4)  The tabulation of the bids shall be submitted to the council at the next regular council meeting. The council in its discretion may accept the lowest bid, reject any or all bids, or determine the lowest bid to be unsatisfactory and award to the next lowest competent bidder. In determining the lowest bid, the council shall consider the bona fide business location of the bidder. If the lowest bidder is not located within the city limits, (and the lowest bid of the bidders located within the city limits does not exceed that of the otherwise lowest bidder by more than five percent), then the council may award the contract to such local bidder. 
(5)  If in the council's discretion, the award is not made to the lowest bidder, the resolution awarding the contract shall state the reasons for not accepting the low bid. 
(6)  After the opening of bids, such bids may not be withdrawn without forfeiture of the bid deposit. Deposits of security accompanying bids shall be retained until the contract is awarded and signed, excepting that deposits from bidders not awarded the contract within 72 hours following council action. If any successful bidder fails or refuses to enter into the contract awarded within ten days after being notified of such award, or should they file any bond required within the same time, the deposit accompanying their bid shall be forfeited to the city and the council may, in its discretion, award the contract to the next lowest competent bidder. 
(c)  The term "transaction amount," as used in this division, shall mean the lowest quote or bidder having qualifications to perform the work which are satisfactory to the council. The lowest quote or bidder shall be determined based on an adjusted bid or quote tabulation which shall be prepared in the following manner: 
(1)  To the bid or quote of any bidder which is neither a Swartz Creek-based business nor an area-based business shall be added an amount equal to five percent of the bid or $2,500.00, whichever is less. 
(2)  To the bid or quote of any bidder which is an area-based business shall be added an amount equal to three percent of the bid or quote or $2,500.00, whichever is less; provided, however, that if no bid or quote is received from a Swartz Creek-based business, no additional amount shall be added to the bid or quote of an area-based business. 
(3)  "Swartz Creek-based business" shall be interpreted to mean a business registered with the county clerk or a corporation registered with the state having a business address within the city limits which pays real and/or personal property taxes levied by the city. 
(4)  The term "area-based business" shall be interpreted to mean a business other than a Swartz Creek-based business registered with the county clerk or a corporation registered with the state having a business address within the Swartz Creek School District which pays real and/or personal property taxes levied by the Swartz Creek Community Schools. 
(5)  If 25 percent or more of a contract for construction or other services is to be subcontracted by an Swartz Creek-based business bidder to a non-city-based business or businesses, or by an area-based business bidder to a non-area-based business or businesses, the adjusted bid or quote shall be calculated by applying the provisions of subsections (1) and (2) within this [sub]section [(c)] separately to each portion of the contract based on the status of the contractor or subcontractor performing that portion of the contract as an Swartz Creek-based or area-based business. 
(6)  Preference shall be given to registered members of the Swartz Creek Area Chamber of Commerce for all products and services that do not require bids or quotes. Preference for such membership shall also be given in the event of bids or quotes within one percent or $1,000.00, whichever is less. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00; Ord. No. 436 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
Sec. 2-403. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No contract or purchase shall be subdivided to avoid the requirements of this division. 
(b)  Employees of the city are expressly prohibited from accepting, directly or indirectly, from any person, business or organization any gift (including money, tangible or intangible personal property, food, beverage, loan, promise, service, or entertainment) for the benefit of personnel or the city, if it may reasonably be inferred that the person, business or organization: 
(1)  Seeks to influence action of an official nature or seeks to affect the performance or nonperformance of an official duty, or 
(2)  Has an interest that may be substantially affected directly or indirectly by the performance or nonperformance of an official duty. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 2-404. - Inspection of material. 
    The responsibility for the inspection and acceptance of all materials, supplies, and equipment shall rest with the purchasing agent, unless such responsibility has been delegated to a department head. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 2-405. - Emergency purchases. 
    If an emergency or an apparent emergency endangering the public peace, health and/or safety of the city should arise, and the delay of established purchasing procedures would vitally affect the welfare of the city, the purchasing agent, finance officer, or any department head may purchase directly any supplies, materials, or equipment that the department head deems to be immediately necessary. Within three working days from the time of purchase, the purchaser shall file in writing with the purchasing agent a detailed explanation of the necessity for any purchases, in addition to a request for such purchases. If the emergency transaction is $5,000.00 or more, the purchasing agent shall submit the statement to the council no later than its next regular meeting before payment thereof may be authorized. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 2-406. - Cooperative purchases. 
    The use of bulk purchasing programs such as the state's extended purchasing program and joining together with area municipalities to secure bids or quotations for goods or services is encouraged. The use of any such source, which conducted a bona fide price competition, will be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance with respect to soliciting bids or quotes. Bids as above mentioned in section 2-402(a)(2) will be presented for council approval. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
Sec. 2-407. - Sale of property. 
    Whenever any city property, real or personal, is no longer needed for corporate or public purposes, the same may be offered for sale in accordance with the restrictions established by section 13.3 of the Charter, provided that utility plants and property may be disposed of only in accordance with section 15.8 of the Charter. 
(Ord. No. 351, § 1, 2-14-00) 
Secs. 2-408-2-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - COST RECOVERY 
DIVISION 1. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENTS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 

Sec. 2-501. - Findings and purpose. 
    The city recognizes that a significant potential exists for police, fire and rescue responses to incidents involving the release or threatened release of hazardous materials. Such incidents create a great likelihood of personal injury and property damage. The control and abatement of such incidents places a significant financial and operational burden upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue services. This cost recovery mechanism is necessary in order to offset the high cost associated with these hazardous materials incidents. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 2-502. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
(2)  Emergency response. The providing, sending or using of police, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services by the city by a fire authority of which the city is a member, or by an individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city or the state to a building, premises, or vehicle within the city at which a hazardous materials release has occurred or is threatened. 
(3)  Expenses of an emergency response. The direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city by any fire authority of which the city is a member, or by a person or corporation, or assisting governmental agencies, operating at either the request or direction of the city or a fire authority of which the city is a member in making an emergency response to the incident, including the cost of providing of police, firefighting, rescue services, containment and abatement of all hazardous conditions at the scene of the incident. In addition, these costs include all of the salaries and wages of the city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, and all costs connected with the administration of the incident relating to any prosecution of the person or persons responsible. These expenses also include all costs of items such as disposable materials and supplies used during the incident; rental or leasing of equipment used for the specific response, the placement of equipment contaminated beyond reuse or repair during a specific response; special technical services and laboratory costs; and services or supplies purchased for a specific evacuation. 
(4)  Hazardous material. Any substance which if spilled, leaked or otherwise released from its container, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized representative, is dangerous or harmful to the environment or human or animal life, health or safety, or is obnoxious by reason or odor, or is determined by the fire chief of his authorized representative to constitute a danger or threat to the public health, safety or welfare. Such hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, explosives, pyrotechnics, flammable gas, flammable compressed gas, nonflammable compressed gas, flammable liquid, combustible liquid, oxidizing material, poisonous gas, poisonous liquid, poisonous solid, irritating material, etiological material, radioactive material, corrosive material, or liquefied petroleum gas. 
(5)  Hazardous material release. The spilling leaking, expulsion, separation, dispersal, or other release of a hazardous material from its container. 
(6)  Owner. The title holder or any authorized agent or attorney, purchaser, devisee, fiduciary of a person having vested or contingent interest in the property, container or vehicle in question. 
(7)  Premises. Any lot or parcel of land, exclusive of buildings, but including parking lots, tourist camps, trailer camps, airports, stockyards, junkyards, wharfs, piers, public roadways and any other place where a hazardous material container is located however owned, used or occupied. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 2-503. - Liability for expense of an emergency operation. 
(a)  Person responsible. The owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition of the building, premise or vehicle, or the container from which the hazardous material is released, and the person causing such release. 
(b)  Charge against person. The expense of a hazardous material emergency response will be a charge against the person responsible for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt owed by that person to the city and is due to and collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an express or implied contract. 
(c)  Cost recovery schedule. The City of Swartz Creek City Council will, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included in a hazardous material incident emergency response. Such schedule will be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department, and will be amended or updated from time to time as necessary. 
(d)  Billing. The fire chief, the chief of police, the city manager, or any fire authority of which the city is a member, or their designees, may within ten days of receiving itemized costs, in full or in part, incurred for any emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated in this division. The bill requires full payment within 30 days from the date of service. 
(e)  Inclusion of penal fine. Any court having jurisdiction over any felony, misdemeanor or civil infraction arising out of an incident involving an emergency response, upon a determination of guilt for such felony or misdemeanor, or determination of responsibility in such civil infraction, may make charges imposed in this division a part of any sentence or condition of probation imposed on such person in addition to any other penalties, fines or costs authorized by the court. The court may also enter a civil judgment in favor of the city for such charges. 
(f)  Failure to pay. Any failure to pay for the expense of a hazardous materials incident emergency response within 30 days of service of a bill will be a default. In case of a default, the city may commence a civil suit to recover such expenses plus any additional costs allowed by law. 
(g)  Hardship. The city may waive any or all costs imposed under this division at its own discretion. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 2-504. - Severability. 
    The phrases, sentences, sections and provisions of this division are severable and the finding that any portion of this division that is unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable will not detract from or affect the enforceability of the remainder of this division. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Sec. 2-505. - Repealing clause. 
    All ordinances or other parts of ordinances in conflict with this division are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 316, § 1, 12-4-95) 
Secs. 2-506-2-600. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ALCOHOL/EMERGENCY RESPONSE 

Sec. 2-601. - Findings and purpose. 
    The city finds that a significant number of traffic arrests and traffic accidents in the city involve drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance. In addition, the city finds that there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage in traffic accidents involving drivers who were operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance. Also, the city finds that a significant number of other violations of city ordinance or state law involve incidents where the person responsible for such incident was under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance. And further, that there is a greater likelihood of personal injury and property damage in incidents involving persons who are under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance. As a result, an additional operational and financial burden is placed upon the city's police, firefighting and rescue services by persons who are violating a city ordinance or state law while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance. It is the purpose of this division to pass a portion of that cost burden on to the person who is violating a city ordinance or state law while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance and proximately caused an emergency response. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 2-602. - Definitions. 
    When used in this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
(a)  Emergency response: 
(1)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services by the city, or by a public or private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an incident resulting in an accident involving one or more motor vehicles operated by one or more drivers who were under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance; or 
(2)  The providing, sending and/or utilizing of police, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services by the city, or by a public or private individual or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city, to an incident resulting in a traffic stop and arrest of a driver who was operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage and/or a controlled substance by a police officer; or 
(b)  Expense of an emergency response. The direct and reasonable costs incurred by the city or by a public or private person or corporation operating at the request or direction of the city in the course of an emergency response to the incident, including the costs of providing police, firefighting, emergency medical and/or rescue services at the scene of the incident. These costs further include all of the salaries and wages of city personnel responding to the incident, all salaries and wages of city personnel engaged in investigation, supervision and report preparation, all costs incurred by the city in connection with said incident including all costs connected with the administration and provision of all chemical analyses of the amount of alcohol in the person's breath, blood or urine, and all costs related to any prosecution of the person causing the incident. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1, 11-13-95) 
Sec. 2-603. - Liability for expense of an emergency response. 
(a)  Person responsible. A person is liable for the expense of an emergency response if, while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and a controlled substance, such person's operation of a motor vehicle or other conduct proximately causes any incident resulting in an emergency response. 
(b)  Presumptions. For the purposes of this division, a person is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage and a controlled substance, when his or her physical or mental abilities are impaired to a degree that he or she no longer has the ability to operate a motor vehicle or control his or her conduct with the caution characteristics of a sober person or ordinary prudence. Further, it shall be presumed that a person was operating a motor vehicle or otherwise acting in violation of law while under the influence of an alcoholic beverage if a chemical analysis of his or her blood, urine, or breath indicates that the amount of alcohol in his or her blood was in excess of seven one-hundredths of one percent. 
(c)  Charge against person. The expense of an emergency response shall be a charge against the person responsible for the expenses under this division. The charge constitutes a debt owed by that person to the city and is due to and collectible by the city in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under an express or implied contract. 
(d)  Cost recovery schedule. The city board shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of the costs included in an emergency response. Such schedule shall be available to the public from either the city clerk or the police department. 
(e)  Billing. The chief of police, or his or her designee, may, within ten days of receiving itemized costs, or any part thereof, incurred for an emergency response, submit a bill for these costs by first class mail or personal service to the person liable for the expenses as enumerated under this division. The bill(s) shall require full payment within 30 days from the date of service. 
(f)  Inclusion in penal fine. Any court having jurisdiction over any felony, misdemeanor or civil infraction arising out of an incident involving an emergency response, upon a determination of guilt for such felony or misdemeanor, or determination of responsibility in such civil infraction, may make the charges imposed hereunder a part of any sentence or condition of probation imposed on such person in addition to any other penalties, fines or costs authorized by law term. Said court may also enter a civil judgment in favor of the city for such charges. 
(g)  Failure to pay. Any failure by the person described in this division as responsible to pay for the expense of an emergency response within 30 days of service of a bill therefor be considered a default. In case of default, the city may commence civil suit to recover such expense plus any costs allowed by law. 
(h)  Hardship. The city board may waive all or any part of the cost imposed hereunder where it determines that payment of said cost will impose a financial hardship on the person responsible to the extent that such person or his or her legal dependents will be deprived of necessary food or shelter. 
(Ord. No. 310, § 1, 11-13-95) 
Secs. 2-604-2-630. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS 

Sec. 2-631. - Prohibition of marijuana establishments. 
    No marijuana establishments, as defined by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (PA - of 2018), are permitted within the boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 437 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
Chapter 3 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt animal control ordinance, MCL 287.290; crimes relating to animals and birds, MCL 750.49 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Keeping of certain animals prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep, harbor, own or in any way possess within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek unless specifically authorized by an act of federal, state, or city government: 
(1)  Any warm-blooded, carnivorous or omnivorous, wild or exotic animals, dangerous or undomesticated animals which are not of a species customarily used as an ordinary household pet, but one which would ordinarily be confined in a zoo, a farm, or one which would ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or property damage (including, but not limited to, pigs, horses, sheep, cattle, poultry (except as enabled by the city), reptiles, goats, primates, raccoons, skunks, foxes, and wild and exotic cats; but excluding fowl, ferrets and small rodents of varieties used for laboratory purposes). 
(2)  Any animal having poisonous bites. 
(3)  Any person in possession, on the date that this section becomes effective, of a State of Michigan Department of Natural Resources Possession Permit or Game Breeder's License, or Department of the Interior U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Federal Fish and Wildlife Licenses/Permit, for an animal otherwise prohibited by this section, shall be allowed to keep, harbor, own, or possess the animal(s) specified in said permit and/or license. Said permit and/or license shall not be amended to include additional animal(s) prohibited by this section. 
(4)  Any farms existing and in possession of any prohibited livestock, on the date that this section becomes effective, shall be allowed to retain said agricultural livestock or similar animals as protected under the Right To Farm Act. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 2, 1-25-88; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 5-11-09; Ord. No. 430 , § 1, 8-22-16) 
Note- See editor's note at Art. II, Div. 2. 
Sec. 3-2. - Keeping of specific fowl varieties permitted. 
    Chickens and ducks may be raised and kept by occupants of single family dwellings under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The property owner shall obtain a zoning permit from the City of Swartz Creek prior to possessing any chicken or duck. 
(2)  Chickens and ducks shall be limited, in any combination, to six for parcels 20,000 to 43,560 (one acre) square feet in size, with an additional prorated allowance for three animals for each additional acre of land area. Hatchlings intended for legal onsite residence as adults are exempt from this provision. 
(3)  No roosters (male adult chickens) may be kept. 
(4)  Chickens and ducks are not allowed in a residence, porch, or attached garage. Hatchlings intended for legal onsite residence as adults are exempt from this provision. 
(5)  Chickens and ducks shall be confined to the rear and side yards of parcels. 
(6)  The coop shall be a structure that is fixed in place and designed to discourage rodents and wild birds from entering. The facilities shall be constructed of durable materials reflective of the primary structure and should keep dogs, cats, and other animals from gaining entry. 
(7)  The coop and enclosures shall be 15 feet from any property line or the respective structure setback that is otherwise applicable, whichever is greater. All coops shall be in the rear or side yards of the parcel and be at least 20 feet from a neighboring occupied structure. 
(8)  Sale of poultry products shall not be permitted in any residential zoning district or from any parcel used primarily for residential use. 
(9)  Minimum space and housing requirements for chickens and ducks are as follows (excluding required setbacks, front yard, dwelling space, parking, sloped grounds greater than 25 percent, water, and wetland): 
Indoor (coop/closure) usable floor space per animal: one and one-half square feet. 
Outdoor usable space (fence enclosed) per animal: 64 square feet. 
( Ord. No. 430 , § 1, 8-22-16) 
Secs. 3-3-3-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dog law, MCL 287.261 et seq.; rules for control of rabies and the disposition of nonhuman agents carrying disease, including rabid animals, MCL 333.5111. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 3-21. - Owning, keeping, etc., barking dog prohibited; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or have charge of any dog, which by loud, frequent and persistent barking, howling or yelping shall cause serious annoyance or disturbance to the neighborhood in which the dog is kept or harbored or to persons passing upon the streets and highways. 
(b)  It is intended that this section shall not be construed to interfere with the owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of a dog in the city where such dog indulges in occasional or infrequent barking, howling or yelping. It is understood and recognized that any dog, no matter how well kept or trained, is apt to bark, howl or yelp occasionally, but this provision is designed to take care of situations where a dog is kept on premises in the city and by its loud, frequent and persistent barking creates a nuisance in and to the neighborhood in which the dog is kept. 
(Ord. No. 149, § I, 6-26-79) 
Sec. 3-22. - Running at large. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of any dog to suffer or permit the dog to run at large within the city. 
(b)  What constitutes. A dog shall be deemed to be running at large, within the meaning of this section, when the dog shall wander unrestrained on any streets, alleys, parks or public places within the city or upon any private property within the city other than that of the person owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of such dog. A dog shall be considered restrained if the person has the dog on a leash no longer than eight feet. 
(c)  Seizure by police officers. It shall be lawful for any police officer of the city to seize any dog running at large in the city in violation of the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 149, §§ II-IV, 6-26-78) 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15. 
Sec. 3-23. - Keeping dog that destroys or trespasses on other's property prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or have charge of any dog, either licensed or unlicensed, that by the destruction of property or trespassing on the property of another person, other than the person owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of such dog, shall become a nuisance in the vicinity where so kept. 
(Ord. No. 149, § V, 6-26-78) 
Sec. 3-24. - Creating unsanitary, obnoxious, or other unsanitary conditions where dog is kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of any dog to collect, confine, keep or harbor such dog in a structure, pen, coop, yard or otherwise so as to create an unsanitary, unwholesome, malodorous or other obnoxious or unclean condition. 
(b)  Any person owning, keeping, harboring or having charge of any dog shall keep the yard, pen, shelter or building provided and maintained for the confinement of such dog, or that is used for the housing, harboring or keeping of such dog, clean by removing from the premises all manure and waste matter from which odors may arise or which may act as vermin harborage. Such cleaning shall occur at least once each day. 
(Ord. No. 149, §§ VII, VIII, 6-26-78) 
Sec. 3-25. - Keeping or harboring specified. 
    Any person allowing a dog habitually to remain and be lodged within his house, store, building, enclosure or premises shall be considered as keeping the same within the meaning of this article. 
(Ord. No. 149, § IX, 6-26-78) 
Sec. 3-26. - Prima facie evidence of ownership. 
    In all prosecutions for a violation of this article the records of the county treasurer's office showing the name of the owner, the license number to whom any license was issued and the license tag affixed to the collar or harness of the dog showing a corresponding number shall be prima facie evidence of ownership of any dog. 
(Ord. No. 149, § X, 6-26-78) 
Secs. 3-27-3-35. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VICIOUS DOGS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 246, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 1988, provided for the repeal of Ord. No. 239, §§ 1-10, adopted Nov. 23, 1987, which pertains to vicious dogs. Sections 3 through 9 of said Ord. No. 246 to be added as Ch. 3, Art. III, have been redesignated by the editor as Art. II, Div. 2, §§ 3-36-3-42, for purposes of classification. Also, section 2, which did not specifically amend the Code has been included herein as § 3-1, at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 3-36. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this division "vicious dog" is defined to mean: 
(1)  Any dog with a propensity, tendency or disposition to attack, to cause injury or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or other domestic animals without provocation; or 
(2)  Any dog which has previously attacked or bitten a human being or other domestic animal other than under the type of circumstances that would be justifiable; or 
(3)  Any dog which has behaved in such a manner that the owner thereof knows or should reasonably know that the dog is possessed of tendencies to attack or bite human beings or other domestic animals other than under the type of circumstances that would be justifiable. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 3, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-37. - Keeping. 
    The keeping of vicious dogs will be subject to the following standards: 
(1)  Leash and muzzle. No person shall permit a vicious dog to go outside its kennel or pen unless such dog is securely leashed with a leash no longer than four feet in length. No person shall permit such a dog to be kept on a chain, rope or other type of leash outside its kennel or pen unless a person is in physical control of the leash. Such dogs may not be leashed to inanimate objects such as trees, posts, buildings, etc. In addition, all such dogs on a leash outside the animal's kennel must be muzzled by a muzzling device sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals. 
(2)  Confinement. All vicious dogs shall be securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen or kennel, except when leashed and muzzled as above provided. Such pen, kennel or structure must have secure sides and a secure top attached to sides. All structures used to confine such dogs must be locked with a key or combination lock to when such animals are within the structure. Such structure must have a secure bottom or floor attached to the sides of the pen or the sides of the pen must be embedded in ground to a depth of no less than two feet. All structures erected to house such dogs must comply with all zoning and building regulations of the city. All such structures must be adequately lighted and ventilated and kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(3)  Confinement indoors. No vicious dog may be kept on a porch, patio or in any part of a house or structure that would allow the dog to exit such building on its own violation. In addition, no such animal may be kept in a house or structure where window screens or screen doors are the only obstacle preventing the dog from exiting the structure. 
(4)  Signs. All owners, keepers or harborers of vicious dogs within the city shall within ten days of the effective date of this division display in a prominent place on their premises a sign easily readable by the public using the words "beware of dog." A similar sign is required to be posted on the kennel or pen of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 4, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-38. - Reporting requirements. 
    All owners, keepers or harborers of a vicious dog must within one day of the incident, report the following information in writing to the City of Swartz Creek city clerk as required hereinafter: 
(1)  The removal from the city or death of a vicious dog; 
(2)  The birth of offspring of a vicious dog; 
(3)  The new address of a vicious dog should the owner move within the corporate city limits; 
(4)  The dog is on the loose, has been stolen or has attacked a person. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 5, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-39. - Failure to comply. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or harborer of a vicious dog within the City of Swartz Creek to fail to comply with the requirements and conditions set forth in this division. Any dog found to be the subject of a violation of this division shall be subject to immediate seizure and impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 6, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-40. - Violation and penalties. 
    Any person violating or permitting the violation of any provision of this division shall upon conviction be fined a sum [not less than] not more than $500.00. In addition to the fine imposed the court may sentence the defendant to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a violation of this division continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing penalties, any person who violates this division shall pay all expenses, including shelter, food handling, veterinary care and testimony necessitated by the enforcement of this division. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 7, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-41. - Order to show cause, killing or confining of dog. 
    A district court magistrate or a judge of the district court shall issue a summons to show cause why a dog should not be killed, upon a sworn complaint that any of the following exist: 
(1)  A dog, licensed or unlicensed, has destroyed property or habitually caused damage by trespassing on the property of a person who is not the owner; 
(2)  A dog, licensed or unlicensed, has attacked or bitten a person; 
(3)  A dog has shown vicious habits or has molested a person when lawfully on a public right-of-way or in a public place; 
(4)  A dog, licensed or unlicensed, has run at-large contrary to city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 8, 1-25-88) 
Sec. 3-42. - Hearing in district court. 
    After a hearing the district court judge may either order the dog killed, or confined to the premises of the owner. Failure to comply with the order [of] a district court judge may result in the owner of the dog against which an order has been entered being punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 90 days, or both such fine or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 246, § 9, 1-25-88) 
Chapter 4 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate construction, erection, alteration, etc., of buildings, § 3.1(b)(2)(g). 
Cross reference- Community development, Ch. 6; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8; planning, Ch. 13; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; subdivisions, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 19; zoning board of appeals, App. A, Art. 22; administration and enforcement of zoning, App. A, Art. 32. 
State Law reference- State Construction Code Act, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 4-1-4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING, MECHANICAL, ELECTRICAL AND PLUMBING CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 403, § 1, adopted July 27, 2009, effective September 1, 2009, amended the title of Art. II to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II was titled. "Building Code." See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 4-21. - Adoption of Michigan Building Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Building Code, in accordance with Act No. 230 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 125.1501 et seq.), as amended, the code enforcement official of the city is hereby designated as the enforcing agent to discharge the responsibilities of the city under such act. The city hereby assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of such act throughout its corporate limits. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 1, 12-9-74) 
Sec. 4-22. - Building permit. 
    No building, structure or part thereof shall be erected, converted, repaired, altered, or enlarged until a building permit has been obtained by the owner or his agent as provided in Article XVIII [section 32.03] of the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 115, § 4, 12-9-74) 
Sec. 4-23. - Adoption of Michigan Mechanical Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Mechanical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Mechanical Code Official of the City of Swartz Creek is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Swartz Creek under 1972 PA 230, State of Michigan. The City of Swartz Creek assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 2, 7-27-2009, eff. 9-1-2009 ) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 403, § 2, adopted July 27, 2009, effective September 27, 2009, added provisions designated as § 4-23, titled, "Adoption of Michigan Mechanical Code." 
Sec. 4-24. - Adoption of Michigan Electrical Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Electrical Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Electrical Code Official of the City of Swartz Creek is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Swartz Creek under 1972 PA 230, State of Michigan. The City of Swartz Creek assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 2, 7-27-09, eff. 9-1-09 ) 
Sec. 4-25. - Adoption of Michigan Plumbing Code. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Plumbing Code, in accordance with Section 8b(6) of 1972 PA 230, the Plumbing Code Official of the City of Swartz Creek is hereby designated as the enforcing agency to discharge the responsibility of the City of Swartz Creek under 1972 PA 230, State of Michigan. The City of Swartz Creek assumes responsibility for the administration and enforcement of said Act throughout its corporate limits. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 2, 7-27-09, eff. 9-1-09 ) 
Sec. 4-26. - Violations. 
    Any violations of the Building Code shall be municipal civil infractions and shall be subject to the sanctions and penalties provided for in Chapter 1, Article II of this Code of Ordinances. Any violations of the Mechanical Code, the Electrical Code and/or the Plumbing Code shall be misdemeanors and shall be subject to the penalties and sanctions provided for in each such code. 
( Ord. No. 403, § 2, 7-27-09, eff. 9-1-09 ) 
Secs. 4-27-4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 

Sec. 4-31. - Adoption of Property Maintenance Code. 
    The city hereby adopts the International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, as published by the International Code Council. 
( Ord. No. 413, § 1, 3-10-14, eff. 5-1-14 ) 
Sec. 4-32. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
(a)  Code official shall mean the city building official, or any designee of the city building official. 
(b)  Jurisdiction or city shall mean the City of Swartz Creek. 
(c)  Structure shall mean any building or structure for which a permit must be obtained for construction under any ordinance or code of the city. 
( Ord. No. 413, § 1, 3-10-14, eff. 5-1-14 ) 
Sec. 4-33. - Modifications and amendments to Code. 
    The following sections and subsections of the International Property Maintenance Code are deleted and replaced with the following: 
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of the City of Swartz Creek, referred to as the Code. 
101.2 Scope. The provisions of the Code shall apply to all existing and future structures in the city and shall constitute minimum requirements and standards for such premises, structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating, sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance, the responsibility of owners, operators and occupants, the occupancy of existing structures and premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties. 
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the Michigan Residential, Building, Plumbing, and Mechanical Code, the State Electrical Code, and the International Fire Code. Nothing in this Code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the City Zoning Ordinance. 
103.5 Fees and fines. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this Code and the fines charged for failure to comply with this Code shall be those adopted by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time by the township board of trustees. 
302.4 Weeds. This section is deleted. See Article II of Chapter 20 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek for provisions regarding weeds, grasses and brush. 
304.14 Screens. Insert May 1 through September 30. 
602.3 Heat supply. Insert October 1 through April 30. 
602.4 Occupiable work space. Insert October 1 through 30. 
( Ord. No. 413, § 1, 3-10-14, eff. 5-1-14 ) 
Secs. 4-34-4-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RENTAL PROPERTY INSPECTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 421 , § 1, adopted July 13, 2015, set out provisions adding Art. IV, §§ 4-31-4-45. To preserve the existing §§ 4-31-4-33 (Art. III), and at the editor's discretion, said provisions have been included herein as Art. IV, §§ 4-41-4-55. 

Sec. 4-41. - Purpose of standards. 
    The city recognizes a compelling interest in establishing standards for the maintenance of sanitary and safe residential rental structures in the city as an important factor for the general health, safety and welfare of all of its citizens. This article is designed to promote the continued maintenance of quality and safe rental properties and to enhance and maintain property values. 
    This article supplements and augments the existing International Property Maintenance Code in protecting and promoting the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Swartz Creek by requiring the registration of all rental dwelling units in the city. This registration, combined with regular systematic inspections, will help prevent overcrowding, the incidence of communicable diseases, and will aid in the enforcement of the International Property Maintenance Code, which sets minimum allowable standards for adequate maintenance of habitable dwellings. This article is not intended nor shall it be used for the purpose of including the city in civil disputes between rental owners and tenants involving, but not limited to, non-payment of rent, evictions and/or personal disputes. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-42. - Definitions. 
    Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy for living purposes and having cooking facilities and sanitary facilities, including single family residences. 
    Landlord means any person who owns or controls a dwelling, dwelling unit, or rental unit and rents such unit, either personally or through a designated agent, to any person. 
    Owner means the legal title holder of a rental unit or the premises within which the rental unit is situated. 
    Rental unit means any dwelling unit or a unit containing sleeping quarters, including but not limited to hotels, motels, bed and breakfast establishments, boarding houses, sleeping rooms, residential, commercial or industrial property, including structures which are leased or rented by the owner or other person in control of such units, to any tenant, whether by day, week, month, year or any other term, except for jails, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent homes, foster homes or temporary group shelters provided by legal nonprofit agencies which are inspected, certified and/or licensed by the state. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-43. - Registration. 
    An owner or landlord shall register their rental unit at least once every three years, in accordance with the applicable inspection cycle, as follows: 
(1)  All existing rental units shall be registered within 90 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derived. 
(2)  All newly constructed rental units shall be registered prior to any use or occupancy as a rental dwelling unit. 
(3)  A new owner or landlord shall register a rental unit, which is sold, transferred or conveyed, within 30 days of the date of the closing of such sale, transfer or conveyance. 
(4)  All existing non-rental dwelling units, which are converted to rental units, shall be registered prior to the date on which the property is first occupied for rental purposes. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-44. - Applications. 
    Applications for registration shall be made in such form and in accordance with such instructions as may be provided by the building inspector designated by the city manager and shall include at least the following information: 
(1)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and/or landlord (no post office box shall be accepted). 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner's representative, if the rental property owner has opted to appoint a representative. This representative must be located within 40 miles of the premises. 
(3)  Upon registration, the owner shall be responsible for notifying the building inspector of any change of address of either the owner or owner's representative. 
    Included with the registration application shall be an agreement, signed by the owner, permitting inspections of his/her rental properties by officials or agents of the city and affirming that all tenants of the subject properties have been informed of the regulations contained in this article and of inspections of the rental properties, including common areas, by authorized city officials. All leases executed after the effective date of this article shall contain a provision requiring the tenant(s) to consent to such inspection upon notice as provided in this article. 
    An authorized city official may, with written notice, require additional information of any or all registrants in order to reasonably further the purposes of this article. 
    At the time of registration of the rental unit, there will be a prescribed fee for registration and the initial inspection, as adopted by resolution. Any unpaid registration fees shall become a lien on the property immediately and collected as an assessment pursuant to city ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-45. - Inspections. 
(a)  The building official shall cause a periodic inspection to be made of every rental unit at least once every three years, with more frequent inspections for rental units that are found to have deficiencies, said inspection frequency to be in accordance with the procedural rules adopted by the city council. Such inspection shall include a thorough examination of all parts of such rental unit and the premises connected therewith. 
(b)  The owner shall be notified of the date and time of a rental inspection via first class mail at least 30 days prior to the inspection date. Owners shall be required to provide all notices of inspection to the tenant(s) as required by law. 
(c)  Any rental unit, even though not previously scheduled for inspection, may be inspected without prior notice to the owner and/or tenant if an authorized city official has probable cause to believe that there exists on the property any condition which makes it or any portion thereof substandard or unsafe, or there is evidence that a violation of a code may exist. 
(d)  If access to a structure, premises or area for the purpose of inspection authorized by this section is refused, an authorized city official, upon showing that probable cause exists for the inspection and for the issuance of an order directing compliance with the inspection requirements of this article with respect to such rental dwelling or rental unit, may petition and obtain such order from a court which has jurisdiction. 
(e)  Except for probable cause inspections, a rental unit may only be inspected during reasonable hours upon presentation of proper identification by an authorized city official. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-46. - Standards. 
(a)  The standards used to determine rental unit and dwelling unit compliance with city codes and ordinances shall be the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted and amended by the city council. 
(b)  The building official is hereby empowered to make such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the enforcement of this article, subject, however, to the approval of the city council. When the rules and regulations made under this article have been adopted and promulgated by the building official and approved by the city council, they shall be deemed to be as complete and binding a part of the article as if such rules were specifically set forth in this article. The violation of any of such regulations so adopted shall be deemed a violation of this article. Copies of such rules and regulations shall be placed on file in the office of the city clerk for inspection by interested parties at any reasonable time. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-47. - Noncompliance with code. 
(a)  Violations not imminently dangerous. Upon inspection by an authorized city official, if a violation of a code is discovered, but the violation is deemed by the official not to be immediately dangerous to health, welfare or safety, a violation notice shall be issued to the owner. The owner shall be advised of the time period to correct the violation. 
(b)  Violations that threaten life, limb or property. If upon inspection of a rental property the authorized city official determines that a violation is of such serious nature so as to immediately threaten the health, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants thereof, the official shall demand that the violation(s) be corrected immediately and/or the rental property be vacated immediately. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-48. - Notices. 
(a)  The building inspector shall issue a written report in accordance with section 107 of the International Property Maintenance Code, noting any violations of this article or any other provision of the city's ordinances and shall provide a copy of the report to the owner or owner's representative. 
(b)  The building inspector shall direct the owner or owner's representative to correct violations within the time set forth in the report. A reasonable time for correcting violations shall be determined by the building inspector in light of the nature of the violations and all relevant circumstances, which shall not exceed 60 days, unless correction of the violation within a 60-day period is impossible due to seasonal considerations. 
(c)  Upon request of the person responsible for correcting violations, the building inspector may extend the time for correcting violations, but not to exceed an additional 30 days. 
(d)  Re-inspections of a rental property shall occur on the date specified on the violation notice, or sooner if requested by the owner and city scheduling permits such inspection. It shall be the owner's responsibility to coordinate the access to all areas of their rental properties. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be charged for each re-inspection after the first re-inspection. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-49. - Violations. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as a municipal civil infraction, subject to fines and costs identified in section 1-21 of article II of the City of Swartz Creek Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Any structure not in compliance with this article is deemed a nuisance per se. 
(c)  The building inspector, building official, code enforcement officer and any other person designated by the city manager is hereby designated as the authorized individual to issue municipal civil infraction citations or pursue any other lawful remedy for violations of this article. 
(d)  In addition to any penalties imposed by law, upon a finding of responsibility by the court for a violation of this article, the city may immediately revoke the registration and order the immediate eviction of all persons and property upon the premises until a certificate of compliance is issued by the city. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-50. - Fees. 
    The city shall, by resolution, establish the fees for registration and inspections of rental units and the city clerk shall make the fee schedule available to the public during regular office hours. Any unpaid inspection fees shall become a lien on the property and collected as delinquent property taxes as allowed by law. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-51. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of any official charged with the enforcement of this article may appeal that order or decision to the city council provided that appeal is taken no later than 20 days from the date of the order or decision being appealed. The appellant shall file with the official from whose decision such appeal is taken and with the city clerk, a notice of appeal specifying the ground therefor. The official from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the city clerk a summary report of all previous action taken. The city council may at its discretion call upon the official from whom the appeal is taken, to explain his/her action. The final disposition of such appeal shall be in the form of a resolution either reversing, modifying or affirming, wholly or partly, the decision or the determination appealed from. To this end, the city council shall have all the powers of the official from whom the appeal is taken. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-52. - Hearings. 
    The city council acting as the board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice thereof to interested parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-53. - Cost. 
    The cost of the demolition, making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure, incurred by the city to bring the property into compliance with this article shall be reimbursed to the city by the owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-54. - Lien. 
    The owner or party in interest in whose name the property appears upon the last local tax assessment records shall be notified by the assessor of the amount of the costs of the demolition, making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building, structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure by first class mail at the address shown on the records. If the owner or party in interest fails to pay the costs within 30 days after mailing by the assessor of the notice of the amount of the cost to the city, the city shall have a lien for the cost incurred to bring the property into conformance with this article. The lien for the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as provided for property tax liens under the General Property Tax Act, Act No. 206 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1893 (MCL 211.1 et seq.), as amended. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Sec. 4-55. - Separate legal action; judgment. 
    In addition to other remedies under this article, the city may bring an action against the owner of the building or structure for the full cost of the demolition, of making the building safe, or of maintaining the exterior of the building or structure or grounds adjoining the building or structure. The city shall have a lien on the property for the amount of a judgment obtained pursuant to this section. The lien provided for in this section shall not take effect until notice of the lien is filed or recorded as provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 421 , § 1, 7-13-15) 
Chapter 5 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Cemetery regulations, § 5.9. 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Authority to organize and maintain cemeteries, MCL 128.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cemetery means any cemetery owned and/or maintained by the city. 
    Burial rights means the owner of one or more lots within a city cemetery. 
    Lot means a grave site. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 1, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-2. - Scope. 
    All cemeteries owned and/or maintained by the city wheresoever situated are covered by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.1, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-3. - Prohibited interments. 
    There shall be no interment of anything other than human bodies in cemeteries. No interment of any deceased human shall be made in any other place than within cemeteries devoted to that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.2, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-4. - Sale of lots subject to rules. 
    Every lot sold is subject to the rules and regulations now in force or that may be hereafter adopted and which may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.3, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-5. - Care, upkeep reserved. 
    The city reserves the right to enter upon any grave and to perform all work necessary for the care and upkeep of all lots and graves within any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.4, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-6. - Orders and responsibilities. 
    The city shall assume no responsibility for errors in opening graves when orders are given by telephone. Orders by morticians for the opening of graves will be considered as orders from the lot owners. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.5, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-7. - Traffic ordinances. 
    The operation of motor vehicles and the presence of pedestrians within the cemetery shall be governed by the provisions of the city traffic ordinances, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 2.6, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 5-8. - Care, maintenance and operation. 
    Care, maintenance and operation of city cemeteries shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 3.1, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-9. - Rules and regulations. 
    The council may adopt rules and regulations for the control of cemeteries, for the conduct of persons therein and for the setting of charges for lots, burial spaces and other services. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 3.2, 9-9-86) 
Secs. 5-10-5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOT OWNERSHIP, SALES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 5-31. - Purchase of lots. 
    Purchase of lots in city cemeteries shall be made from the city clerk and the purchasers shall acquire only the privilege or right to make interments in one or more lots so purchased. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.1, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-32. - Burial certificate; contents. 
(a)  Ownership of one or more lots shall be evidenced by a certificate which shall be surrendered and a new certificate issued in the event of any transfer. 
(b)  The burial certificate shall bear the name of the owner or owners, the block number, lot number, the name of the cemetery and such other information as may be necessary and it shall be signed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 214, §§ 4.2, 4.3, 9-9-86) 
State Law reference- Permit for disposition of body, MCL 333.2850. 
Sec. 5-33. - Notice of transfer. 
    The city clerk shall be notified of all transfers of ownership. Upon such notification and the submission of proof of ownership, the city clerk shall issue one or more new certificates. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.4, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-34. - Lot prices. 
    Payment for lots in the city cemeteries shall be made to the city treasurer in accordance with prices established from time to time by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.5, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-35. - Deposit of sales funds. 
    All monies received by the city treasurer for sale of lots in the city cemeteries shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.6, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-36. - Burial designations. 
    The lot or grave site owner, or his legal representative, may designate at any time in writing whom he wishes to be buried in his lot or grave site. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.7, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-37. - Charges. 
    Rentals and charges for labor, services and materials furnished by the city shall be established by resolution of the council. Payment made therefor shall be to the city treasurer, who shall deposit all monies so received into the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.8, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-38. - Foundations. 
    Foundations for all heavy materials such as markers, monuments, stones, etc., shall be placed by monument companies. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 4.9, 9-9-86) 
Secs. 5-39-5-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNLAWFUL ACTS 

Sec. 5-61. - Restricted use. 
    Lots shall not be used for any other purpose other than as a place for the remains of human bodies. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.1, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-62. - Protection of flowers, trees, shrubs, etc. 
    No person shall cut, remove, injure or carry away any flowers, shrubs, trees, plants, vines or any growing thing in or from any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.2, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Vegetation generally, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 5-63. - Protection of markers, monuments, headstones, etc. 
    No person shall deface, injure, disturb, mark or write upon any marker, monument, headstone, fence or structure in any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.3, 9-9-86) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 5-64. - Protection of vases, flower pots and ornaments. 
    No person shall injure, destroy, take or carry away any vases, flower pots, or other containers or ornaments that may have been placed in cemeteries, except such as were originally brought in by the party so removing them. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.4, 9-9-86) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 5-65. - Places of entrance. 
    No person shall enter, nor shall any vehicle be propelled or driven into, any cemetery except through the established gates and entrances thereof. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.5, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-66. - Vehicle speed. 
    No vehicle shall be driven in any cemetery at any time at a speed greater than is reasonable and proper under all circumstances and in no event in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.6, 9-9-86) 
Sec. 5-67. - Disorderly conduct. 
    No person shall conduct themselves in a disorderly manner within the limits of any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.7, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Offenses against public peace, § 10-161 et seq. 
State Law reference- Disorderly person, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 5-68. - Food and beverages prohibited. 
    No person shall take any refreshments, food or alcoholic liquor of any kind within the boundary of any cemetery, except such food and beverage, excluding any alcoholic liquor of any kind, as may be required by workers engaged therein. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.8, 9-9-86) 
State Law reference- Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.1 et seq. 
Sec. 5-69. - Firearms prohibited. 
    No person shall take any firearms or explosives within the boundary of any cemetery. However, military or other organizations may carry arms therein for the purpose of firing a salute over the grave at the burial of a member of their organization or upon observance of memorial services. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.9, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Weapons generally, § 10-211 et seq. 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq. 
Sec. 5-70. - Trespassing. 
    Walking or driving through any cemetery grounds to property or land outside of any cemetery for the purpose of saving time or distance is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.10, 9-9-86) 
Cross reference- Trespassing generally, § 10-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 
Sec. 5-71. - Rubbish. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave or scatter rubbish within the confines of any cemetery. 
(Ord. No. 214, § 5.11, 9-9-86) 
State Law reference- Littering, MCL 752.901 et seq. 
Chapter 6 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance affecting any specific urban renewal project saved from repeal, § 1-6(12); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; special assessments, Ch. 14; taxation, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Downtown development authority, MCL 125.1651 et seq.; housing and slum clearance projects, MCL 125.651 et seq.; housing corporation law, MCL 125.601 et seq.; urban redevelopment corporations, MCL 125.901 et seq.; rehabilitation of blighted areas, MCL 125.71 et seq.; economic development corporations, MCL 125.1601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 6-1-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-252 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 392, § 1, adopted December 19, 2005, designated Ch. 6, Art. II, §§ 6-21-6-25 as Div. 1 to accommodate inclusion of new provisions as Div. 2. See also the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 

Sec. 6-21. - Established. 
    Pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as amended, a Downtown Development Authority is established. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 1, 1-14-80) 
Sec. 6-22. - Boundaries of downtown district. 
    Boundaries of downtown development authority district are hereby amended to be a continuous border line within which are included all of the following parcels of property, which are also reflected in the map attached to this motion. 
Tax Parcel # Address Street Zoning
(01-24-2005) 58-01-100-001 5279 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-100-005 5239 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-100-007 5181 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-008 5175 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-009 5167 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-011 7493 Grove Street RA-1 58-01-100-012 7503 Grove Street RA-1 58-01-100-013 5157 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-014 5151 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-016 7488 Grove Street RA-1 58-01-100-017 7494 Grove Street RA-1 58-01-100-018 7506 Grove Street RA-1 58-01-100-019 7512 Grove Street S-O 58-01-100-020 5129 Morrish Road S-O 58-01-100-021 5123 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-022 5073 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-023 5067 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-024 5061 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-100-025 7510 Wade Street B-2 58-01-100-026 5043 Morrish Road B-2 58-01-100-027 7512 Wade Street B-2 58-01-100-028 5013 Morrish Road B-2 58-01-100-029 5035 Holland Drive B-2 58-01-100-031 5020 Morrish Road B-2 58-01-100-032 5023 Holland Drive B-2 58-01-100-033 5016 Morrish Road B-2 58-01-100-034 5017 Holland Drive B-2 58-01-100-035 5015 Holland Drive B-2 58-01-100-036 8027 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-037 8023 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-038 8021 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-039 8015 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-040 8013 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-041 8011 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-042 8003 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-044 5014 Morrish Road B-2 58-01-100-045 7589 Miller Road B-2 58-01-100-046 5203 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-502-008 5043 Third Street CBD 58-01-502-011 7523 Miller Road B-2 58-01-502-012 7529 Miller Road B-2 58-01-502-013 543 Miller Road B-2 58-01-502-015 5018 Third Street RA-1 58-01-502-018 5036 Third Street RA-1 58-01-502-019 5044 Third Street RA-1 58-01-502-020 5048 Third Street RA-1 58-01-502-021 5021 Second Street B-2 58-01-502-022 5027 Second Street R-B 58-01-502-023 5033 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-027 7561 Miller Road B-3 58-01-502-031 5020 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-032 5028 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-034 5036 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-035 5044 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-036 5048 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-038 5027 First Street RA-1 58-01-502-039 5031 First Street RA-1 58-01-502-043 5020 First Street B-2 58-01-502-046 5036 First Street B-2 58-01-502-047 7484 Wade Street B-2 58-01-502-049 7500 Wade Street B-2 58-01-502-052 7501 Wade Street I-1 58-01-502-059 5121 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-502-073 7497 Miller Road CBD 58-01-502-074 7499 Miller Road CBD 58-01-502-075 5015 Third Street CBD 58-01-502-076 7509 Miller Road CBD 58-01-502-077 5017 Third Street CBD 58-01-502-079 5029 Third Street CBD 58-01-502-080 5033 Third Street CBD 58-01-502-081 5037 Second Street RA-1 58-01-502-082 7440 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-086 5019 First Street RA-1 58-01-502-087 7577 Miller Road B-2 58-01-502-088 5026 First Street B-2 58-01-502-089 5023 Morrish Road RA-1 58-01-502-090 5030 First Street B-2 58-01-502-091 7504 Wade Street B-2 58-01-502-092 7508 Wade Street B-2 58-01-502-093 7479 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-094 7469 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-095 7465 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-096 7459 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-097 7455 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-098 7451 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-099 7445 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-100 7435 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-101 7425 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-102 5083 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-502-103 7481 Wade Street I-1 58-01-502-104 5099 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-502-105 5093 Morrish Road I-1 58-01-502-112 5032 Third Street RA-1 58-01-502-113 7567 Miller Road B2 58-01-502-116 7485 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-118 5037 First Street RA-1 58-01-502-119 7474 Wade Street RA-1 58-01-502-120 7468 Wade Street RA-1 58-02-200-002 8159 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-200-003 8132 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-200-004 8126 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-200-014 5086 Morrish Road RM-1 58-02-200-017 5116 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-018 5118 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-019 5126 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-020 5130 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-021 5138 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-022 5144 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-200-023 5152 Morrish Road RM-1 58-02-200-029 5256 Morrish Road I-1 58-02-200-030 5220 Morrish Road B-1 58-02-200-032 5208 Morrish Road I-1 58-02-200-033 5232 Morrish Road I-1 58-02-400-002 5288 Morrish Road I-1 58-02-400-018 5280 Morrish Road I-1 58-02-526-001 8169 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-526-002 8179 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-526-003 5021 School Street RA-1 58-02-526-004 5027 School Street RA-1 58-02-526-005 5033 School Street RA-1 58-02-526-006 5039 School Street RA-1 58-02-526-027 8197 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-527-001 8127 Miller Road B-2 58-02-527-002 8129 Miller Road B-2 58-02-527-003 8145 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-527-004 8151 Miller Road RA-1 58-02-527-005 5020 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-006 5024 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-007 5032 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-008 5038 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-014 5019 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-015 5027 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-016 5031 Brady Street RA-1 58-02-527-022 8100 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-527-023 8096 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-528-001 8093 Miller Road B-2 58-02-528-002 8103 Miller Road B-2 58-02-528-003 5021 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-004 5027 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-005 5031 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-006 8063 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-528-009 5020 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-010 5026 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-011 5006 Ford Street B-2 58-02-528-012 5014 Ford Street B-2 58-02-528-013 8121 Miller Road B-2 58-02-528-014 5032 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-528-015 8090 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-528-016 5038 Ford Street RA-1 58-02-529-005 5018 Holland Drive B-2 58-02-529-006 5019 Hayes Street RA-1 58-02-529-007 5026 Holland Drive B-2 58-02-529-008 8032 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-529-009 5032 Holland Drive B-2 58-02-529-010 5044 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-529-011 5052 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-529-012 5058 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-529-015 5018 Hayes Street RA-1 58-02-529-017 5012 Holland Drive B-2 58-02-529-018 8047 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-019 8053 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-020 8057 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-021 8067 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-022 8023 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-529-023 8033 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-529-024 8039 Ingalls Street RA-1 58-02-529-025 8077 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-026 8083 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-027 8089 Miller Road B-2 58-02-529-028 5014 Hayes Street B-2 58-02-529-029 5032 Hayes Street RA-1 58-02-529-030 5038 Hayes Street RA-1 58-02-529-031 5070 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-530-044 5170 Morrish Road RA-1 58-02-530-045 8012 Maple Street R-B 58-02-530-047 8035 Crapo Street RA-1 58-35-200-005 4062 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-200-007 4140 Morrish Road I-1 58-35-200-008 4150 Morrish Road I-1 58-35-200-009 8119 Bristol Road RA-1 58-35-200-010 8079 Bristol Road RA-1 58-35-200-012 8065 Bristol Road RA-1 58-35-200-013 8041 Bristol Road RA-1 58-35-200-014 8023 Bristol Road RA-1 58-35-200-015 4048 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-200-016 4076 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-200-017 4088 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-200-018 4110 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-400-001 4290 Morrish Road M-Z 58-35-576-001 4444 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-002 4438 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-003 4432 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-004 4426 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-005 4412 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-006 4400 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-007 4394 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-008 4384 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-009 4374 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-010 4366 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-011 4360 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-012 4354 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-013 4344 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-014 4336 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-015 4318 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-016 4306 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-017 4296 Morrish Road RA-1 58-35-576-018 4272 Morrish Road B-3 58-35-576-019 4278 Morrish Road B-3 58-35-576-020 4150 Morrish Road I-1 58-35-576-021 4264 Morrish Road B-3 58-35-576-023 8118 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-024 8110 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-025 8104 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-026 8098 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-027 8092 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-028 8084 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-029 8060 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-030 4505 Fortino Drive B-2 58-35-576-031 4459 Fortino Drive B-2 58-35-576-032 8021 Fortino Drive B-2 58-35-576-033 8059 Fortino Drive B-2 58-35-576-034 8055 Fortino Drive B-2 58-35-576-037 8100 Civic Drive B-2 58-35-576-038 8056 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-039 8048 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-040 8040 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-041 8036 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-042 8030 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-043 8024 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-044 8018 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-045 8014 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-046 8012 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-047 8010 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-048 8006 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-049 8002 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-050 4514 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-051 4500 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-052 4506 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-053 4484 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-054 4494 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-055 4464 Morrish Road B-2 58-35-576-057 8138 Miller Road B-2 58-35-576-058 8095 Civic Drive B-2 58-35-576-059 8083 Civic Drive B-2 58-36-100-001 4013 Morrish Road RA-1 58-36-300-019 7524 Miller Road B-2 58-36-300-020 7530 Miller Road B-2 58-36-300-021 7538 Miller Road B-2 58-36-300-022 4485 Frederick Street RM-1 58-36-300-023 4453 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-300-024 4437 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-300-025 4413 Morrish Road RA-1 58-36-300-026 4379 Morrish Road RA-1 58-36-300-027 7534 Apple Creek Drive RA-1 58-36-300-028 4345 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-300-030 4369 Roundhouse Road RM-1 58-36-551-001 4463 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-551-002 4473 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-551-003 4483 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-551-004 7579 Mason Street RA-1 58-36-551-005 7565 Mason Street RA-1 58-36-551-006 7557 Mason Street RA-1 58-36-551-007 7553 Mason Street RA-1 58-36-551-008 7550 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-009 7556 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-010 7562 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-011 7572 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-012 7580 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-013 7579 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-014 7571 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-015 7563 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-016 7557 Church Street RA-1 58-36-551-017 7551 Church Street RA-1 58-36-552-001 4495 Morrish Road B-1 58-36-552-002 4501 Morrish Road B-2 58-36-552-003 4505 Morrish Road B-2 58-36-552-004 7594 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-005 7582 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-006 7574 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-007 7566 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-008 7562 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-009 7556 Miller Road B-2 58-36-552-010 7550 Miller Road B-2  
(Ord. No. 158, § 2, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 1-10-05; Ord. No. 424 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Editor's note- The boundary maps are not set out herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
Sec. 6-23. - Powers of the authority. 
    The authority shall have such powers as are now or may hereafter be conferred upon authorities established under Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975, (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 3, 1-14-80) 
Sec. 6-24. - Financing of activities of the authority. 
    The activities of the authority shall be financed from one or more sources which may be authorized pursuant to Act No. 197 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1975 (MCL 125.1651 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 4, 1-14-80) 
Sec. 6-25. - Dissolution of the authority and distribution of its assets. 
    Upon completion of the purposes for which the authority created in this article was organized, the authority shall be dissolved by ordinance. All property and assets of the authority remaining after satisfaction of any obligations of the authority shall belong to the city. 
(Ord. No. 158, § 6, 1-14-80) 
Secs. 6-26-6-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY DEVELOPMENT AND TAX INCREMENT FINANCING PLAN NO. 1[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 425 , adopted Dec. 7, 2015, provides that said ordinance shall become effective 20 days after publication, expected to be Dec. 30, 2015. 

Sec. 6-31. - Definition of terms. 
    The terms used in this division and in the plan shall have the meanings assigned to them in the plan and in section 1 of Public Act 197 of the Public Acts of 1975, as amended, being MCL 125.1651 et seq. ("Act"). 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-32. - Public purposes; best interest of the public. 
    The city council hereby finds and determines: 
(1)  The plan constitutes a public purpose. 
(2)  It is in the best interests of the public, in order to halt property value deterioration, increase property tax valuation, eliminate the cause of property value deterioration and to promote economic growth in the development area, to proceed with the plan. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-33. - Review findings. 
    Having determined that the plan constitutes a public purpose, as required by the Act, the city council has considered the various elements of the plan as required by section 19 of the Act and, as a result thereof, the city council finds: 
(1)  The plan meets the requirements set forth in section 17(2) of the Act. 
(2)  The proposed method of financing the development is feasible, and the authority has the ability to arrange the financing. 
(3)  The development is reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes of the Act. 
(4)  The amount of captured assessed value estimated to result from adoption of the plan is reasonable. 
(5)  The land included within the development area to be acquired (to the extent required by the plan) is reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the plan and the purposes of the Act in an efficient and economically satisfactory manner. 
(6)  The development plan is in reasonable accord with the master plan of the city. 
(7)  Public services such as fire and police protection and utilities, are or will be adequate to service the development area. 
(8)  Changes in zoning, streets, street levels, intersections and utilities (to the extent required by the plan) are reasonably necessary for the project and for the village. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-34. - Approval and adoption of development and tax increment financing plan. 
    The plan is hereby approved and adopted as set forth in exhibit A hereto. The duration of the plan shall be 30 years from the effective date of the ordinance establishing this division. A copy of the plan and any amendments thereto shall be maintained on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Editor's note- Exhibit A is not set out herein, but is on file in the city clerk's office. 
Sec. 6-35. - Boundaries of the development area. 
    The boundaries of the development area, as set forth in the plan, are adopted and confirmed, as amended to remove 4110 Morrish Road, tax identification number 58-35-200-019, as described in the 2015 assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-36. - Establishment of initial assessed value. 
    The initial assessed value for purposes of the plan shall be the assessed value of all real and personal property in the development area as of December 31, 2004, and equalized by the State of Michigan in May, 2005, less any parcels subsequently removed from the district by ordinance. The initial assessed value shall also include all real and personal property in the development area as of December 31, 2014, and equalized by the State of Michigan in May 2015, for the parcels added to the district by Ordinance 425. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-37. - Annual calculation of captured assessed value and tax increment revenues; payment to the DDA. 
    Each year, within 15 days following the final equalization of property in the development area, the city assessor shall calculate the captured assessed value for the development area and report said value to the city council and to the DDA. As real and personal property taxes are collected by the city and county treasurers for properties within the development area, the tax increment revenue portion of said taxes shall be paid to the DDA. The payments to the DDA shall be made on the date or dates on which the city and the county treasurers are required to remit taxes to each of the taxing jurisdictions. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-38. - Use of tax increment revenues. 
    The DDA shall utilize the tax increment revenues only in accordance with the plan and in the following manner and following order of priority: 
(1)  First, if bonds are issued pursuant to the plan, to pay into the debt retirement fund or funds, for all outstanding series of bonds issued pursuant to the plan, an amount equal to the interest and principal coming due (in the case of principal, whether by maturity or mandatory redemption) prior to the next collection of taxes, less any credit for sums on hand in a debt retirement fund. 
(2)  Second, to establish a reserve account for payment of principal of an interest on bonds issued pursuant to the plan to the extent required by any resolution authorizing bonds. 
(3)  Third, to pay the administrative, auditing, legal and operating costs of the authority and the city pertaining to the development area, including planning and promotion, to the extent provided in the annual budget of the DDA. 
(4)  Fourth, to repay amounts advanced by the city for project costs as may be set forth in the plan, including costs for preliminary plans, and fees for other professional services. 
(5)  Fifth, to pay, to the extent determined desirable by the DDA and approved by the city, the cost of completing the public improvements as may be set forth in the plan to the extent those costs are not financed from other sources. 
(6)  Sixth, to pay the cost of any additional amendments to the plan that are determined necessary by the DDA and approved by the village council in accordance with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-39. - Annual report. 
    Within 90 days after the end of each fiscal year, the DDA shall submit to the city council, with copies to each taxing jurisdiction, a report on the status of the plan. The report shall include the information required by MCL 125.1665(3). The DDA shall cause a copy of the report to be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Sec. 6-40. - Termination of tax increment financing plan. 
    As provided in MCL 125.1665(2), the city council may abolish the tax increment financing plan when it finds that the purposes for which it was established are accomplished. The tax increment financing plan shall not be abolished, however, until the principal of, and interest on, any bonds issued pursuant to the plan have been paid or funds sufficient to make the payment have been segregated. 
(Ord. No. 392, § 2, 12-19-05; Ord. No. 425 , § 1, 12-7-15) 
Secs. 6-41-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REHABILITATION OF BLIGHTED AREAS 

Sec. 6-46. - Purpose. 
    Consistent with the letter and spirit of Act No. 344 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945 (MCL 125.71 et seq.), as amended, it is the purpose of this article to prevent, reduce and eliminate blight or potential blight in the city by the prevention or elimination of certain environmental causes of blight or of blighting factors which exist or which may in the future exist in the city. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 1, 9-14-64) 
Sec. 6-47. - Cause of blight or blighting factors. 
    It is hereby determined that the following uses, structures and activities are causes of blight or are blighting factors which, if allowed to exist, will tend to result in blighted and undesirable neighborhoods. No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained any of the following causes of blight or blighting factors upon any property in the city that are owned, leased, rented or occupied by such person: 
(1)  In any area zoned for residential and/or commercial purposes, the storage upon any property of junk automobiles, except in a completely enclosed building. For the purpose of this section the term "junk automobiles" shall include any motor vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 60 days and it shall also include whether so licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 60 days. 
(2)  In any area zoned for residential and/or commercial purposes, the storage upon any property of building materials, unless there is in force a valid building permit issued by the city for construction upon the property and the materials are intended for use in connection with such construction or are part of stock or trade of business located upon the property. Building materials shall include, but not be limited to, lumber, bricks, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in the construction of any structure. 
(3)  In any area zoned for residential and/or commercial purposes, the storage or accumulation of junk, trash, rubbish or refuse of any kind, except in a completely enclosed building. Domestic refuse shall be allowed if stored in such a manner as not to create a nuisance and is stored 30 feet from any other residential structure, for a period not to exceed seven days. The term "junk" shall include parts of machinery or motor vehicles, unused stoves or other appliances which are stored in the open, remnants of wood, metal, other material or other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not the same could be put to any reasonable use. 
(4)  In any area the existence of any structure or part of a structure which because of fire, wind or other natural disaster or physical deterioration is no longer habitable as a dwelling nor useful for any other purpose for which it may have been intended. 
(5)  In any area zoned for residential and/or commercial purposes, any vacant dwelling, garage, or other out-building unless they are kept securely locked, windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereof by vandals. 
(6)  In any area where lies any partially completed structure, unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid and subsisting building permit issued by the city and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 2, 9-14-64) 
Sec. 6-48. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by those persons who shall be so designated by the city manager. 
(b)  The owner, if possible, or the occupant of any property upon which any of the causes of blight or a blighting factor, as set forth in section 6-47, is found to exist shall be notified in writing by the city to remove or eliminate within ten days after serving of the notice upon him. Such notice may be served personally or by registered mail, return receipt requested. Additional time may be granted by the enforcement officer where bonafide efforts to remove or eliminate such causes of blight or any blighting factors are in progress. 
(c)  Failure to comply with such notice within the time allowed by the owner and/or occupant shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 39, § 3, 9-14-64) 
Chapter 7 - FILLING STATIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate and restrict location of oil and gasoline stations, § 3.1(b)(2)(d). 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 

Sec. 7-1. - Defined. 
    Filling station means any building, structure, premises, enclosure or other place within the city where one or more containers or tanks, either portable or stationary, and containing either carbon bisulphide, gasoline, naphtha, benzole, hydrocarbon (gas) drips, kereosene, or other inflammable liquids, having a flash point below 165 degrees Fahrenheit, are kept or located for the purpose of sale and delivery into the fuel supply tanks of motor vehicles, provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any place where such inflammable liquids are kept or sold for medical purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 1, 4-12-71) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 7-2. - Permit required, other provisions, restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner of or in control of any filling station in the city to operate or maintain a filling station in such place until a permit shall have been obtained from the city clerk by authority of the council or to operate and maintain such filling station after such permit, when granted, shall have been revoked by the council. No permit for the operation of a filling station shall be issued that would permit the existence of more than two filling stations at any street intersection having four or more corners; nor will a permit be issued for the operation of a filling station if the site at which such operation is proposed is within 300 feet of an existing building constructed for the purpose of conducting such a business, whether or not the building is actually being used for such purpose, provided that any building constructed as a filling station which has been converted to another use shall not be considered in determining the existence of a filling station within the restricted area. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 2, 4-12-71) 
Sec. 7-3. - Application, transfer. 
    Any person desiring to operate a filling station in the city shall make or cause to be made an application in writing to the council, signed by the owner or person in control of the place where such filling station is proposed to be operated, for a permit to operate such filling station, stating the location thereof, which application shall contain the further statement that the permit, if granted, will be accepted on condition that the same may be revoked by the council whenever it may deem it necessary for the public safety of the city and which permit, if granted, shall not be transferable without the consent of the council. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 3, 4-12-71) 
Sec. 7-4. - Accumulation of junk prohibited; defined; grounds for revocation of permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a filling station in the city to allow the accumulation of junk, as defined in this section, upon the premises of such filling station. 
(b)  Junk, for the purpose of this chapter, is defined as any waste material, refuse or any item which has ceased to have any value for its original intended use. Nonrepairable automobiles or any automobile parts which are no longer suitable for repair operations are hereby declared to be junk for the purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  The accumulation of junk on the property of a filling station is hereby declared to be grounds for the revocation of the permit to operate a filling station in the city. Such permit shall be revoked only after a public hearing and after notification has been sent to the owner or occupant by registered mail at least seven days prior to a hearing. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 4, 4-12-71) 
Cross reference- Nuisances generally, Ch. 9. 
Sec. 7-5. - Plans to be submitted, specifications, restrictions. 
(a)  Any person desiring to erect a filling station shall submit to the city manager for approval plans drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch to a foot, and specifications showing the location of the filling station, driveways, pumps, air hose, and all other artificial devices to be constructed. 
(b)  No driveway on public property shall exceed 30 feet in width where it crosses the public sidewalk nor shall it exceed 40 feet in width along the line of the curb. The distance from the edge of any driveway on public property to the extension of the street property line on any adjacent intersecting street, measured along the outer edge of the public sidewalk, shall not be less than four feet. Whenever more than one driveway is constructed from any one street over public property, such driveway shall be separated by an intervening space or island located between the walk and the curb line of not less than five feet in length adjacent to the public walk and not nearer than one foot from the outer edge of the public sidewalk. Such space shall be enclosed with a cement curb at least four inches higher than the surface of the driveway and walk adjacent. When public driveways on filling station sites are parallel to the public sidewalk, a concrete curb at least four inches high and six inches wide, or suitable guard rail, shall be constructed on private property to separate the driveways from public property. Such curb or guard rail shall be adjacent to the street property line and shall not be less than five feet in length and so constructed that it will prevent a car from being serviced while standing on city property. No curb shall be cut closer than six feet to any fire hydrant, fire alarm box or street lighting pole. No part of a pump foundation above grade shall be located closer than five feet from the property line nearest parallel to it nor shall the end of a pump base be nearer than 16 feet from the street property line at right angles to the pump base. Pumps and other service devices shall be so placed that no car while being serviced will be located on city property. 
(c)  No permission shall be granted for any such filling station in any location where, by reason of traffic conditions, fire or explosion hazard, the filling station would imperil the public safety. 
(d)  No permit for the construction of a filling station shall be issued which would permit the existence of more than two filling stations at any street intersection having four or more corners; nor will any permit be issued for the construction of a filling station if the site at which such construction is proposed is within 300 feet of an existing building constructed for the purpose of conducting such a business, whether or not the building is actually being used for such a purpose, provided that any building constructed as a filling station which has been converted to another use shall not be considered in determining the existence of a filling station in the restricted area. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 5, 4-12-71) 
Sec. 7-6. - Tanks, inspection, fee. 
    All new installations or replacements of tanks for storing flammable liquids shall be inspected and approved by the fire chief or a fire department inspector designated by the fire chief before back-filling around tanks is started. An inspection fee of $5.00 shall be paid to the department of public services and no final approval shall be given until the inspection fee is paid. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 6, 4-12-71) 
Sec. 7-7. - To conform to city safety regulations; closure conditions. 
    All filling stations erected and constructed after May 3, 1971, shall conform to the city zoning, building and sanitary ordinances. All existing filling stations, if not in safe and sanitary condition, must be made safe and/or sanitary when ordered to do so by any of the various city department officials having jurisdiction over such matters and within 30 days thereafter or sooner, if there is immediate danger. In case of emergency, the fire chief shall have the power to close any filling station and to have the tanks emptied and the same shall remain closed until the condition creating the emergency is abated. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 8, 4-12-71) 
Sec. 7-8. - Operating without permit declared a public nuisance. 
    Any filling station operated without a permit as provided in this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be restrained by proceedings instituted by the city manager in the county circuit court. 
(Ord. No. 90, § 9, 4-12-71) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to regulate buildings and lands in order to prevent fires, § 3.1(b)(2)(i); fire department, § 7.11. 
Cross reference- Hazardous materials incidents, § 2-501 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; fireworks, § 10-192. 
State Law reference- Fire prevention act, MCL 29.1 et seq.; crimes related to fires, MCL 750.240 et seq.; crimes related to explosives and bombs, MCL 750.200 et seq.; explosives act, MCL 29.41 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Burning wastes without council authorization unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start, cause or permit to be started any open fire for the purpose of burning waste matter within the city, provided that the council shall have the right to authorize the open burning of waste matter upon application to the council and when in the discretion of the council it shall determine that such burning shall provide for the general welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 100, § 1, 1-8-73; Ord. No. 123, § 1, 6-23-75) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIREWORKS 

Sec. 8-21. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
    APA means American Pyrotechnics Association. 
    Articles pyrotechnic means pyrotechnic devices for professional use that are similar to consumer fireworks in the chemical composition and construction but not intended for consumer use, that meet the weight limits for consumer fireworks but are not labeled as such, and that are classified as UN0431 or UN0432 under 49 CFR 172.101. 
    Consumer fireworks means fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3 or 3.5. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
    Department means the Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs (LARA), State of Michigan. 
    Display fireworks means large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 162 and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
    Firework or fireworks means any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effects. 
    Low-impact fireworks means ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8 and 3.5. 
    Minor means an individual who is less than 18 years old. 
    National holiday means as defined in 5 USC 6103 and includes: New Year's Day (January 1); Martin Luther King Jr. Day (third Monday in January); Washington's birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving day (fourth Thursday in November); Christmas day (December 25). 
    NFPA means National Fire Protection Association. 
    Novelties means as defined under APA standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4 and 3.2.5, and all of the following: 
(1)  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls or individual caps containing not more than 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cup. 
(2)  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in the above paragraph are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
(3)  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 -inch in diameter. 
    Person means an individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
    Special effects means a combination of chemical elements or chemical compounds capable of burning independently of the oxygen of the atmosphere and designed and intended to produce an audible, visual, mechanical, or thermal effect as an integral part of a motion picture, radio, television, theatrical or opera production or live entertainment. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Sec. 8-22. - Novelties. 
    This article does not apply to and does not regulate the use of novelties in the city. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Sec. 8-23. - Consumer fireworks. 
(a)  Consumer fireworks may be used in the city on the day proceeding, the day of and the day after a national holiday between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. 
(b)  At any time other than the day preceding, the day of and/or the day after a national holiday, consumer fireworks shall be prohibited. 
(c)  A person shall not ignite, discharge or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property or the property of another person, without that person or organization's express permission to use the consumer fireworks on those premises. 
(d)  A person shall not use consumer fireworks or low impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance. 
(e)  Consumer fireworks shall only be used in accordance with all applicable local, state and federal laws. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Sec. 8-24. - Pyrotechnic and display fireworks. 
(a)  The city may permit articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks and special effect fireworks pursuant to the provisions of MCL 28.451 et seq. and this article. 
(b)  Any person wishing to conduct an articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display shall, at least 45 days prior to any display, submit an application on a form furnished by the city, pay the required fee and shall secure permission from the city prior to any such fireworks display. 
(c)  The site plan of the area where the articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display is to be conducted shall be submitted with the application. The site plan shall set forth all structures in the area and within the discharge site fallout area. The site plan shall furthermore set forth the distance separating any fireworks and any spectator viewing areas. All site plans shall be forwarded to the fire chief and/or his designated alternate for approval, including any recommended conditions, prior to coming before the city council for its approval. 
(d)  A copy of any required state or federal permit for the fireworks display shall be submitted with the application. 
(e)  Proof of insurance conforming the requirements of this article and PA 256 of 211 shall be submitted with the application. 
(f)  The application shall include information as to the competency and qualifications of the fireworks display operators, as required by NFPA 1123. 
(g)  The city shall approve an application for an articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks or special effects display if it finds that all of the following standards are satisfied: 
(1)  The application and accompanying documentation is complete and conforms to the requirements of this article. 
(2)  The operator of the fireworks display is competent and qualified to conduct the fireworks display, per NFPA 1123. 
(3)  The fire chief or his/her designated alternate has approved the application and site plan. 
(4)  The fireworks display will not have an adverse effect upon public safety. 
(5)  The time, duration, location of the fireworks or special effects display will not, due to noise and other factors, unreasonably disturb the peace of persons residing within the vicinity. 
(6)  The city, in approving an application hereunder, shall have the authority to impose such conditions as it determines in its sole reasonable discretion are necessary to assure that the fireworks display will satisfy the above standards. 
(h)  Requirements and restrictions. 
(1)  The person conducting the fireworks display shall follow NFPA 1123 for fireworks display and/or the city requirements set forth herein, whichever are more restrictive. 
(2)  A minimum safe area of 250 feet radius, plus an additional 70 feet radius for each inch by which the fireworks shell exceeds three inches in diameter shall be required. The city shall have the authority to grant a variance from this requirement where it determines in its sole reasonable discretion that, given: 
a.  The nature of the subject site, 
b.  The nature of the surrounding area, and/or 
c.  The nature of the proposed fireworks display, that a variance will not have a material adverse impact on public safety. 
In no event, however, shall the applicant fail to comply with the minimum requirements of NFPA 1123. 
(3)  The applicant shall maintain personal injury liability insurance/property damage liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.00 for each event. The city shall be named as an additional insured on the insurance policy. 
(4)  The city shall not issue a permit to a nonresident person until the person has appointed in writing a member of the state bar or a resident agent to be the person's legal representative upon whom all process in an action or proceeding against the person may be served. 
(5)  The applicant shall be responsible for all shells being fired. In the event one or more of the shells does not explode, the applicant shall secure the area until the unexploded shell(s) is found and properly disposed of. 
(6)  The consumption of alcohol immediately prior to and during the fireworks display by any person involved in conducting the display is prohibited. 
(7)  A fireworks display conducted hereunder shall conform with all specifications set forth in the approved application and site plan, as well as with any conditions imposed by the city in granting such approval. 
(8)  The applicant shall cause the site of the fireworks display to be cleaned up within 24 hours after the fireworks display has ended. 
(9)  A permit is not transferable and shall not be granted to a minor. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Sec. 8-25. - Violations; penalties. 
    Any person that violates any provision of this article shall be deemed responsible for a municipal civil infraction and fined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Fine Maximum Fine 1st offense within 3-year period $75.00 $500.00 2nd offense within 3-year period $150.00 $500.00 3rd offense within 3-year period $325.00 $500.00 4th offense within 3-year period $500.00 $500.00  
    Additionally, the violator shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the city incurs in enforcing this article. 
    In addition, the city shall have the right to proceed in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of obtaining an injunction, restraining order or other appropriate remedy to compel compliance with this article. Each day that a violation of this article continues to exist shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 420 , § 1, 6-22-15) 
Chapter 9 - NUISANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to declare a hazard or nuisance, § 3.1(b)(1). 
Cross reference- Accumulation of junk prohibited at filling stations, § 7-4; offenses, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Air pollution act, MCL 336.11 et seq.; environmental protection act, MCL 691.201 et seq. 

Sec. 9-1. - Public nuisances defined. 
    Public nuisances are those things, acts or failures to act or uses of property which: 
(1)  Annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health or comfort of the public; 
(2)  Offend public decency; 
(3)  Interfere with, obstruct or render dangerous any street, highway, alley, stream or public place; 
(4)  In any way render the public insecure in life or property. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 1, 8-28-61) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 9-2. - Creation, maintenance of public nuisances. 
(a)  No person shall commit, create or maintain any public nuisance. 
(b)  Public nuisances shall include, but not be limited to, whatever is forbidden by the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, possessor or occupier of any lot or premises, occupied or vacant, within the city limits or for any person having charge of such lot or premises to cause or permit to continue unabated any condition as described in this chapter as a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 2, 8-28-61) 
Sec. 9-3. - Accumulation of junk unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate ashes, junk, abandoned automobiles, rubbish or other similar matter causing an unsightly appearance. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 3(A), 8-28-61) 
Sec. 9-4. - Offensive organic matter not permitted; exceptions. 
    No person shall permit any offal, manure, unclean or nauseous matter, garbage, sewage or seepage from leech or filter beds, or any filthy or offensive matter to gather upon or remain on any property owned or occupied by that person in such a manner as to attract flies, rodents or as to emit offensive or unhealthy odors. This provision shall not prohibit the normal and proper use of commercial fertilizers and manure necessary and proper for normal pursuits in the field of agriculture and farming. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 3(B), 8-28-61) 
Sec. 9-5. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 380, § 1, adopted March 10, 2002, repealed § 9-5, which pertained to littering of any public places prohibited. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Sec. 9-6. - Noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or business entity to create, assist in creating, permit or make any unusual, unnecessary, loud or disturbing noise in the city. 
(1)  The following acts shall constitute a partial list of unnecessary, unusual, loud or disturbing noises in violation of this section, but the following enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, to wit: 
a.  The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so as to create loud or unnecessary noises. 
b.  The discharge into the open air of any exhaust of any internal combustion engine of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, or motor scooter, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud noises from issuing therefrom. 
c.  The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile or other motor vehicle, except as a danger signal if other vehicles are approaching, in such manner as to disturb the comfort or repose of the general public. 
(2)  The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving vehicles is hereby prohibited within the city, unless the city manager shall issue a permit stating the hours and places where sound-amplifying equipment may be used. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the production of music in connection with any military, civic or authorized parade, funeral procession or religious ceremony, nor to prevent any musical performance conducted under the consent of the city manager, nor to be construed so as to apply to the playing of children in any of the parks, schools, playgrounds or other public amusement places owned by the city or the public. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 3(D), 8-28-61; Ord. No. 347, § 1, 11-8-99) 
Sec. 9-7. - Dangerous conditions. 
(a)  Structures. 
(1)  No person shall maintain any structure, house or building, whether abandoned or occupied, that is unsafe or a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(2)  No person shall permit or maintain an uncapped basement for a period longer than 30 days. 
(b)  Excavations. No person shall permit or maintain any excavation hole, well-shaft pit, or other similar type condition that is unsafe or a menace to the health, morals or safety of the public. 
(c)  Notice and hearing. The city manager may after notice to the owner or person causing dangerous conditions to exist and after holding a public hearing thereon, condemn such dangerous structure or excavation by giving notice to the owner of the land upon which the structure or excavation is located and to the person causing the dangerous condition, specifying in what respects the structure or excavation is a public nuisance and requiring the owner or other persons to alter, repair, tear down, fill in or remove within a reasonable time, not exceeding 90 days, as may be necessary to do or have done the work required by the state. 
(d)  Dangerous structures or excavations-Abatement. If at the expiration of any time limit in the notice the owner or other person has not complied with the requirements thereof, the city manager shall carry out the requirements of the notice. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof and shall become and be a lien upon the property and shall be assessed and collected in the same manner provided in the Charter of the city for the collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 4(A-D), 8-28-61) 
Sec. 9-8. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    No person shall have in his possession either inside or outside of any building, structure, or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other similar container of any kind which has an airtight snap-latch or other locking device thereon, without first removing the snap-latch or other locker device or the doors from such icebox, refrigerator, or other similar container. 
(Ord. No. 22, § 4(E), 2-28-61) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.493d. 
Chapter 10 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Nuisances, Ch. 9; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Abolition of distinction between accessory and principal. 
    Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this Code, whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 767.39. 
Sec. 10-2. - Attempts. 
    Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this Code, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration, or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the same, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.92. 
Sec. 10-3. - Begging. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to beg in a public place from any passersby, either by words, gestures or by the exhibiting of a sign. 
State Law reference- Persons found begging in a public place defined as disorderly persons, MCL 750.167(1)(h). 
Sec. 10-4. - Fortunetelling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tell or pretend to tell fortunes for hire, gain, reward, or profit, whether by means of cards, tokens, trances, inspection of the hands or skull, mind-reading, consulting the movements of the heavenly bodies, or otherwise. It shall likewise be unlawful for a person, whether for hire, gain, reward or profit, to pretend to enable another to recover lost or stolen property, to pretend to give success in any business, enterprise, speculation or game of chance, or to induce any person to dispose of property in favor of another. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.267 et seq. 
Sec. 10-5. - Window peeping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be found looking into the windows or doors of any house, apartment or other residence in the city in such a manner as would be likely to interfere with the occupant's reasonable expectation of privacy and without the occupant's express or implied consent. 
State Law reference- Person window peeping defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(c). 
Sec. 10-6. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, torment, deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, mutilate, or cruelly kill, cause or procure to be so overdriven, overloaded, driven when overloaded, overworked, tortured, tormented, deprived of necessary sustenance, cruelly beaten, mutilated, or cruelly killed, any animal, and having the charge or custody of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, inflict unnecessary cruelty upon the same, or who willfully fails to provide the same with proper food, drink, shelter, or protection from the weather. The cropping of dogs ears shall be considered to be a mutilation or cruelty to an animal within the meaning of this section unless such cropping is performed by a registered veterinary surgeon, while the dog is under an anaesthetic. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.21. 
Secs. 10-7-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AFFECTING GOVERNMENTAL FUNCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 10-26. - Obstruction of officers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist or oppose any sheriff, coroner, city treasurer, constable or other officer or person duly authorized, in serving, or attempting to serve or execute any process, rule or order made or issued by any lawful authority. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully resist any officer in the execution of any ordinance, by-law, or any rule, order or resolution made, issued or passed by the council. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly and willfully obstruct, resist, oppose, assault, beat or wound any peace officer or any other person authorized by law to maintain and preserve the peace in their lawful acts, attempts and efforts to maintain, preserve and keep the peace. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly furnish to a police officer false, forged, fictitious, or misleading verbal or written information identifying the person as another person. 
(Ord. No. 165, §§ 1-3, 2-4-80; Ord. No. 385, § 1, 2-14-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.479. 
Sec. 10-27. - Disguising with intent to obstruct law or intimidate officer, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner disguise himself, with intent to obstruct the due execution of the law, or with intent to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any officer or any other person in the legal performance of his duty or the exercise of his rights under the constitution and laws of this state, whether such intent be effected or not. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.217. 
Sec. 10-28. - Impersonating a police officer or other city officer or employee. 
(a)  No person other than an official police officer of the city shall wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card, or any other insignia of office like, or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn, or carried by the official police officers of the city. 
(b)  No person shall act or pretend to be an official police officer of the city or any other city officer or employee. 
State Law reference- False personation of officers, MCL 750.215. 
Sec. 10-29. - False alarms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to summon, as a joke, prank or otherwise without any good reason therefor, by telephone or other means, the police, the fire department or any public or private ambulance to go to any address where the service called for is not needed. 
State Law reference- False fire alarms, MCL 750.240. 
Sec. 10-30. - False report of crime. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or file with the police department any false, misleading or unfounded statement or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any crime occurring within the city. 
State Law reference- False report on crime, MCL 750.411a. 
Sec. 10-31. - Escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to escape or attempt to escape from the lawful custody of a police officer or a person duly empowered with the police authority. 
State Law reference- Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq. 
Sec. 10-32. - Assisting escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to offer or endeavor to assist any person in the custody of a police officer, a member of the police department, or a person duly empowered with police authority to escape or attempt to escape from such custody. 
State Law reference- Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq. 
Sec. 10-33. - Providing prisoners with alcoholic liquor, controlled substances or implements of escape prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make available to, present to, or place within the reach of any person who is confined under the authority of the city, any alcoholic liquor, controlled substances or any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined. 
State Law reference- Escapes, rescues, jail and prison breaking, MCL 750.183 et seq.; liquors in jail prohibited, MCL 801.116, 801.117. 
Secs. 10-34-10-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 10-51. - Assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery upon the person of another. 
(Ord. No. 164, § 1, 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Assaults, MCL 750.81 et seq. 
Sec. 10-52. - Harassment. 
    A person commits the offense of harassment if, with intent to harass, annoy or alarm another person, he: 
(1)  Follows a person in or about a public place; or 
(2)  Engages in a course of conduct or repeatedly commits acts that alarm or seriously annoy another person and that serve no legitimate purpose. 
Sec. 10-53. - Harassing communications. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of harassing communications if, with intent to harass or alarm another person, he communicates with a person, anonymously or otherwise, by telephone, telegraph, mail or any other form of written communications in a manner likely to harass or cause alarm. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any service provided by a communications common carrier with intent to terrorize, frighten, intimidate, threaten, harass, molest or annoy any other person, or to disturb the peace and quiet of any other person by any of the following: 
(1)  Threatening physical harm or damage to any person or property in the course of a telephone conversation; 
(2)  Falsely and deliberately reporting any telephone or telegraph message to the effect that any person has been injured, has suddenly taken ill, has suffered death, or has been the victim of a crime or of an accident; 
(3)  Deliberately refusing or failing to disengage a connection between a telephone and another telephone or between a telephone and other equipment provided for transmission of messages by telephone, thereby interfering with any communications service; 
(4)  Using any vulgar, indecent, obscene or offensive language or suggesting any lewd or lascivious act in the course of a telephone conversation. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.540e. 
Sec. 10-54. - Malicious annoyance by writing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly send, deliver or make, and for the purpose of being delivered or sent, to part with the possession of any letter, postal card or writing containing any obscene language with or without a name subscribed thereto, or signed with a fictitious name, or with any letter, mark or other designation, with the intent thereby to cause annoyance to any person, or with the view or intent to extort or gain any money or property of any description belonging to another. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.390. 
Sec. 10-55. - Neglect of family. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of sufficient ability to refuse or neglect to support his family. 
State Law reference- Desertion and nonsupport, MCL 750.161; person neglecting family deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(a). 
Sec. 10-56. - Contribution to neglect or delinquency of children. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, by act or by any word, to encourage, contribute toward, cause or tend to cause any minor child under the age of 17 years to become neglected or delinquent so as to come or tend to come under the jurisdiction of the juvenile division of the Probate Court, as defined in section 2, chapter 12a, 1939 PA 288, as added by Act No. 54 of the Public Acts of Michigan the Extra Session of 1944 (MCL 598.2), and any amendments thereto, whether or not such child shall in fact be adjudicated a ward of the Probate Court. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.145. 
Sec. 10-57. - Stalking. 
(a)  Definitions. For purposes of this ordinance, the following words and phrases shall mean: 
(1)  Course of conduct means a pattern of conduct composed of two or more separate non-continuous acts evidencing a continuity of purpose. 
(2)  Emotional distress means significant mental suffering or distress that may, but does not necessarily, require medical or other professional treatment or counseling. 
(3)  Harassment means conduct directed toward a victim that includes, but is not limited to, repeated or continuing unconsented contact that would cause a reasonable individual to suffer emotional distress and that actually causes the victim to suffer emotional distress. Harassment does not include constitutionally protected activity or conduct that serves a legitimate purpose. 
(4)  Stalking means a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment of another individual that would cause a reasonable person to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested and that actually causes the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
(5)  Unconsented contact means contact with another individual that is initiated or continued without that individual's consent or in disregard of that individual's expressed desire that the contact be avoided or discontinued. Unconsented contact includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Following or appearing within the sight of that individual. 
b.  Approaching or confronting that individual in a public place or on private property. 
c.  Appearing at that individual's workplace or residence. 
d.  Entering onto or remaining on property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
e.  Contacting that individual by telephone. 
f.  Sending mail or electronic communications to that individual. 
g.  Placing an object on, or delivering an object to, property owned, leased, or occupied by that individual. 
(6)  Victim means an individual who is the target of a willful course of conduct involving repeated or continuing harassment. 
(b)  Prohibited conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in stalking. 
(c)  Presumption. In a prosecution for a violation of this section, evidence that the defendant continued to engage in a course of conduct involving repeated unconsented contact with the victim after having been requested by the victim to discontinue the same or a different form of unconsented contact, and to refrain from any further unconsented contact with the victim, gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the continuation of the course of conduct caused the victim to feel terrorized, frightened, intimidated, threatened, harassed, or molested. 
(Ord. No. 338, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 10-58. - Domestic violence; domestic assault and battery. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an assault or an assault and battery upon a spouse, former spouse, an individual with whom he or she has or has had a dating relationship, an individual with whom he or she has had a child in common, or a resident or former resident of his or her household. This section shall be enforced in accordance with MCL 764.15a. 
    As used in this section, "dating relationship" means frequent, intimate associations primarily characterized by the expectation of affectional involvement. This term does not include a casual relationship or an ordinary fraternization between two individuals in a business or social context. 
(Ord. No. 359, §§ 1, 2, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 366, § 1, 4-22-02) 
Secs. 10-59-10-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-76. - Littering. 
(a)  It is unlawful for a person to place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave in any street, alley, park, river, lake or other public place, any rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, waste paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description, except when placed in an authorized receptacle for same. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a person to place, deposit, throw, scatter or leave upon the private property of another, any rubbish, refuse, waste material, garbage, offal, waste paper, glass, cans, bottles, trash, debris or other foreign substances of every kind and description, except when placed in an authorized receptacle for same. 
(c)  It is unlawful to attach, post or affix by any means to a post, pole, mailbox post, or stand, tree or other stationary object located within a public right-of-way or on public property a handbill, newspaper, magazine, placard, sign or other publication without first securing the approval for same. 
(d)  It is unlawful for a person to deliver to private property or disseminate in a public place any handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication if any of the following should occur: 
(1)  If the publisher, publishing company, or distributor has previously been advised by the occupant of the property that the occupant does not want delivery of the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication; 
(2)  If the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication is thrown or placed upon the ground, street, sidewalk or driveway upon or abutting property within the city when the occupant of the property has previously advised the publisher, publishing company, or distributor that he/she objects to placement of those materials in those locations; 
(3)  If the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication is placed in the mail box in violation of federal postal law or regulations; 
(4)  If the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication is (1) placed in a receptacle when the appropriate receptacle is filled and cannot reasonably be expected to hold the current delivery or (2) previously delivered documents by the same publisher or publishing corporation or company remains unclaimed from previous deliveries or are lying upon the street, ground, driveway or sidewalk within 15 feet of the usual point of delivery. 
(e)  The person or persons responsible for littering under this section shall be any of the following: 
(1)  The person making the actual delivery of the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication; 
(2)  In the event that the person making the actual delivery of the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication is a minor, the person directly responsible for supervision of the minor making the delivery; 
(3)  In the event that the publisher or publishing company, publishing corporation or distributor shall have been notified by the owner or occupant of the property targeted for delivery that he or she does not want the handbill, newspaper, magazine or other publication, the publisher, publishing company, publishing corporation or distributor. 
(Ord. No. 370, § 2, 3-10-02) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.901. 
Secs. 10-77-10-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TRESPASSING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Trespassing in cemeteries, § 5-70. 
State Law reference- Trespassing, MCL 750.546 et seq. 

Sec. 10-96. - Prowling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to prowl about any alley or the private premises of any other person, either by day or night, without authority or the permission of the owner of such premises. 
Sec. 10-97. - Illegal entry. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully enter upon the lands or premises of another without lawful authority, after having been forbidden to do so by the owner or occupant, or by the agent or servant of the owner or occupant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, being upon the land or premises of another, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the owner or occupant, by the agent or servant of either, or without lawful authority, to neglect or refuse to depart therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 162, §§ 1, 2, 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.552. 
Sec. 10-98. - Breaking and entering or entering without breaking, entering without permission; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to break and enter, or enter without breaking, any dwelling, house, tent, hotel, office, store, warehouse, barn, granary, factory or other building, or any boat, ship, railroad car or structure used or kept for public or private use, or any private apartment therein, or any cottage, clubhouse, boathouse, hunting or fishing lodge, garage or outbuildings belonging thereto without first obtaining permission to enter from the owner or occupant, agent, or person having immediate control thereof, provided that this section shall not apply to entering without breaking any place which at the time of such entry was open to the public, unless such entry has been expressly denied. 
(b)  This section shall not apply in cases where the breaking and entering or entering without breaking were committed by a police officer or someone under his direction in the lawful performance of his duties as such police officer. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.115. 
Secs. 10-99-10-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Malicious and willful mischief and destruction, MCL 750.377 et seq. 

Sec. 10-116. - Maliciously destroying or injuring personal property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure the personal property of another. 
(Ord. No. 160, § 1, 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.377a. 
Sec. 10-117. - Maliciously injuring or destroying dwelling, building of another. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully and maliciously destroy or injure any house, barn or other building of another, or any appurtenances thereof. 
(Ord. No. 160, § 2, 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.380. 
Sec. 10-118. - Damaging or unauthorized tampering or meddling with motor vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally and without authority from the owner, to start or cause to be started the motor of any motor vehicle, or maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which it was left by the owner or driver of the motor vehicle; 
(2)  Intentionally cut, mark, scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides, top, covering or upholstering of any motor vehicle, which is the property of another, or intentionally to cut, mash, mark, destroy or damage such motor vehicle, or any of the accessories, equipment, appurtenances or attachments thereof, or any spare or extra parts thereon being or thereto attained, without the permission of the owner thereof; 
(3)  Intentionally release the brake upon any standing motor vehicle with intent to injure the machine or cause the same to be removed without the consent of the owner, provided that this section shall not apply in case of the moving or starting of the motor vehicles by the police under authority of local ordinance or by members of fire departments in case of emergency in the vicinity of a fire. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.416. 
Sec. 10-119. - Unlawful use, possession or driving away of motor vehicle. 
(a)  No person shall, willfully and without authority, take possession of and drive or take away, and no person shall assist in or be a party to such taking possession, driving or taking away of any motor vehicle, belonging to another. 
(b)  No person shall take or use without authority any motor vehicle with intent to steal the same, nor shall any person be a party to such unauthorized taking or using. 
(Ord. No. 341, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Secs. 10-120-10-136. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - THEFT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Larceny, MCL 750.356 et seq. 

Sec. 10-137. - Larceny. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to steal, take or carry away the property of another without the consent of the owner or the person having the right to possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 161, § 1, 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Larceny, MCL 750.356 et seq. 
Sec. 10-138. - Receiving, concealing, etc., stolen, embezzled or converted property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, conceal or aid in the concealment of stolen, embezzled or converted money, goods or property when knowing that the money, goods or property are stolen, embezzled or converted, if the property purchased, received, possessed, or concealed has the value of $100.00 or less. 
(b)  A person who is a dealer in or a collector of merchandise or personal property or the agent, employee, or representative of a dealer or collector who fails to make reasonable inquiry that the person selling or delivering the stolen, embezzled or converted property to the dealer or collector has a legal right to do so, or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled, or converted property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. This presumption may be rebutted by proof. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.535. 
Sec. 10-139. - Fraudulent procurement of food or lodging. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, put up, board or lodge at any boarding house as a guest or boarder by the day, week or month, or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, unless there is a distinct and express agreement made by such person with the owner, proprietor or keeper of such boarding house for credit, when there is an intent to defraud such owner, proprietor or keeper out of the pay for such board, lodging, food, entertainment or accommodation, or with intent so to defraud, to obtain credit at any accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto, provided that no conviction shall be had under the provisions of this subsection unless complaint shall be made within ten days of the time of the violation hereof. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to put up at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe as a guest or to procure any food, entertainment or accommodation without paying therefor, except when credit is given therefor by express agreement, with intent to defraud such keeper thereof out of the pay for the same, or, with intent to defraud such keeper out of the pay therefor, to obtain credit at any hotel, motel, inn, restaurant or cafe for such food, entertainment or accommodation, by means of any false show of baggage or effects brought thereto, provided that no conviction shall be had under the provisions of this subsection unless a complaint is made within 60 days of the time of the violation hereof. 
(c)  Obtaining such food, lodging or accommodation by false pretense, or by false or fictitious show of baggage or other property, or refusal or neglect to pay therefor on demand, or payment thereof with check, draft or order upon a bank or other depository on which payment was refused, or absconding without paying or offering to pay therefor, or surreptitiously removing or attempting to remove baggage shall be prima facie evidence of such intent to defraud. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.291 et seq. 
Sec. 10-140. - Checks without sufficient funds. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent to defraud, to make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money, to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of such making, drawing, uttering or delivering, that the maker or drawer has not sufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon its presentation, or with the intent to defraud, to make, draw, utter or deliver any check, draft or order for the payment of money to apply on account or otherwise, upon any bank or other depository and not have sufficient funds for the payment for same when presentation for payment is made to the drawee, except where lack of funds is due to garnishment, attachment, levy or other lawful cause, and such fact was not known to the person who made, drew, uttered or delivered the instrument at the time of so doing. 
(b)  As against the maker or drawer thereof, the making, drawing, uttering or delivering of a check, draft or order, payment of which is refused by the drawee, when presented in the usual course of business, shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud and of knowledge of insufficient funds in or credit with such bank or other depository, provided that such maker or drawer shall not have paid the drawee thereof the amount due thereon, together with all costs and protest fees, within five days after receiving notice that such check, draft or order has not been paid by the drawee. 
(c)  Where the check, draft or order is protested, on the ground of insufficiency of funds or credit, the notice of protest thereof shall be admissible as proof of presentation, nonpayment and protest, and shall be prima facie evidence of intent to defraud, and of knowledge of insufficient funds or credit with such bank or other depository. 
(d)  The word "credit" as used in this section, shall be construed to mean an arrangement or understanding with the bank or depository for the payment of such check, draft or order, in full, upon the presentation thereof for payment. 
(Ord. No. 262, § 1, 6-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.131, 750.132-750.134. 
Sec. 10-141. - False pretenses with intent to defraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with intent to defraud or cheat, to designedly, by color of any false token or writing, by any false or bogus check or other written, printed or engraved instrument, by spurious coin or metal in the similitude of coin, or by any other false pretense, cause any person to grant, convey, assign, demise, lease or mortgage any land or interest in land, or obtain the signature of any person to any written instrument, the making whereof would be punishable as forgery, or obtain from any person any money, personal property or the use of any instrument, facility, article or other valuable thing or service, or by means of any false weights or measures obtain a larger amount or quantity of property than was bargained for, or by means of any false weights or measures sell or dispose of a less amount of quantity of property than was bargained for, if such land or interest in land, money, personal property, use of such instrument, facility or article, valuable thing, service, larger amount obtained or less amount disposed of, shall be of the value of $100.00 or less. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.218. 
Sec. 10-142. - Not returning rented property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to whom tangible property is delivered on a rental or lease basis under any agreement in writing providing for its return to a particular place at a particular time to refuse or willfully neglect, with intent to defraud the lessor, to return such tangible property, after the expiration of the time stated in a notice in writing proved to have been mailed by registered or certified mail addressed to the last known address of the person who rented or leased the tangible property. 
(Ord. No. 336, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 10-143. - Retail fraud. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the following in a store or in its immediate vicinity: 
(1)  While a store is open to the public, alter, transfer, remove and replace, conceal, or otherwise misrepresent the price at which property is offered for sale, with the intent not to pay for the property or to pay less than the price at which the property is offered for sale. 
(2)  While a store is open to the public, steal property of the store that is offered for sale. 
(3)  With intent to defraud, obtain or attempt to obtain money or property from the store as a refund or exchange for property that was not paid for and belongs to the store. 
(Ord. No. 337, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Secs. 10-144-10-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Disorderly conduct in cemeteries, § 5-67. 

Sec. 10-161. - Definition. 
    Public place, as used in this article, shall mean any sidewalk, street, alley, park, playground, public building or any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public or any other place to which the public has access. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 1, 8-28-61) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-162. - Disturbing the peace. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make or excite any disturbance or commotion in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 2(b), 8-28-61; Ord. No. 166, § 2(b), 2-4-80) 
Sec. 10-163. - Picketing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following: 
(1)  To hinder or prevent by mass picketing, unlawful threats, or force the pursuit of any lawful work or employment; 
(2)  To obstruct or interfere with entrance to or egress from any place of employment; 
(3)  To obstruct or interfere with free and uninterrupted use of public roads, streets, highways, railways, airports, or other ways of travel or conveyance; 
(4)  To engage in picketing a private residence by any means or methods whatever. 
    However, picketing, to the extent that the same is authorized under constitutional provisions, shall in no manner be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 130, § 1, 3-4-77) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 423.9f. 
Sec. 10-164. - Indecent, obscene conduct unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful to engage in any indecent, or obscene conduct in any public place. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 2(a), 8-28-61; Ord. No. 166, § 2(a), 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Indecent language, MCL 750.103, 750.337; person engaged in indecent or obscene conduct deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(f). 
Sec. 10-165. - Loitering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter on any street, sidewalk, park or public building or to conduct himself in any public place so as to obstruct the free and uninterrupted passage of the public after having been told to move on by a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 21, § 2(c), 8-28-61; Ord. No. 166, § 2(c), 2-4-80) 
State Law reference- Certain loiterers deemed disorderly persons, MCL 750.167. 
Sec. 10-166. - Disturbing lawful assemblies. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb any service of worship or any other assembly gathered for a lawful purpose. 
State Law reference- Disturbing meetings, MCL 750.169 et seq. 
Sec. 10-167. - Disorderly intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be under the influence of any controlled substance in any public place or to be intoxicated in a public place so as to either endanger directly the safety of another person or of property, or in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
State Law reference- Intoxicated person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(e). 
Sec. 10-168. - Jostling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jostle or roughly crowd people unnecessarily in a public place. 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(l). 
Sec. 10-169. - Unlawful assembly. 
    It shall be unlawful and shall constitute an unlawful assembly for a person to assemble or act in concert with four or more persons for the purpose of engaging in conduct constituting the crime of riot, or to be present at an assembly that either has or develops such a purpose and to remain thereat with intent to advance such purpose. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.543. 
Sec. 10-170. - Riot. 
    It shall be unlawful and shall constitute the crime of riot for five or more persons, acting in concert, to wrongfully engage in violent conduct and thereby intentionally or recklessly cause or create a serious risk of causing public terror or alarm. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.541. 
Sec. 10-171. - Incitement to riot. 
    It shall be unlawful and shall constitute incitement to riot for a person intending to cause, to aid or to abet the institution or maintenance of a riot, to do an act or engage in conduct that urges other persons to commit acts of unlawful force or violence, the unlawful burning or destroying of property or the unlawful interference with a police officer, peace officer, fireman or a member of the national guard or any unit of the armed services officially assigned to riot duty in the lawful performance of his duty. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.542. 
Sec. 10-172. - Noise disturbances from radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which: 
(1)  Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals, or 
(2)  Annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensibilities, or 
(3)  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
    Person means any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes the city and other governmental entities. 
    Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intrabuilding real property divisions. 
(b)  Noise disturbances; prohibited acts. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, play, or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical instrument, sound amplifier or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound: 
a.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a real property boundary; 
b.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance at 50 feet (15 meters) from such device, when operated in or on a motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space, or in a boat on public waters; 
c.  In such a manner as to create a noise disturbance to any person other than the operator of the device, when operated by any passenger on a common carrier. 
(c)  Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the production of music in connection with any military, civic or authorized parade, funeral procession or religious ceremony, nor shall this section apply to any musical performance conducted under the consent of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 347, § 347, 11-8-99) 
Sec. 10-173. - House parties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with other persons because of, participate in, or be in any part of gathering of people from which sound emanates of a sufficient volume so as to disturb the peace, quiet or repose of persons residing in any residential area. It shall be unlawful for any person to visit or remain within any residential dwelling unit or within the vicinity of a residential dwelling unit wherein such party or gathering of people is taking place except persons who have gone there for the sole purpose of abating said disturbance. A police officer may order all persons present in any group or gathering from which such sound emanates, other than the owners or tenants of the dwelling unit, to immediately disperse in lieu of being charged under this section. Owners or tenants of the dwelling unit shall immediately abate the disturbance and, failing to do so, shall be in violation of this section. 
(b)  Statement of intent. No provision of this section shall be construed to limit or abridge the rights of any person to peacefully assemble and express opinions. It is the purpose of this section to protect individuals from unreasonable intrusions caused by excessive, unnecessary, unreasonable and unusually loud noises. 
(Ord. No. 348, § 1, 11-8-99) 
Sec. 10-174. - Failure of adult to prevent consumption of alcoholic beverages and/or controlled substances to minors; penalties; exceptions. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Adult means a person 17 years of age or older. 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spirituous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether or not medicated, propriety, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage purposes. The term "alcoholic liquor" includes, by way of example and not by way of limitation, beer, wine, spirits, alcohol, sacramental wine, brandy, mixed wine drink, and mixed spirit drink. 
    Control means any form of regulation or dominion including a possessory right. 
    Controlled substance means a controlled substance as defined now or hereafter by the Public Acts of the State of Michigan. Currently, such controlled substances are defined by Act No. 196 of the Public Acts of 1971, as amended, being MCL 335.301 to 335.367. 
    Premises means any land, building, or part thereof, including without limitation, any motel room, hotel room, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of such dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as dwelling or specifically for social functions and whether owned, leased, rented or used with or without compensation. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. Any adult having control over any premises is guilty of a misdemeanor if: 
(1)  The adult knows or reasonably should know that alcoholic liquor or controlled substances are possessed or being consumed by persons under 21 years of age on the premises; and 
(2)  Such adult fails to take steps reasonably calculated to prevent such possessions or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance by such persons under 21 years of age. 
(c)  Exception. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to legally protected religious observances or legally protected educational activities. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as specified in section 1-8 of Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek. 
(Ord. No. 349, § 1, 11-8-99) 
Sec. 10-175. - Skateboarding. 
(a)  Definitions. 
    Pedestrian means a person on foot or on skateboard, excluding a person on foot walking a bicycle or moped. 
    Sidewalk means that portion of a highway designed or ordinarily used for pedestrian travel. 
    Skateboard means a single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled solely by human power and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer or to control the movement or direction of the platform. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard upon the property of another without the owner's written consent. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a skateboard upon any sidewalk or property open to the general public. 
(d)  No more than one person shall operate or ride on a skateboard at one time. 
(e)  A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days and/or a fine of $500.00. In addition to any other penalty imposed, a police officer or other law enforcement agent may confiscate the skateboard and obtain the operator's name, address, telephone number and age. A skateboard confiscated under this subsection shall be returned to persons 17 years of age or older, not earlier than 48 hours after the violation, upon their appearance at the City of Swartz Creek police department. Skateboards confiscated from those persons under the age of 17 shall be returned not earlier than 48 hours after the violation, to the persons' parent or guardian upon their appearance at the City of Swartz Creek police department. If a skateboard is confiscated from a person other than the owner of the skateboard, the skateboard shall be returned not earlier than 48 hours after the violation, to the owner or the parent or guardian of the owner, if the owner is under 17 years of age, upon the appearance of the owner or the parent or guardian of the owner at the City of Swartz Creek police department. 
(Ord. No. 386, § 1, 2-14-05) 
Secs. 10-176-10-190. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-191. - Throwing projectiles from or at motor vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or propel any snowball, missile or other object from or at any moving motor vehicle. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles generally, Ch. 18. 
State Law reference- Throwing stone or missile at train, automobile, etc., MCL 750.394. 
Sec. 10-192. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 420 , § 2, adopted June 22, 2015, repealed § 10-192, which pertained to fireworks and derived from the original codification of this Code. 
Secs. 10-193-10-210. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Firearms prohibited in cemeteries, § 5-69. 
State Law reference- Firearms and weapons, MCL 28.421 et seq., 750.222 et seq. 

Sec. 10-211. - Definition. 
    Firearms, as used in this division, shall be defined as any weapon from which a dangerous projectile may be propelled by using explosives, a spring, gas or air as a means of propulsion, provided that it is specifically intended that firearms commonly referred to as "air guns" or "B-B guns" shall be included within the meaning of this definition. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 1, 3-10-86) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-212. - Discharge of firearms prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a firearm while within the city, except for the following: 
(1)  A peace officer in the performance of his duty or any other person lawfully acting in defense of people or property; 
(2)  Military or other organizations may fire a salute over the grave at a burial of a member of their organization or upon observation of memorial services; 
(3)  Discharge for ceremonial or exhibition purposes, upon application to the council and when, at the discretion of the council, it shall determine that such discharge shall be in the best interest of the community. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 2, 3-10-86) 
Sec. 10-213. - Carrying or flourishing a firearm; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, excepting a peace officer in the performance of his duty or as otherwise authorized by general state law, to carry or flourish a firearm upon any public street or in any public place, unless the firearm is unloaded and either in a car or wholly within a case or other cover. 
(Ord. No. 217, § 3, 3-10-86) 
Sec. 10-214. - Possession of firearms while under influence of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person under the influence of alcoholic liquor, any controlled substance or any other exhilarating or stupefying substance to carry, to have in his possession or under his control, or to use in any manner or otherwise discharge any firearm within the city. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.237. 
Sec. 10-215. - Intentionally aiming a firearm without malice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, without malice, point or aim any firearm at or toward any other person, or to discharge any firearm while so aimed. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.233. 
Sec. 10-216. - Reckless use of firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly, heedlessly, willfully or wantonly use, carry, handle or discharge any firearm without due caution and circumspection for the rights, safety or property of others. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 752.a863. 
Sec. 10-217. - Use or possession of gas-ejecting devices. 
(a)  A person shall not manufacture, sell, offer for sale, or possess a device, weapon, cartridge, container, or contrivance designed to render a person temporarily or permanently disabled by the ejection, release, or emission of a gas or other substance. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not apply to a self-defense spray device as defined in MCL 750.224d. 
(Ord. No. 339, § 1, 4-12-99) 
Sec. 10-218. - Hunting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt within the city. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as specified in section 1-8 of Chapter 1 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 352, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-00) 
Sec. 10-219. - Knives or other weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto, or knife having a blade over three inches in length. 
(Ord. No. 387, § 1, 2-14-05) 
Secs. 10-220-10-235. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 10-236. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Urinate or defecate on any public street or sidewalk, or on the floor of that part of any building open to the public, or any other public place not specifically designated for that purpose; 
(2)  Intentionally make or cause to be made any open exposure of the human male or female genitals, pubic areas, buttocks or female breasts in any public place; 
(3)  Perform any act of sexual conduct in a vehicle when the vehicle is in motion, parked, stopped or standing: 
a.  In a public place; 
b.  In an area open to the public; 
c.  On private property when the interior of the vehicle is on view from a public area or an area open to the public. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following words or phrases shall mean the following: 
(1)  Public place shall mean any sidewalk, street, alley, playground, public building or any place of business or assembly open to or frequented by the public or any other place to which the public has access. 
(2)  On view shall mean capable of being seen if the interior of the vehicle is lighted naturally or artificially, or if unlighted, capable of being seen if it becomes lighted naturally or artificially, whether the light originates from the interior or exterior of the vehicle. 
(3)  Sexual conduct shall mean: 
a.  Sexual intercourse that has its ordinary meaning of sexual gratification upon any penetration, however slight. Emission of semen is not required. 
b.  Deviate sexual intercourse, which means any act of sexual gratification between persons involving the sex organs of one person and the mouth or anus of another. 
c.  Sexual contact, which includes the intentional touching of a person's intimate parts or the intentional touching of the clothing covering the immediate areas of a person's intimate parts, if the intentional touching can reasonably be construed as being for the purpose of sexual arousal or gratification. 
(Ord. No. 388, § 1, 2-14-05) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 750.335a. 
Sec. 10-237. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any act of prostitution or to solicit or accost any person for the purpose of inducing the commission of any such act. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of prostitution if he engages in or agrees to engage in sexual conduct with another in return for a fee. 
State Law reference- Common prostitute deemed a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(b); prostitution generally, MCL 750.448 et seq. 
Sec. 10-238. - Gambling. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in gambling activities within the city unless said activities are approved, licensed, or sanctioned by or under the laws of the State of Michigan; 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to engage in gambling activities within the city, whether or not those activities are approved, licensed, or sanctioned by or under the laws of the State of Michigan. 
(Ord. No. 346, § 1, 9-13-99) 
State Law reference- Gambling, MCL 750.301 et seq. 
Sec. 10-239. - Operating or attending illegal business. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly attend, frequent, operate or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of alcoholic liquor or where any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted. 
State Law reference- Such person defined as a disorderly person, MCL 750.167(1)(d), (j). 
Sec. 10-240. - Transporting for illegal acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly transport any person to a place for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling or in any illegal act. 
State Law reference- Transporting person for prostitution, MCL 750.459. 
Sec. 10-241. - Sale of paraphernalia used with controlled substances. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell for profit any device, article, implement, tool, apparatus, utensil, instrument or appliance intended for use in connection with any controlled substance, except that this section shall not apply to any licensed physician, pharmacist or other person under the laws of this state who is authorized to prescribe or dispense controlled substances. 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, MCL 333.7101 et seq. 
Sec. 10-242. - Use or possession of marijuana. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally possess or use marijuana. 
Sec. 10-243. - Possession and distribution of prescription drugs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to possess a drug, pharmaceutical preparation, or chemical belonging to another person, or to possess for the purpose of resale, or sell, offer to sell, dispense, or give away, a drug, pharmaceutical preparation, or chemical that has been dispensed on prescription and has left the control of a pharmacist. 
(Ord. No. 377, § 1, 3-22-04; Ord. No. 394, § 1, 2-27-06) 
Sec. 10-244. - Huffing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to inhale, breathe or drink any compound, liquid, chemical or any other substance known as glue, adhesive, cement, mucilage, dope or any similar material or substance, or combination thereof with the intent of becoming intoxicated, elated, dazed, paralyzed, irrational or in any manner changing, distorting or disturbing the eyesight, thinking process, balance or coordination of such person. This section shall not pertain to any person who inhales, breathes or drinks such material or substance pursuant to the direction or discretion of any doctor, physician, surgeon, dentist or podiatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 389, § 1, 2-14-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 389, § 1, adopted February 27, 2006, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as a new § 10-243. Inasmuch as there already exist provisions so designated, Ord. No. 389 have been included herein as a new § 10-244 at the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 10-245-10-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO SCHOOLS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic regulations on school property, § 18-91 et seq. 

Sec. 10-261. - Defacing school buildings. 
    No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface or do damage to any building owned, occupied, or otherwise used as a school within the city. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 1, 6-1-70) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 10-262. - Defacing property used by schools. 
    No person shall mark with any substance or in any other manner deface or do damage to any fence, tree, lawn or other fixture situated on lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 2, 6-1-70) 
State Law reference- Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377 et seq. 
Sec. 10-263. - Disturbing school from adjacent grounds. 
    No person, while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a school or any class thereof is in session, shall willfully make or assist in making any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet or good order of such school session or class thereof. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 3, 6-1-70) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 10-264. - Disturbing gathering on school property. 
    No person, while on public or private lands adjacent to any building or lands owned, occupied or otherwise used by a school within the city in or on which any gathering or function is in progress, whether in the day or at night, shall willfully make or assist in the making of any noise or diversion which disturbs or tends to disturb the peace, quiet, or good order of such gathering or function. 
(Ord. No. 85, § 4, 6-1-70) 
State Law reference- Disturbing public places, MCL 750.170. 
Sec. 10-265. - Trespass upon school property. 
    It shall be illegal for any person to remain within any school during normal school hours or remain on any lands owned, occupied or used by any school within the city and adjacent to a school, upon being notified to depart therefrom by the principal or any other person in charge of the school property. 
(Ord. No. 265, § 2, 1-8-90) 
Secs. 10-266-10-285. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO UNDERAGED PERSONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 10-286-10-304. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CURFEW 

Sec. 10-305. - Failure of parent or guardian to collect minor. 
    It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor child to fail or refuse to collect that child from the authorities or make provisions therefor within a period of three hours after notification that the child was taken into custody for a violation of the Swartz Creek City Code. 
(Ord. No. 390, § 1, 2-14-05) 
Sec. 10-306. - Minors under the age of thirteen. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 13 years to be in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place within the city between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some other person of the age of 18 years or older who is delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 1, 9-13-76) 
Sec. 10-307. - Minors under the age of sixteen and over the age of twelve. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor of the age of 13 years and under 16 years to be in or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public place between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. immediately following, unless the minor is accompanied by a parent, guardian or some other person of the age of 18 years or older who is delegated by the parent or guardian to accompany the minor, excepting cases where the minor is upon an errand directed by his parent or guardian. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 2, 9-13-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.752. 
Sec. 10-308. - Aiding or abetting violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person of the age of 16 years or older to assist, aid, abet, allow, permit or encourage any minor under the age of 16 years to violate the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 129, § 3, 9-13-76) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 722.753. 
Sec. 10-309. - Use or possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age to possess or smoke cigarettes or cigars; or possess or chew, suck, or inhale chewing tobacco or tobacco snuff; or possess or use tobacco in any other form. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, give, or furnish any cigarette, cigar, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, or tobacco in any other form to a person under 18 years of age. 
(1)  It is an affirmative defense to a charge pursuant to subsection (b) that the defendant had in force at the time of arrest and continues to have in force a written policy to prevent the sale of cigarettes, cigars, chewing tobacco, tobacco snuff, and other tobacco products to persons under 18 years of age, and that the defendant enforced and continues to enforce the policy. A defendant who proposes to offer evidence of the affirmative defense described in this subsection shall file and serve notice of the defense, in writing, upon the court and the city attorney. The notice shall be served not less than 14 days before the date set for trial. 
(2)  If the city proposes to offer testimony to rebut the affirmative defense described in subsection (b)(1) shall file and serve a notice of rebuttal, in writing, upon the court and the defendant. The notice shall be served not less than seven days before the date set for trial, and shall contain the name and address of each rebuttal witness. 
(Ord. No. 344, § 1, 9-13-99) 
Secs. 10-310-10-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - OFFENSES PERTAINING TO ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference- Liquor Control Act, MCL 436.1 et seq. 

Sec. 10-326. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Alcoholic liquor means any spiritous, vinous, malt or fermented liquor, liquids or compounds, whether or not medicated, proprietary, patented, and by whatever name called, containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume which are fit for use for beverage consumption. The term "alcoholic liquor" includes, by way of example and not by way of limitation, beer, wine, spirits, alcohol, sacramental wine, brandy, mixed wine drink and mixed spirit drink. 
    Any bodily alcohol content means either of the following: 
(1)  An alcohol content of not less than 0.02 grams or more per 100 milliliters of blood, per 210 liters of breath, or per 67 milliliters of urine; 
(2)  Any presence of alcohol within a person's body resulting from the consumption of alcoholic liquor, other than consumption of alcoholic liquor as a part of a generally recognized religious service or ceremony. 
    Diligent inquiry means a diligent good faith effort to determine the age of a person, which includes at least an examination of an official Michigan operator's or chauffeur's license, an official Michigan personal identification card, or any other bona fide picture identification which establishes the identity and age of the person. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, limited partnership, association, limited liability company or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 33, § 1, 7-8-63; Ord. No. 334, § 1, 6-22-99; Ord. No. 393, § 1, 2-13-06) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-327. - Public consumption. 
    No alcoholic liquors shall be consumed on the public highways or streets, or in public places, including any store or establishment doing business with the public and not licensed to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises. Any person who owns, operates or controls any such unlicensed store or establishment shall not permit the consumption of alcoholic liquor therein. 
(Ord. No. 33, § 2, 7-8-63) 
State Law reference- Place of consumption of liquor, MCL 436.34. 
Sec. 10-328. - Selling or furnishing alcoholic liquor to minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for a person to knowingly sell or furnish alcoholic liquor to a minor, or to fail to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor, or to fail to make diligent inquiry as to whether the person is a minor except if the violation is the result of an undercover operation in which the minor received alcoholic liquor under the direction of the state police, the Michigan Liquor Control Commission or the City of Swartz Creek Police Department as part of an enforcement action. 
(b)  A person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of $500.00 or both. 
(c)  For violations that occur in an establishment that is licensed by the Michigan Liquor Control Commission for consumption of alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises, a licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of a licensee shall not be charged with a violation of this section unless the licensee or the clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee knew or should have reasonably known with the exercise of due diligence that a person less than 21 years of age possessed or consumed alcoholic liquor on the licensed premises and the licensee or clerk, agent, or employee of the licensee failed to take immediate corrective action. A licensee shall not be charged with a violation of this section unless all of the following occur: 
(1)  Enforcement action is taken against the minor who purchased or attempted to purchase, consumed or attempted to consume, or possessed or attempted to possess alcoholic liquor. 
(2)  Enforcement action is taken under this section against the person 21 years of age or older who is not the retail licensee or the retail licensee's clerk, agent, or employee who sold or furnished the alcoholic liquor to the minor. 
(3)  Enforcement action under this section is taken against the clerk, agent, or employee who directly sold or furnished alcoholic liquor to the minor. 
(4)  Proof that the defendant or the defendant's agent or employee demanded and was shown, before furnishing alcoholic liquor to a minor, a motor vehicle operator's or chauffeur's license or a registration certificate issued by the federal selective service, or other bona fide documentary evidence of the age and identity of that person, shall be a defense to an action brought under this section. 
(Ord. No. 33, § 3, 7-8-63; Ord. No. 393, § 2, 2-13-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33. 
Sec. 10-329. - Fraudulent age identification. 
(a)  A person who furnishes fraudulent identification to a person less than 21 years of age, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by 93 days in jail and/or fine of $500.00. 
(b)  A person under the age of 21 years who uses any false information or makes any false representation as to his age to purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by 93 days in jail and/or fine of $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 33, § 4, 7-8-63; Ord. No. 393, § 3, 2-13-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33b(3). 
Sec. 10-330. - Conduct of minors. 
(a)  Except as provided in paragraph (b), it shall be unlawful for any person less than 21 years of age to purchase or attempt to purchase alcoholic liquor, consume or attempt to consume alcoholic liquor, or possess or attempt to possess alcoholic liquor or have any bodily alcohol content, unless the person is authorized to do so under state or federal law. A person who violates this subsection is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as follows: 
(1)  If a minor has not previously been convicted of or received a juvenile adjudication of paragraph (a) pleads guilty to a violation of paragraph (a), the court, without entering a judgment of guilt and with the consent of the accused, may defer further proceedings and place the minor on probation upon terms and conditions that include, but are not limited to, the sanctions as set out in subsection (a)(2) below. Upon violation of a term or condition of probation, the court may enter an adjudication of guilt and proceed as otherwise provided by law. Discharge and dismissal under this section shall be without adjudication of guilt and is not a conviction for purposes of this section or for purposes of the additional penalties imposed for second or subsequent convictions as stated in this section. There may be only one discharge or dismissal under this subsection as to an individual. 
(2)  First violation of paragraph (a). For the first violation, the fine shall be $100.00 and the minor may be ordered to participate in community service, substance abuse prevention, treatment and rehabilitation services and may be ordered to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
(3)  Second violation of paragraph (a). For a second violation of this subsection or former subsection, the minor may be punished by imprisonment for not more than 30 days but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation for that conviction, a fine of $200.00, or both, and the minor may be ordered to participate in community service, substance abuse prevention, treatment and rehabilitation services and may be ordered to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
(4)  Third violation of paragraph (a). For the third or subsequent violation of this subsection or former subsection, the minor may be punished by imprisonment for not more than 60 days but only if the minor has been found by the court to have violated an order of probation for that conviction, a fine of $500.00, or both, and the minor may be ordered to participate in community service, substance abuse prevention, treatment and rehabilitation services and may be ordered to undergo substance abuse screening and assessment at his or her own expense. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) does not apply to a minor who participates in either or both of the following: 
(1)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the person's employer and with the prior approval of the city prosecutor's office as part of an employer-sponsored internal enforcement action. 
(2)  An undercover operation in which the minor purchases or receives alcoholic liquor under the direction of the City of Swartz Creek Police Department as part of an enforcement action unless the initial or contemporaneous purchase or receipt of alcoholic liquor by the minor was not under the direction of the City of Swartz Creek Police Department and was not part of the undercover operation. 
(3)  A peace officer who has reasonable cause to believe a person less than 21 years of age has consumed alcoholic liquor or has any bodily alcohol content may require the person to submit to a preliminary chemical breath analysis. A peace officer may arrest a person based in whole or in part upon the results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis. The results of a preliminary chemical breath analysis or other acceptable blood alcohol test are admissible in a criminal prosecution to determine whether the person less than 21 years of age has consumed or possessed alcoholic liquor or had any bodily alcohol content. A minor who refuses to submit to a preliminary chemical breath test analysis is responsible for a civil infraction and may be ordered to pay a civil fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 33, § 5, 7-8-63; Ord. No. 163, § 2, 2-4-80; Ord. No. 291, § 1, 3-22-93; Ord. No. 334, § 2, 2-22-99; Ord. No. 360, § 1, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 393, § 4, 2-13-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, MCL 436.33a, 436.33b. 
Chapter 11 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Authority to operate recreation and playgrounds, MCL 123.51 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 11-1-11-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-252 et seq. 

Sec. 11-21. - Formation. 
    There is hereby created a parks and recreation advisory board within the city. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 1, 1-13-69) 
Sec. 11-22. - Membership. 
    The city parks and recreation advisory board shall consist of nine members and, except as otherwise provided for, shall be appointed by the mayor with the concurrence of the council. 
(Ord. No. 66, 2, 1-13-69; Ord. No. 106, 8-13-73) 
Sec. 11-23. - Term of office. 
    The term of office of each member of the board shall be for three years. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 3, 1-13-69; Ord. No. 106, 8-13-73) 
Sec. 11-24. - Compensation. 
    The members of the board shall serve without compensation, provided that they may be reimbursed for actual and necessary expenses incurred by attendance at conferences or seminars approved by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 4, 1-13-69) 
Sec. 11-25. - Organization. 
    The members of the board shall annually elect a chairman, a vice-chairman, and a secretary and they shall adopt rules for the conduct of their business. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 5, 1-13-69) 
Sec. 11-26. - Vacancies. 
    If there is a vacancy on the board, the mayor, with the concurrence of the city council, shall appoint a person to fill such vacancy for the remainder of the term vacated. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 6, 1-13-69; Ord. No. 357, § 1, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 11-27. - Authority, purpose. 
    The board shall advise and make recommendations to the appropriate city official regarding the planning, maintaining, improving, financing, and supervision of the parks and recreation facilities and programs of the city. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 7, 1-13-69) 
Sec. 11-28. - Acquisition of gifts and donations. 
    The board is authorized to solicit gifts or donations of money or other property for park and recreation purposes, provided that any such gifts or donations shall be received by the city. 
(Ord. No. 66, § 8, 1-13-69) 
Secs. 11-29-11-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RULES AND REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 417, § 1, adopted November 24, 2014, repealed Art. III, §§ 11-46-11-52, which pertained to rules and regulations. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. III, §§ 11-46, 11-47. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 11-46. - Definition. 
    For purposes of this article "park" means any area or plat of land owned or operated by the city and which is developed and used for public recreational purposes, including but not limited to, landscaped tracts, picnic grounds, playgrounds, athletic fields, stadiums, camps, foot and bicycle paths, motor vehicle drives, ice rinks and other recreational structures and facilities for the use and benefit of the public. 
( Ord. No. 417, § 2, 11-24-14 ) 
Sec. 11-47. - Park rules and regulations. 
    The city council may by resolution adopt rules and regulations governing the use of parks, including prohibitions or restrictions on uses and acts within parks. 
( Ord. No. 417, § 2, 11-24-14 ) 
Chapter 12 - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 414, § 1, adopted April 28, 2014 , amended Ch. 12, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 12, §§ 12-1-12-3, pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference- Charitable organizations and solicitations, MCL 400.271 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq.; home solicitations sales, MCL 445.111 et seq.; exceptions for a veteran's license, MCL 35.441. 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Commercial solicitation. Direct and personal communication in the course of a trade or business reasonably intended to result in a sale. 
    Person. An individual, organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above. 
    Sale. An activity creating an obligation to transfer property or services for a valuable consideration. 
    Solicitor. 
(1)  A person who engages in commercial solicitation when traveling either by foot, automobile, motor truck, or other means of conveyance from place to place, from house to house or from street to street. 
(2)  The word solicitor shall include but not be limited to the words canvassers, peddler, and hawker. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-2. - License required. 
    No person shall be a solicitor and/or solicit in the City of Swartz Creek without first obtaining a license therefor. An application for a license shall be made to the city clerk. In the event that the application is made by an organization, group, association, partnership, corporation, trust, business entity or any combination of the above, an application must be made for each agent or employee who will be engaging in the act of soliciting. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-3. - Exceptions to license. 
    The following activities are exempt from this chapter: 
(1)  Solicitations made to a congregation or group in attendance at one location and made by the person or organization inviting the individuals composing the congregation or group; 
(2)  Solicitations made over the radio, television or telephone; 
(3)  Any communication by an organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of the organization at the time of the solicitation; 
(4)  Any solicitation pursuant to a political candidacy or ballot issue qualified pursuant to "The Michigan Election Law" or "The School Code of 1976" as they are amended from time to time; 
(5)  Any peddler traveling on an established route at the request, express or implied, of their customers; 
(6)  Salespersons calling on clients, customers or business establishments with whom they have established business relationships at the time of the solicitation; 
(7)  The distribution of handbills or leaflets where the individual distributing them does not seek or accept payments, orders or contributions; 
(8)  A person handling vegetables, fruits or perishable farm products at any established city farmers' market; 
(9)  A person who is not a business or merchant, but who engages in a garage sale whereby they are selling their own items from their household. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-4. - License application. 
    A license application filed hereunder shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  Name and description of the applicant; 
(2)  Permanent home address and full local address of the applicant; 
(3)  A brief description of the nature of the solicitation contemplated; 
(4)  If the applicant is an employee, the name and address of the employer, together with the credentials establishing the exact employer/employee relationship; 
(5)  The length of time the applicant intends to solicit; 
(6)  The place where the wares, merchandise, services, items of personal property or real property are located, manufactured or produced and the proposed method of delivery; 
(7)  One photograph of the applicant, it being from the applicant's driver's license or identification card; 
(8)  The applicant's social security number; 
(9)  A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any felony, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor. This statement shall be accompanied by a release allowing the city, including the city police department to conduct a criminal background check. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-5. - Administrative fee and/or license fee. 
    An applicant shall pay a reasonable administrative processing fee and/or license fee set by resolution of the city council when submitting his or her license application. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-6. - Issuance, possession, and presentation of license. 
    Upon approval of the license application, the city clerk shall issue a license and license identification card including the name, address, and photo of the licensed person. The licensed person shall visibly display on their person at all times the license identification card when conducting activities permitted by the license. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-7. - License revocation. 
    The city may suspend or revoke a license for violation of this article after reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard. The city may suspend on an emergency basis, without hearing, any license issued to the solicitor when it specifies in the notice of emergency suspension, the reasons and grounds indicating the violation of this article which constitutes the emergency. The notice shall set forth that within 48 hours, at a designated time and place, a hearing shall be held on whether the license shall be permanently suspended or revoked. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-8. - Prohibited activities. 
    The following acts or activities shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Prohibited areas. No solicitor shall obstruct any street, alley, sidewalk or driveway. 
(2)  Litter. No solicitor shall litter any street, alley, sidewalk, driveway, or private property in the city. 
(3)  Curb service prohibited. No solicitor shall operate or maintain any stand, vehicle, store or place of solicitation on or near any highway. No solicitor shall be permitted to use the streets, alleys, lanes or public places of the city for soliciting or to use any stands, stores or other places of transaction in any manner that requires the person wishing to participate in a transaction, when engaged in the transaction, to stand within the limits of the streets, highways, alleys or public places of the city. 
(4)  Prohibition of entry upon private property expressly requesting no solicitation. No solicitor shall enter upon and/or call upon a place of residence or business within the City of Swartz Creek after having been expressly notified by the occupant of the place of residence or business that no solicitation is desired, or if the place of residence or business visibly displays on its property and/or premises a sign indicating "no soliciting," "no solicitation" and/or other language specifically conveying the message that no soliciting is desired. 
(5)  Prohibition of creation of nuisance. No solicitor shall threaten or annoy any resident of the city in the course of their solicitation or in any way engage in any conduct which is or would tend to create a nuisance. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-9. - Hours of operation. 
    Soliciting may take place within the city between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. or sunset, whichever occurs earlier. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Sec. 12-10. - Penalty. 
    Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs of prosecution or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or by both fine and costs and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
( Ord. No. 414, § 1, 4-28-14 ) 
Chapter 13 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- City planning, § 7.13. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; streets, sidewalks and other public places, Ch. 15; subdivisions, Ch. 16; utilities, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Municipal planning, MCL 125.31 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Development plans, contents; fees. 
(a)  A development plan submitted to the city for review containing therein a proposed multi-family development shall be accompanied with a fee of $100.00, plus $2.00 for each proposed family unit planned therein. 
(b)  All development plans, excepting single-family subdivisions and those provided for in subsection (a) above and submitted to the city for review shall be accompanied by a fee of $100.00. 
(c)  If a development plan is submitted to the city for review pursuant to this chapter without the fees required by this section accompanying the plan, no further action shall be had upon the plan until the requisite fees are paid. 
(d)  The fees required by this section are intended as a reimbursement to the city for monies expended by the city for the review of any development plans. 
(Ord. No. 87, §§ 1-4, 11-2-70; Ord. No. 97, § 1, 6-5-72) 
Secs. 13-2-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; boards and commissions generally, § 2-252 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to create a planning commission, MCL 125.32. 

Sec. 13-21. - Establishment of planning commission. 
    There is hereby established a planning commission in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 1, 3-14-60) 
Sec. 13-22. - Powers and duties of planning commission. 
    The planning commission shall have the powers and duties prescribed for a planning commission in Act No. 33 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 2008 (MCL 125.3801 et seq.), as amended. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 2, 3-14-60; Ord. No. 411, § 1, 3-24-14 ) 
Sec. 13-23. - Composition, terms of office, compensation. 
(a)  The planning commission shall be composed of the mayor, the city manager or a person designated by the manager, a member of the council appointed by the mayor and six qualified electors of the city appointed by the mayor and confirmed by a majority vote of the council. The mayor, manager or manager's designee, and member of the council shall serve as ex officio members of the planning commission. 
(b)  The term of the mayor shall correspond to his or her term as mayor. The term of the city manager or manager's designee shall expire with the term of the mayor. The term of the member of the council shall expire with his or her term on the council. 
(c)  The terms of members who are qualified electors shall be for three years. Of those members first appointed, a number shall be appointed to one-year or two-year terms such that, as nearly as possible, the terms of one-third of all the planning commission members will expire each year. 
(d)  If a vacancy occurs on a planning commission, the vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as provided for an original appointment. A member shall hold office until his or her successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 5, § 3, 3-14-60; Ord. No. 411, § 2, 3-24-14 ) 
Chapter 14 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to undertake any public work or make any public improvement, § 3.1(b)(4); special assessments, Ch. 10. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor saved from repeal, § 1-6(7); community development, Ch. 6; taxation, Ch. 17. 
State Law reference- Powers re special assessments, MCL 117.4a, 117.4b, 117.5. 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Cost means and includes, when referring to the cost of any improvement, the cost of surveys, plans, land, rights-of-way, profiles, spreading of rolls, notices, advertising, financing and construction and all other costs incident to the making of such improvements, the special assessments therefor and the financing thereof. 
    Improvement means any public improvement, any part of the cost of which is to be assessed against one or more lots or parcels of land to be especially benefited thereby and in proportion to the benefit to be derived therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 1, 2-13-61) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 14-2. - Initiation of projects. 
    Proceedings for the making of any local public improvement to be financed by special assessment on the property especially benefiting therefrom may be commenced by resolution of the council on its own initiative, or by an initiatory petition signed by owners or if being purchased on land contract by the land contract vendees of more than 50 percent of the property to be assessed for such improvements. All such petitions shall: 
(1)  Contain a description of the type of public improvement to be made and the area to be covered by the improvement; 
(2)  Contain a request that such improvement be made and the cost thereof defrayed by special assessment upon the property benefited; 
(3)  Contain in addition to the signatures of the owners, a brief description of the property owned by the respective signers thereof; 
(4)  Be verified by the affidavit of one or more of the owners or land contract vendees or by some person with knowledge that the signers are such owners or land contract vendees and that such signatures are genuine; 
(5)  Be addressed to the council and filed with the city clerk; however, petitions shall in no event be mandatory upon the council; 
(6)  Be referred by the city clerk to the city manager. The city manager shall check the petitions to determine whether they conform to the foregoing requirements and shall report his findings to the council. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 2, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-3. - Preparation of report. 
    Before the council shall consider the making of any local public improvement to be financed in whole or in part by special assessment, the project shall be referred by resolution to the city manager, directing him to prepare a report which shall include necessary plans, profiles, specifications and detailed estimates of probable cost, as well as an estimate of the life of the improvement, the need for the improvement, a description of the assessment districts, and such other pertinent information as will permit the council to decide the cost, extent and necessity of the improvement proposed and what part, if any, should be paid by the city at large. The council shall not determine to proceed with the making of any such improvement until such report of the city manager has been filed, nor until after a public hearing has been held by the council for the purposes of hearing objections to the making of such public improvement. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 3, 2-13-61) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 14-4. - Determination by council-Notice of necessity hearing. 
    After the city manager has presented the report required in section 14-3 to the council and it has reviewed the report, a resolution may be passed determining the necessity of the improvement; setting forth the nature thereof; prescribing what part or proportion of the cost of such improvement shall be paid by special assessment upon the property especially benefited, which shall be in accordance with the benefits received by affected properties, and what part, if any, shall be paid by the city at large; designating the limits of the special assessment district; designating whether to be assessed according to the frontage or other benefits; placing the complete information on file in the office of the city clerk where the same may be found for examination; and directing the city clerk to publish a notice of public hearing on the proposed improvement at which time and place opportunity will be given interested persons to be heard. Such notice of necessity hearing shall be made by one publication in a newspaper published or circulated within the city at least one week prior to the holding of the hearing. Notice of hearing shall also be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax record, at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this action may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 4, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-5. - Hearing on necessity. 
    At the public hearing on the proposed improvements, all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard, after which the council may modify the scope of the public improvement, if necessary, in such a manner as they shall deem to be in the best interest of the city as a whole. However, if the amount of work is increased or additions are made to the district, then another hearing shall be held pursuant to notice prescribed in section 14-4. If the determination of the council shall be to proceed with the improvement, a resolution shall be passed approving the necessary profiles, plans, specifications, assessment district and detailed estimates of cost, and the council shall direct the city assessor to prepare a special assessment roll in accordance with the council's determination and report the same to them for confirmation. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 5, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-6. - Objections to improvement. 
    At or prior to the council meeting, the owners of property which will be required to bear over 50 percent of the amount of such special assessment or by a majority of the owners of property to be assessed shall object in writing to the proposed improvements, the improvement shall not be made by proceedings authorized by this chapter, except by the affirmative vote of five members of the council. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 6, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-7. - Deviation from plans and specifications. 
    No deviation from the original plans or specifications as adopted shall be permitted by any officer or employee of the city without the authority of the council by resolution. A copy of the resolution authorizing such changes or deviation shall be certified by the city clerk and attached to the original plans and specifications on file in his office. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 7, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-8. - Limitations on contracting for improvements. 
    No contract or expenditure, except for the cost of preparing necessary profiles, plans, specifications and estimates of cost, shall be made for the improvement until special assessments to defray the costs of the same have been levied. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 8, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-9. - Special assessment roll. 
    The city assessor shall make a special assessment roll of all lots and parcels of land within the designated district benefited by the proposed improvement and assess to each lot or parcel of land the amount benefited thereby. The amount spread in each case shall be based upon the detailed estimate of the city manager as approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 9, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-10. - Assessor to file assessment roll. 
    When the city assessor shall have completed the assessment roll, he shall file the same with the city clerk for presentation to the council for review and certification. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 10, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-11. - Review of roll-Objections. 
    Upon receipt of the special assessment roll, the council by resolution shall accept such assessment roll and order it to be filed in the office of the city clerk for public examination. The council shall fix the time and place the council will meet to review such special assessment roll, and the council shall direct the city clerk to publish a notice of public hearing for the purpose of giving an opportunity for interested persons to be heard. Such notice shall be made by one publication at least one week prior to the holding of the hearing. Notice of hearing shall also be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records by mailing by first class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing. The hearing required by this section may be held at any regular, adjourned or special meeting of the council. At this meeting, all interested persons or parties shall present their objections, if any, to the assessment against them in writing. The city assessor shall be present at every meeting of the council at which a special assessment is to be reviewed. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 11, 2-13-61) 
State Law reference- Special assessment notices and hearings, MCL 211.741 et seq. 
Sec. 14-12. - Changes in roll. 
    The council shall meet at the time and place designated for the review of such special assessment roll and at such meetings, or proper adjournment thereof, shall consider all objections thereto submitted in writing. The council may correct the roll as to any special assessment, a description of any lot or parcel of land or other errors appearing therein. It may, however, by resolution annul such assessment roll and the same proceedings shall be followed in making a new roll as in the making of the original roll. If, after hearing all objections and making record of such changes as the council deems justified, the council determines that it is satisfied with said special assessment roll, and that assessments are in proportion to benefits received, it shall thereupon pass a resolution reciting such determinations, confirming such roll, placing it on file in the office of the city clerk, and directing the city clerk to attach his warrant to a certified copy within ten days, therein commanding the city assessor to spread the various sums and amounts appearing thereon on a special assessment roll, or upon the tax rolls of the city for the full amounts or in annual installments as directed by the council. This roll shall have the date of confirmation endorsed thereon and shall from that date be final and conclusive for the purpose of the improvement to which it applies, subject only to adjustments to conform to the actual cost of the improvement, as provided in section 14-18. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 12, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-13. - Special assessment-When due. 
    All special assessments, except such installments thereof as the council shall make payable at a future time, shall be due and payable upon confirmation of the special assessment roll. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 13, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-14. - Installments-When due. 
    The council may provide for the payment of special assessments in annual installments. Such annual installments shall not exceed ten in number, the first installment being due upon confirmation of the roll and the deferred installment being due annually thereafter or, in the discretion of the council, it may be spread upon and made a part of each annual city tax roll thereafter, until all annual installments have been spread. Interest shall be charged on all deferred installments at a rate not to exceed six percent per annum, payable annually, provided that after the council has confirmed the roll the city treasurer shall notify by mail each property owner on the roll to the effect that the roll has been filed and stating the amount assessed. Failure on the part of the city treasurer to give notice or of such owner to receive notice shall not invalidate any special assessment roll of the city of any assessment thereon nor excuse the payment of any interest. Each property owner shall have 30 days from the date of such notification to pay the assessment in full and without interest or penalty. Upon the expiration of the 30-day period the roll shall be closed for collection and forwarded to the city assessor for spreading the roll on all unpaid assessments in conformity with the council resolution. Following the 30-day period the property owner may pay all interest that the city has obligated itself to pay upon the description by reason of financing the improvement. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 14, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-15. - Collection from roll. 
    When any special assessment shall be confirmed, and be payable as provided in this chapter, the council shall direct the assessment so made in the special assessment roll to be collected direct therefrom or from the general tax rolls. Thereupon the city clerk shall attach his warrant to a certified copy of the special assessment roll, therein commanding the city treasurer to collect from each of the persons assessed in the roll the amount of money assessed to set opposite his name therein and in case any person named in the roll shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, then to levy and collect the same by distress and sale of the goods and chattel of such person, returning the roll and warrant, together with his doings thereon, within 60 days from the date of such warrant. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 15, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-16. - Collection by city treasurer. 
    Upon receiving the assessment roll and warrant, the city treasurer shall proceed to collect the amounts assessed therein. If any person shall neglect or refuse to pay his assessment upon demand, the city treasurer shall seize and levy upon any personal property found within the city, or elsewhere within the county, belonging to such person, and sell the same at public auction, first giving six days' notice of the time and place of such sale, by posting such notices in three of the most public places in the city where such property may be found. The proceeds of such sale, or so much thereof as may be necessary for that purpose, shall be applied to the payment of the assessment, and a percentage of five percent upon the amount of the assessment of the costs and expenses of the seizure and sale, and the surplus, if any, shall be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 16, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-17. - Creation of lien. 
    Special assessments and all interest and charges thereon, from the date of confirmation of the roll, shall be and remain a lien upon the property assessed of the same character and effect as the lien created by general law for state and county taxes, and by the Charter for city taxes, until paid. From such date after confirmation as shall be fixed by the council, the same collection fees shall be collected on delinquent assessments and upon delinquents of such special assessments as are provided by the Charter. Such assessments and installments shall be subject to the same penalties and the land upon which the same are a lien shall be subject to sale therefor the same as in the case of delinquent city taxes and the lands upon which they constitute a lien. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 17, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-18. - Additional assessment-Refunds. 
    The city manager shall within 60 days after the completion of each local or special public improvement, compile the actual cost thereof and certify the same to the council. When any special assessment roll shall prove insufficient to meet the costs of the improvement for which it was made, the council may make an additional pro rata assessment but no additional assessment for any public improvement which exceeds 25 percent of the original assessment shall be made, unless such additional assessment be reviewed at a meeting of the council. Notices shall be published for such a meeting, as provided in the case of review of the original special assessment roll. Should the assessment prove larger than necessary to five percent or less, the council may place the excess in the city treasury. If more than five percent, the excess shall be refunded pro rata according to assessments. In either case, the council may provide by resolution that the amount of any such excess may be allowed as a credit on the last installment where such installment still remains unpaid at the time the final cost of the improvement is determined. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 18, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-19. - Special assessment accounts. 
    Monies raised by special assessment to pay the cost of any local improvement shall be held in a special fund to pay such cost or to repay any money borrowed therefor. Each special assessment account must be used only for the improvement project for which the assessment was levied, except as otherwise provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 19, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-20. - Contested assessments. 
    Except and unless notice is given to the council in writing of an intention to contest or enjoin the collection of any special assessment for the construction of any public improvement or the removal or abatement of any public hazard or nuisance, within 15 days after the date of the resolution of the council confirming the assessment roll for such improvement, which notice shall state the grounds on which the proceedings are to be contested, no suit or action of any kind shall be instituted or maintained for the purpose of contesting or enjoining the collection of such special assessment. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 20, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-21. - Reassessment for benefits. 
    Whenever the council shall deem any special assessment invalid or defective for any reason whatsoever, or if any court of competent jurisdiction shall have adjudged such assessment to be illegal for any reason whatsoever, in whole or in part, the council shall have power to cause a new assessment to be used for the same purpose for which the former assessment was made, whether the improvement or any part thereof has been completed or not, and whether any part of the assessment has been collected or not. All proceedings on such reassessment and for the collection thereof shall be made in the same manner as provided for in the original assessment. If any portion of the original assessment shall have been collected and not refunded, it shall be applied upon the reassessment and the reassessment shall to that extent be deemed satisfied. If more than the amount reassessed shall have been collected, the balance shall be refunded to the person making such payment. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 21, 2-13-61) 
Sec. 14-22. - Combination of projects. 
    The council may combine several districts into one project for the purpose of effecting a saving in the costs, provided that for each district there shall be established separate funds and accounts to cover the cost of the same. 
(Ord. No. 19, § 22, 2-13-61) 
Chapter 15 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to establish and reasonably control streets, alleys, bridges, and public places, § 3.1(b)(3); streets and alleys, § 5.10. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any public street in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(3); any ordinance establishing or prescribing grades in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(6); dogs running at large prohibited, § 3-22; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; cemeteries, Ch. 5; parks and recreation, Ch. 11; subdivisions, Ch. 16; traffic and motor vehicles, Ch. 18; utilities, Ch. 19; zoning, App. A; franchises, licenses and permits, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 15-1-15-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-21. - Duty to remove snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt, or other encumbrances. 
(a)  The occupant of any premises or the owner of any unoccupied premises within the city shall keep, or cause to be kept, the sidewalks in front of or adjacent to such premises free, so far as is practicable and reasonable, from snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt, or any other encumbrance. 
(b)  Whenever any snow or ice has fallen or accumulated, it shall be cleared within 48 hours of the time it fell or accumulated. Rubbish, excessive dirt, or any other encumbrance shall likewise be cleared within 48 hours of the time it appeared. 
(c)  Improved sidewalks, paths, and trails that measure 60 inches or less in width shall be cleared of ice and snow in their entirety. Improved sidewalks, paths, and trails with a width greater than 60 inches need only clear 60 inches of such sidewalk. 
(d)  The city clerk shall notify the owner of any parcel of land, or the agent of the owner, to keep the property clear of snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt or other encumbrances. Such notice shall be given by publishing notice in a newspaper circulating in the city at least once each calendar year. That notice shall state that: 
(1)  Snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt or any other encumbrance must be removed within 48 hours of the time it fell or accumulated; 
(2)  Failure to do so constitutes a violation of this article; 
(3)  The city may cause the sidewalk to be cleared where violations are found to exist; and 
(4)  The city's expenses of clearing the encumbrances shall become a debt to the city, a lien against the property and collected as delinquent property taxes. 
(e)  A person who violates this section shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction punishable by a civil fine of $50.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each violation. 
( Ord. No. 412, §§ 1, 2, 3-10-14, eff. 5-1-14 ; Ord. No. 419, §§ 1, 2, 1-26-15 ) 
Note- See the editor's note at § 15-22. 
Sec. 15-22. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 412, § 1, adopted March 10, 2014, effective May 1, 2014 , repealed §§ 15-21 and 15-22, which pertained to duty to remove snow, ice, rubbish, excessive dirt, or other encumbrances and warning for first offense. Section 2 of said ordinance added provisions designated as a new § 15-21 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Secs. 15-23-15-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR 

Sec. 15-41. - Sidewalk widths. 
(a)  All sidewalks constructed within the corporate limits of the city shall be five feet in width, excepting as may be provided for or specified elsewhere in this division. 
(b)  The city manager may authorize the construction of walks of less than five feet in width where the existing walks on the street or adjacent streets, when the walk is to be constructed on a cross street, are less than five feet in width and on streets where no walk exists in the block in which the new walk is to be constructed, when in his opinion a walk less than five feet in width is ample to accommodate the pedestrian traffic. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 2, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-42. - Permit for sidewalks. 
(a)  No sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway shall be laid or repaired by any person other than the city in any street, alley or other public place within the city without a permit from the city manager. The fee for each such permit shall be set by resolution of the city council and shall be for the purpose of defraying the expense of issuance and necessary inspections of the work. 
(b)  This permit must be returned to the city manager within 30 days from the date of issue with a statement thereon by the contractor of the number of linear feet of sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway constructed under same. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 3, 6-27-66; Ord. No. 435 , § 1, 11-26-18) 
Sec. 15-43. - Construction standards for sidewalks. 
    All sidewalks laid, constructed or repaired in any street, alley or other public place within the city shall be constructed in accordance with the standard rules of the department of public services as approved by the council and shall be in strict conformity with specifications appertaining thereto as specified by the city engineer and approved by the council. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 4, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-44. - Materials and specifications for sidewalks. 
    All private driveways crossing the sidewalk space, excepting on unpaved streets where specifications as to mix and type of construction shall prevail where same crosses the sidewalk space only, must be constructed of stone, brick, asphalt or concrete from curbline to the lot line and placed at a grade to be fixed by the city engineer and according to specifications furnished by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 5, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-45. - Sidewalks ordered by council. 
(a)  Whenever the council shall by resolution declare the necessity for and direct the construction of sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways in any street, whether in front of or adjoining private property, it shall be the duty of the city manager to notify the owner, or party in interest as indicated in the most recent tax rolls of the city, where such sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways are required in front of any lot or parcel of land or adjacent thereto, and to give notice by publication in the official newspaper of the city, which notice shall be published once, to construct or rebuild such sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways according to specifications prepared by the city engineer and approved by the council. This notice is to be in the following form: 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SIDEWALK NOTICE 
Swartz Creek _______ 20___ 
To Whom It May Concern: 
    Take notice that by order of the Council you are required to construct a _______ sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway on the _______ side of _______ Street/Avenue, in front of or adjoining such lot, lots, or parts of lots numbered _______ (insert description) as are owned by you or in which you have an interest, within thirty (30) days from the date hereto, or, in default thereof, the same will be constructed by the city and the expense thereof, together with the cost of advertising, will be assessed against said lot, lots or parts of lots. 
_____
City Manager 
(b)  Service of the notice shall also be made upon each owner, occupant or party in interest through the United States mail to the last known address of the owner, occupant or party in interest, according to the latest assessment roll of the city, with full first class postage prepaid thereon. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every owner or party in interest of any lot or parcel of land, when notified by the city manager to build or rebuild sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways in accordance with this section, to promptly comply with the notice and construct or reconstruct the sidewalks, crosswalks or driveways as ordered. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 6, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-46. - Sidewalk installed by city-Special assessment. 
    If any person having been served notice shall not have constructed such sidewalk within 30 days, it shall be the duty of the city to construct such sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway in front of or adjoining the premises of the person so in default. The city manager shall then ascertain the cost and expense of the construction of the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway and prepare for the city assessor a report of the form of a tentative assessment roll. This tentative roll shall be made as designated by the city assessor and shall show the exact amount according to cost and expense that should be assessed against each parcel of land for the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so constructed. The city shall proceed to the completion of the assessment roll from the facts contained in the tentative roll in legal and proper form and assess the amount so recorded against the owner or parties in interest upon the lot, lots or parts of lots fronting or adjoining the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so laid and in proportion to the number of square feet constructed. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 7, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-47. - Assessment for sidewalks. 
(a)  Upon the completion of the roll referred to in section 15-46, the city assessor shall give notice by one publication in a newspaper published in the city and by United States mail to the last known address of the owner, occupant or party in interest according to the latest assessment roll of the city, with full first class postage prepaid thereon. Such roll is completed and will remain in his office for at least seven days from the date of publication of the notice for the inspection of all concerned. 
(b)  The notice referred to in subsection (a) above shall be as follows: 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SIDEWALK ASSESSMENT 
NOTICE 
Swartz Creek _______ 20___ 
To Whom It May Concern: 
    Take notice that sidewalk assessment roll No. _______, for defraying the cost and expense of constructing sidewalks hereinafter described, has been prepared and is now open for inspection, revision or correction in this office, and will be presented to the Council at a meeting thereof to be held on the _______ day of _______, 20___. 
    The lot or lots described in each roll have been assessed for the cost and expense of constructing the walk in front of or adjoining the parcels named in such rolls. 
    Notice is hereby given that an assessment has been made upon all the lots and premises liable to be assessed for improvement; that a roll of assessments is now completed and will remain at the City Assessor's office in the City of Swartz Creek for at least seven days from the date of publication of this notice, that is from the date hereof until the _______ day of _______, 20_______ at 10:00 a.m., at his office in the City Hall, and that he will remain in his office for a period of six hours thereafter on that day to hear any person desiring to object to any assessments so made, and to review, and correct the same, if correction thereof be found necessary. 
_____
City Assessor 
(Ord. No. 50, § 8, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-48. - Confirmation of sidewalk special assessment roll. 
(a)  The city assessor upon the date last mentioned in the notice, which shall be at least seven days after the publication of same, and after needful correction or revision of such roll shall transmit the roll to which shall be attached the affidavit of publication of the assessment notice, together with the report of the city manager, to the council for confirmation. 
(b)  Notice of the meeting of the council to consider each such special assessment roll shall be published in a newspaper published in the city not less than seven days prior to such meeting. Notice of hearings shall also be given to each owner of or party in interest in property to be assessed, whose name appears upon the last local tax assessment records, by mailing by first class mail addressed to such owner or party at the address shown on the tax records, at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
(c)  Upon the confirmation of the roll and after opportunity for persons affected to be heard thereon, the same shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for collection. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 9, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-49. - Collection of sidewalk special assessment roll. 
    The assessment roll shall contain a list of lots, parts of lots or parcels of land assessed thereon as provided for in this division and the total amount assessed thereon shall be due and payable 30 days after the assessment roll is confirmed by the council. However, if the assessment is not paid within the time stated, a penalty shall be attached thereto of five percent of the amount of such assessment in addition to interest at the rate of one-half of one percent for each month or fraction of a month from the date the assessment roll was confirmed by the council. Assessments so levied shall be a lien upon lots, parts of lots, or parcels of land until paid. In default of payment of the assessment, the lots, parts of lots or parcels of land so assessed may be treated and sold thereafter in the manner and procedure provided by law for the sale of land for unpaid taxes. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 10, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-50. - Petition and agreement concerning sidewalks. 
    Upon petition by or agreement of any person concerning the installation or repair of sidewalks in the city at or not to exceed an agreed cost per lineal foot of sidewalk, the city may proceed to install or repair sidewalks in areas of streets abutting property owned by the signers of any such petition or the parties to any such agreement without the necessity of notice or hearing on any special assessment roll therefor. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 11, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-51. - Repair of sidewalks. 
    When any sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway, becomes out of repair within the city, the city manager shall give the owner, occupant or party in interest of the premises located in front of or adjacent to the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway notice to repair the same within 30 days. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 12, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-52. - Notice of procedure. 
    The giving of notice, the hearing on assessment rolls, the confirmation of assessment rolls and the collection of special assessments for sidewalk repairs shall be the same as required for the installation of new sidewalks. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 13, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-53. - Sidewalk repairs by city. 
(a)  If any person served with notice shall not have repaired or reconstructed any sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway within the 30-day period, it shall be the duty of the city manager to repair or reconstruct such sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway in front or adjacent to the premises of the owner, occupant or party in interest who is in default. If the city does the repair or reconstruction the cost and expense of such repairs or reconstruction of the sidewalk, crosswalk, or driveway including any legal or administrative costs in connection therewith, shall be charged to such owner, occupant or party in interest. 
(b)  In case of nonpayment by the owner, occupant or party in interest of the proportionate cost and expense of such repair or reconstruction within 30 days after the confirmation of the special assessment roll therefor, the proportionate cost and expense of such repair or reconstruction may be certified to the city assessor by the city manager in the form of a tentative assessment roll. This tentative roll shall be made as designated by the city assessor and shall show the exact amount according to cost and expense that should be assessed against each parcel of land for the repair or reconstruction of the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so repaired or reconstructed. After this tentative roll has been presented to the city assessor by the city manager, the city assessor shall proceed to the completion of the assessment roll from the facts contained in and shown by the tentative roll in legal and proper form and assess the amount due and payable from the owner, occupant or parties in interest upon the lot, lots or parts of lots in front of or adjacent to the sidewalk, crosswalk and driveway so required or reconstructed and in proportion to the number of square feet of the sidewalk, crosswalk or driveway so repaired and reconstructed. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 14, 6-27-66; Ord. No. 255, § 1, 6-27-88) 
Sec. 15-54. - Sidewalk openings. 
(a)  No person shall install, maintain, use or operate any trapdoor, coal hole or other sidewalk opening, unless the doors or covers for such opening shall be of metal or reinforced concrete with a nonslipping, wearing surface of sidewalks, and shall present no hazard to traffic. 
(b)  No coal hole, trapdoor or other sidewalk opening shall be allowed to remain open, except when actually in use. 
(c)  When any coal hole, trapdoor, or other sidewalk opening is open, such opening shall be protected by guards, not less than 32 inches in height and fully protecting all sides of the opening. However, the guard on the loading side may be removed therefrom during the period of loading and unloading. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 15, 6-27-66) 
Sec. 15-55. - Liability of owner. 
    Any owner who shall refuse or neglect to comply with the provisions of any notice to repair, in addition to the penalties provided for in this division, shall be liable for and compelled to pay the city all damages to persons or property for which the city may be liable by reason of injury or damages resulting therefrom, which sum may be recovered by the city in proceedings brought for such purpose in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 50, § 16, 6-27-66) 
Secs. 15-56-15-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-76. - Guarding excavations and obstructions. 
    Any person making or causing to be made an excavation or opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or right-of-way, or within five feet of the line of any street or public place, between sunset and sunrise on every night that the same remains open or a danger exists therefrom, shall keep such excavation or opening fenced or barricaded and properly lighted so as to warn all persons of such excavation or opening and all obstructions. No unauthorized person shall remove or interfere in any way with any such lantern, other danger signal or any barriers. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 5, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-77. - Requirements for work under permit. 
    All work under a permit shall be under the supervision of the city engineer and in conformity with the following requirements: 
(1)  All work shall be started within 48 hours after the receipt of the permit and shall be pursued diligently and continuously until the same is completed. When in consequence of the weather, any process of the law or any other unexpected obstacle, the work shall be stopped for so long a time as public travel shall be unreasonably obstructed and the excavation or opening shall be refilled and repaved as if the work contemplated in a permit were actually completed. 
(2)  In no case shall a person open or remove a greater area of surface nor at any other location than that specified in the original or supplementary application. However, at the time of actually doing the work if it shall be necessary to open or remove a greater area of surface than originally applied for, the applicant shall first notify and procure the consent of the city engineer to do so but only upon the express condition that he shall and will, before noon of the following business day, file a supplementary application for the making of an additional excavation. 
(3)  All work shall be performed in such a manner as to cause a minimum of inconvenience and restriction to both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. No dirt or other materials shall be placed on sidewalks. No more than one-half of the width of the street shall be opened at one time; the other half shall remain untouched for the accommodation of traffic until the first half is restored for safe use. All work shall be prosecuted so as not to interfere with any access to fire hoses, fire hydrants and United States mail boxes. The permittee must remove within 24 hours all snow and ice that may fall or form upon the street within five feet upon either side of the opening and shall keep such space free from snow and ice until the opening is properly filled. 
(4)  The person to whom a permit is granted shall give notice in writing thereof to any corporation whose pipes, poles, mains or conduits are laid in the street about to be disturbed by such excavation, doing so at least 24 hours before commencing the same. He shall at his expense sustain, secure and protect such pipes, poles, mains or conduits from injury and he shall replace and pack the earth wherever the same shall have been removed, loosened or disturbed under or around them, so that they shall be well and substantially supported. If any person shall fail to sustain, secure or protect such pipes, poles, mains or conduits from injury or to replace and pack the earth under or around them, as the provisions of this section require, then the same may be done by the corporation to whom the same may belong and the cost thereof and all damages sustained by such corporation thereby shall be paid by such person. In default thereof, such corporation may maintain an action against him therefor. 
(5)  Paving materials and earth or gravel removed must be kept separate and such materials that are capable of being reused shall be preserved. The width of the excavation or opening shall be no greater than is necessary for doing the work. Sheeting and bracing shall be used when the excavation or opening is five feet or more in depth. At the discretion of the city engineer, sheeting and bracing may be cut off one foot below the surface pavement and left in place when the opening is refilled. The street, alley, sidewalk or other public place or right-of-way must be opened in a manner that will cause the least inconvenience to the public and admit of the uninterrupted passage of water along the gutter. Excavation shall generally be made by the open-cut method. However, tunneling or augering may be required and shall be authorized at the discretion of the city engineer. No excavation shall be undercut or have a greater width at the bottom than at the top. In case of slips or slides of the sides of the excavation, the same shall be trimmed to solid earth and the top surface cut back to the limit of the same before any back-filling is commenced. 
(6)  All openings shall be refilled and temporarily resurfaced on or before the time fixed in the permit, and written notice shall be given to the city engineer when the work is completed. Such temporary resurfacing shall be maintained by the person to whom the permit is issued until the city or other designated person shall permanently resurface such opening. Refilling shall be done in thin layers not exceeding six inches in height, firmly rammed until the excavation is filled or to a proper line of placing the paving thereon. All refilling shall be done with sand, gravel, or, if approved by the city engineer, other materials of equivalent compaction qualities. Puddling or water tamping shall be done by permission of the city engineer. Whenever rock is excavated, not more than one-third of the total excavation shall be refilled with the broken stone, which must be in pieces not exceeding six inches in their largest dimensions, and mingled with clean earth and sand, and restored in such manner as to insure the thorough and compact filling of all spaces. All void space in a tunnel excavation shall be back-filled with thoroughly rammed concrete as specified by the city engineer. 
(7)  In all unimproved streets the surface of the refilled excavation or opening shall be finished in a workmanlike manner and shall in every respect be equal in quality, character and materials to the street surface existing previous to making the excavation. In all improved streets the crown of the surface must conform to the adjacent street surface until sufficient time has elapsed to warrant the permanent restoration of the paved surface. All such restoration of paving surfaces shall be made in accordance with city specifications and may be done by the city under contract or by its own forces and the cost thereof charged to the permittee. 
(8)  In the replacement or restoration of the permanent pavement, the city shall have the right and authority to remove the old concrete for an area extending at least one foot in all directions beyond the edge of the original cut, and replace it with new reinforced concrete, not less than six inches thick, but equal in thickness to that of the adjacent pavement made in accordance with the latest city specifications for a permanent foundation. The new wearing surface shall extend at least six inches beyond the joint in the foundation of the pavement and be laid with the same care and in the same manner as the original pavement. 
(9)  If any part of a slab of sidewalk is cracked or damaged in any way, the entire slab shall be replaced. 
(10)  If it is necessary to remove any sod, it shall be replaced in a workmanlike manner when the excavation is completed so that the lawn surface shall be equal in appearance to the lawn surface previous to making the excavation. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 6, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-78. - Failure to comply with regulations. 
    In case any person to whom a permit has been granted shall fail to comply with the terms thereof, such permit shall become null and void. Any expense which may be incurred by the city in refilling the excavation or restoring the street, lawn or sidewalk to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. In case the person to whom a permit is granted shall fail to leave the street, lawn or sidewalk in as good a condition as it was previous to any work being done under the permit, any expense which may be incurred by the city in restoring the street, lawn or sidewalk to its proper condition shall be borne by the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 7, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-79. - Damage to shade trees, shrubs or lawn. 
    The person to whom a permit is granted shall not injure or damage any shade trees, shrubs or lawns in making openings and excavations in streets, alleys, sidewalks, public right-of-ways of any streets and in other public places. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 8, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-80. - Inspection. 
    The city engineer shall be responsible for making all necessary inspections of openings, excavations and capping of the openings. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 9, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-81. - Duties of police. 
    All police shall be vigilant in the enforcement of this article, and shall report through proper channels any violation thereof to the city manager on observing or being informed of the opening of or excavation in any street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or right-of-way. They shall require the person making such opening or excavation to exhibit the permit therefor; and, if none has been given, or if the exhibition thereof be refused, the officer shall, without delay, enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 11, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-82. - Penalties. 
    Any person who, by himself or by his agent or employee, shall make, cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or right-of-way without a permit as required by this article, or shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or any rules or regulations made in pursuance thereof, or who, having his permit declared null and void shall continue such work, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 12, 12-30-63) 
Secs. 15-83-15-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 15-101. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a duly authorized city official or employee in the course of his employment, to make, cause or permit to be made any excavation or opening in or under the surface or pavement of any street, alley, sidewalk, public place or right-of-way within the limits of the city until a permit therefor shall have been obtained from the city manager. In case of an emergency arising after office hours, at night, on Sundays or legal holidays and when an immediate excavation may be necessary for the protection of public or private property, the same shall be reported to the police department, which shall grant permission to make the necessary excavation upon the express condition that an application for a permit shall be made in the manner provided for in this division on or before noon of the next following business day. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 1, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-102. - Application. 
(a)  Except as provided for in this division, any person desiring to procure a specific permit shall submit an application in writing to the city manager at least 24 hours before the time proposed to begin such work. The application shall be upon forms furnished by the city and shall state the following: 
(1)  The name and address of applicant; 
(2)  The name of the street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or right-of-way in or under which it is desired to make the excavation or opening; 
(3)  The kind of pavement, sidewalk or surface thereon; 
(4)  The purpose, size and location, as near as can be determined, of the proposed excavation or opening; 
(5)  The preferred time during which such opening is to be permitted. 
(b)  When required by the city manager, the application shall be accompanied by a plat or a pencil tracing or sketch showing the location, character or dimensions of the proposed excavation or opening for the installation of new work, or the location and character of the alterations involving the location of pipes, poles, conduits, wires, or other conductors. 
(c)  Any public utility that is operating in the state under the jurisdiction and control of the Michigan Public Service Commission, upon written application on a form provided by the city, and upon the filing of an annual bond and the payment of an annual fee as provided in this division, shall be granted a permit under the provisions of this division for the installation, maintenance or repair of any public utility installations in the public streets, alleys, sidewalks, other public places or in the public right-of-way. This permit shall be good for a period of one year from the date thereof. Every such corporation performing any construction work under the provisions of this division, whenever required by the city engineer, shall file a written report on a form provided by the city showing all construction work performed by it within the city under the provisions of such permit. Such annual permit shall not authorize any opening in any street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or in the public right-of-way without the special permission of the city manager in each case. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 2, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-103. - Bond and liability insurance requirements. 
    The application shall be accompanied by a surety bond to the city approved as to form by the city attorney in the penal sum of $5,000.00, conditioned for the faithful performance of such work in accordance with the rules, regulations and ordinances of the city and within the time fixed by the city engineer in the permit, and, for the restoration of any street, alley, sidewalk, other public place or right-of-way in which the excavation or opening shall be made by such person to the original condition and to the satisfaction of the city engineer and, for the maintenance of such condition for a reasonable length of time as shall be required by the city engineer, and, that such person will indemnify and save harmless the city against and from any and all damages or claims for damages, loss, costs, charges or expenses that may be brought against it by any person for or on account of injury to persons or property resulting from or occasioned by reason of the negligence of any such person making such excavation or opening. Any and all permittees under this division shall provide protection to the city by carrying liability insurance in the sum of at least $100,000.00 for each person and $500,000.00 for each occurrence. The permittee shall, upon request, deliver to the city a certificate of such insurance coverage. However, any public utility applying for an annual or special permit under the provisions of this division shall file a continuing surety company bond in the penal sum of $20,000.00 conditioned upon the faithful performance by it of the provisions of this division, and so long as such bond shall be in effect, no other bond shall be required from the utility. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 3, 12-30-63) 
Sec. 15-104. - Granting of permit. 
(a)  The city manager, upon the filing of the application and bond and the payment of a permit fee as set by resolution by the city council may in his discretion issue a permit. This permit shall state the name and address of the applicant, the location, nature, purpose and extent of the excavation or opening, the kind or kinds of pavement or surface to be disturbed and the dates of the granting and expiration of the permit. All permits shall be consecutively numbered and shall be in triplicate, one copy to be given to the applicant, one copy to be delivered to the city engineer and one copy to remain on file in the office of the city manager. Such permit shall at all times be in the possession of a competent person actually engaged in the work and shall be shown upon demand to a police officer, other duly authorized officer or employee of the city. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a public utility to which an annual permit shall have been issued under the provisions of this division. 
(c)  The annual fee for a yearly permit issued by this section shall be $50.00 per year, payable in advance. Such permits shall expire on July first. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 4, 12-30-63; Ord. No. 435 , § 2, 11-26-18) 
Sec. 15-105. - Permits not to be issued under certain circumstances. 
    No permit shall be issued to any person who shall be in default on any obligation to the city or who shall be in default under a contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 38, § 10, 12-30-63) 
Secs. 15-106-15-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 415, § 1, adopted November 19, 2014, repealed Art. IV, §§ 15-401-15-409, which pertained to maintenance of drains. Subsequently, Ord. No. 416, § 1, adopted November 10, 2014, added provisions designated as a new Art. IV, §§ 15-401-15-421, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 15-401. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Authorized enforcement agency. Employees or designees of the director of the municipal agency designated to enforce this article. 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good house keeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to storm water, receiving waters, or storm water conveyance systems. BMPs also include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. 
    Clean Water Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    Construction activity. Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. Currently these include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five acres or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES storm water Phase II permits will be required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or more. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Illegal discharge. Any direct or indirect non-storm water discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in section 15-406(b), (c) of this article. 
    Illicit connections. An illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
    Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-storm water discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency or, 
    Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, § 122.26(b)(14). 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) discharge permit, means a permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to Waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Non-storm water discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water. 
    Person, means any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or as the owner's agent. 
    Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, ordinances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
    Premises. Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    Storm drainage system. Publicly-owned facilities by which storm water is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures. 
    Storm water. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    Storm water pollution prevention plan. A document which describes the Best Management Practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to storm water, storm water conveyance systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
    Wastewater means any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated storm water, discharged from a facility. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-402. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized enforcement agency. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-403. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The City of Swartz Creek shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the director of the authorized enforcement agency to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the agency. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-404. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this article. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-405. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article are minimum standards; therefore this article does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-406. - Discharge prohibitions. 
(a)  Prohibition of illegal discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than storm water. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any non-authorized discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
(1)  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article providing they are not identified as significant contributor to violations of water quality standards: water line flushing or other potable water sources; landscape irrigation or lawn watering, and irrigation waters; diverted stream flows and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; rising ground water and springs; uncontaminated ground water infiltration and seepage; uncontaminated pumped ground water except for groundwater cleanups specifically authorized by NPDES permits; foundation drains, water from crawl space pumps, footing drains and basement sump pumps (not including active groundwater dewatering systems); air conditioning condensation; waters from non-commercial washing of vehicles; street wash water; dechlorinated swimming pool water from single-, two-, or three-family residences; and firefighting activities. 
(2)  Dye testing done under the authorization of the MDEQ (General Rule 97) is an allowable discharge, but requires a complete notice of intent to the MDEQ prior to the time of the test. 
(3)  The prohibition shall not apply to any non-storm water discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(b)  Prohibition of illicit connections. 
(1)  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
(2)  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(3)  A person is considered to be in violation of this article if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection to continue. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-407. - Suspension of MS4 access. 
(a)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. The City of Swartz Creek may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the authorized enforcement agency may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(b)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The authorized enforcement agency will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the authorized enforcement agency for a reconsideration and hearing. 
    A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the authorized enforcement agency. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-408. - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES storm water discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to City of Swartz Creek prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-409. - Monitoring of discharges. 
(a)  Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have storm water discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
(b)  Access to facilities. 
(1)  The City of Swartz Creek shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the authorized enforcement agency. 
(2)  Facility operators shall allow the City of Swartz Creek ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge storm water, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by State and Federal Law. 
(3)  The City of Swartz Creek shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's storm water discharge. 
(4)  The City of Swartz Creek has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(5)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the City of Swartz Creek and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
(6)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the City of Swartz Creek access to a permitted facility is a violation of a storm water discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge storm water associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the authorized enforcement agency reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
(7)  If the City of Swartz Creek has been refused access to any part of the premises from which storm water is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this article or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-410. - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce storm water pollutants by the use of best management practices. 
    The City of Swartz Creek will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of storm water, the storm drain system, or Waters of the U.S. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of storm water associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this section. These BMPs shall be part of a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-411. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-412. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or Waters of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the City of Swartz Creek within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-413. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Notice of violation. Whenever the City of Swartz Creek finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
    If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-414. - Appeal of notice of violation. 
    Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the authorized enforcement agency. The notice of appeal must be received within 15 days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the municipal authority or their designee shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-415. - Enforcement of measures after appeal. 
    If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within 30 days of the decision of the municipal authority upholding the decision of the authorized enforcement agency, then representatives of the authorized enforcement agency shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the government agency or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-416. - Cost of abatement of the violation. 
    Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid in not more than 12 equal payments. Interest at the rate of five percent per annum shall be assessed on the balance beginning on the 1st day following discovery of the violation. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-417. - Injunctive relief. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the authorized enforcement agency may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-418. - Compensatory action. 
    In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the authorized enforcement agency may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-419. - Violations deemed a public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-420. - Criminal prosecution. 
    Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty of $500.00 per violation per day and/or imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed 90 days. 
    The authorized enforcement agency may recover all attorney's fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 15-421. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, State or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
( Ord. No. 416, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Chapter 16 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city saved from repeal, § 1-6(8); buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; planning, Ch. 13; utilities, Ch. 19. 
State Law reference- Subdivision control act, MCL 560.101 et seq.; minimum standards, MCL 560.259. 

Sec. 16-1. - Certain provisions saved from repeal. 
    Nothing in this Code or in the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the provisions of Ordinance Number 41, which provisions shall continue in full force and effect as if set out fully herein. 
Sec. 16-2. - Fees. 
    All plats submitted to the city shall not be reviewed or acted upon unless the following fees accompany the proposed plat: 
(1)  Upon original submission of the preliminary plat for tentative approval, the sum of $20.00. 
(2)  Upon submission of the preliminary plat for final approval, the total sum of $10.00 times the number of lots contained in the proposed subdivision, but not less than a minimum of $125.00. 
(3)  Upon submission of the final plat for preliminary review by the city clerk prior to its submission to the council for final approval, the total sum of $10.00 times the number of lots contained in the proposed subdivision, but not less than a minimum of $100.00, plus: 
a.  $100.00 for title examination of the abstract, unless the proprietor submits a fee title insurance policy or lawyer's title opinion. In this case the sum of $25.00 for review of the title policy or lawyer's title opinion, and a fee computed at the rate of $25.00 per hour for review of public water supply plans, public storm sewer system and public sanitary sewer system, but not less than a minimum of $100.00 for review of the public water, storm and sanitary sewer system will be required. 
b.  $75.00 for preparation or revision by the city of each of the following documents if required by the Michigan Subdivision Control Act, provided that if these documents shall be prepared and submitted by the proprietor and shall not require any revision, then the sum of $25.00 for review of each of the following documents: 
1.  Deposit agreement for guaranteed placement of subdivision monuments if monuments are not placed by proprietor at the time of submission of the final plat; 
2.  Deposit agreement for guaranteed installation of city roads, streets, alleys, bridges and culverts if same are not completed at the time of submission of the final plat, provided that this requirement does not apply to county roads or state highway improvements; 
3.  Deposit agreement for guaranteed construction of lagoons, waterways, etc., where subdivision includes such and if not completed and in place at time of submission of final plat; 
4.  Deposit agreement for restrictive covenants to prevent building in floodplain area if subdivision includes such; 
5.  Subdivision common use area documents if subdivision includes such. 
(4)  Upon submission of a petition for partitioning or dividing lots, outlots, or other parcels of land in a recorded plat pursuant to section 16-3, the total sum of $10.00 times the number of lots resulting from the proposed partition or division, but not less than $20.00. 
(Ord. No. 80, § 2, 6-23-69; Ord. No. 270, § 1, 7-23-90) 
Sec. 16-3. - Partitioning or division of lots, outlots, or other parcels of land in a recorded plat. 
(a)  Upon the filing of a petition by the owner or owners of all interest therein with the city council, platted lots, outlots or parcels of land in existing recorded plats may be partitioned or divided upon resolution of the city council into not more than four parts each, each of which shall, in regard to width, depth and area, conform to the terms and provisions of the zoning ordinance of the city, as amended. 
(b)  Provided, however, that lots, outlots, or parcels of land in existing recorded plats, not served by public sewer and public water systems, shall not be further partitioned or divided if the resulting lots, outlots or parcels are less than the minimum width and area provided under Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967 (MCL 560:101, et seq.). 
(c)  Further providing, however, that nothing herein shall prevent the city council from approving the division of any such lot, outlot, or parcel of land in any case where the owner of any such divided parcel owns land immediately adjacent thereto, or in a case where there is presented to the city council an executed agreement to sell and convey such divided parcel to the adjoining owner, and where the newly combined parcel shall become recorded as a single ownership, and where the combined width and area of the divided parcel and the adjacent parcel shall, as a single parcel, conform to the terms and provisions of this chapter and the zoning ordinance. 
(d)  The filed petition shall include a legal description of the proposed partition or division and newly formed lots, and a map prepared and certified by a surveyor, meeting the requirements of section 143 of Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, except paragraph (d) thereof on monuments, and section 144 of said act. 
(e)  The city may require, as conditions for approval, the designation of reservation of easements, including non-access easements along roads, highways, and thoroughfares, the dedication of street rights-of-way or portions thereof, the installation or guarantee of installation of public improvements, the recordation of protective covenants, and such other actions as would reasonably be required under the provisions and scope of this section if the land were being initially platted. 
(f)  The filed petition shall be accompanied with the fees required under section 16-2 of the Code. 
(Ord. No. 270, § 2, 7-23-90) 
Chapter 17 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- General finance, Ch. 8; taxation, Ch. 9. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance levying or imposing annual taxes saved from repeal, § 1-6(5); finance, § 2-381 et seq.; community development, Ch. 6; special assessments, Ch. 14. 
State Law reference- General property tax act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 17-1. - Collections. 
(a)  Current. All taxes, charges and assessments levied or spread by the city on the tax roll under authority of law which are paid on or before the thirty-first day of August of each year shall be collected by the city treasurer without interest. 
(b)  Delinquent. The city treasurer shall add to all such taxes, charges and assessments as levied or spread, if paid on or after the first day of September of each year an interest charge at the rate of one and one-fourth percent per calendar month, or fraction thereof, to be computed from the first day of July. 
(c)  Delinquents returned to county treasurer. All interest as provided for in subsection (b) above shall be a lien against the property upon which the original taxes, charges and assessments shall have been levied or spread. When such taxes, charges and assessments as shall have been levied or spread are returned to the county treasurer as delinquent, all interest shall be included as delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 191, §§ 1-3, 1-10-83; Ord. No. 367, § 1, 7-8-02; Ord. No. 391, § 1, 5-23-05) 
Charter reference- Tax payment schedule, § 9.19. 
Secs. 17-2-17-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTION FOR HOUSING DEVELOPMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State housing development authority act, MCL 125.1401 et seq. 

Sec. 17-21. - Preamble. 
(a)  It is acknowledged that it is a proper public purpose of the state and its political subdivisions to provide housing for its citizens of low income and to encourage the development of such housing by providing for a service charge in lieu of property taxes in accordance with the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.), as amended. The city is authorized by the Act to establish or change the service charge to be paid in lieu of taxes by all classes of housing exempt from taxation under the Act at any amount it chooses, not to exceed the taxes that would be paid but for the Act. It is further acknowledged that such housing for persons of low income is a public necessity. As the city will be benefited and improved by such housing, the encouragement of the same by providing certain real estate tax exemptions therefor is a valid public purpose; further, that the continuance of the provisions of this article for tax exemption and the service charge in lieu of taxes during the periods hereinafter contemplated are essential to the determination of economic feasibility of housing developments which are constructed and financed in reliance thereon. 
(b)  The city acknowledges that the state housing development authority (the "authority") has offered, subject to the authority's ability to obtain sufficient federal subsidies, to sell housing development bonds at favorable rates and satisfactory completion by the sponsor of the authority's underwriting standards and procedures, to finance a housing development, of which certain portions will be for elderly persons. 
(c)  The portions are on certain property described as: 
Part of the West one-half of the Southeast one-quarter of Section 35, T7N-R5E, City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan, described as: Beginning at a point on the South line of Section 35, that is S 89°07' and W 1436.6 feet from the Southeast corner of Section 35; Thence S 89°07' and W 348 feet along the South line of Section 35; Thence N 0°12'10? and W 250.90 feet; Thence S 89°10'50? and 328 feet; Thence N 0°12'10? and W 815.48 feet; Thence N 89°07' and E 325 feet; Thence S 0°12'10? and E 170 feet; Thence N 89°07' and E 466.50 feet; Thence S 0°12'10? and E 454 feet; Thence S 89°07' and W 115.50 feet; Thence S 0°12'10? and E 442.75 feet to the point of beginning. This property contains 14.5 acres, more or less; reserving therefrom that part used for Miller Road so-called; in the city to serve persons of low income, and that the Swartz Creek Limited Dividend Housing Association (the "Sponsor") has offered to pay the city on account of the housing development, an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all taxes on the elderly portions, not to exceed 100 living units, of the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 2, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 17-22. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966, Act No. 346 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.), as amended. 
    Authority means the Michigan State Housing Development Authority. 
    Class of housing development means and shall apply to housing developments or portions thereof not to exceed 100 units for elderly persons of low income to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the Act. 
    Contract rents means those identified by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
    Housing development means a development which contains a significant element of housing for persons of low income and such elements of other housing, commercial, recreational, industrial, communal and educational facilities as the authority determines improve the quality of the housing development as it relates to housing for persons of low income. 
    Mortgage loan means a loan to be made by the authority to the sponsor for the construction and permanent financing of the housing development. 
    Sponsor means any person who has applied to the authority for a mortgage loan to finance a housing development. 
    Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the housing development. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 3, 9-8-80) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-23. - Class of housing developments. 
    It is hereby determined that the class of housing developments to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of taxes shall be housing development or portions thereof not to exceed 100 living units for elderly persons of low income to be financed or assisted pursuant to the provisions of the Act. It is further determined that the elderly portions, not to exceed 100 living units of the housing development described in this article, are of this class. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 4, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 17-24. - Establishment of annual service charge. 
    The elderly portion or portions, not to exceed 100 living units, of the housing development described in this article and the property on which such elderly portion or portions, not to exceed 100 living units, shall be constructed shall be exempt from all property taxes from and after the completion of construction. The city, acknowledging that the sponsor and the authority have established the economic feasibility of the housing development in reliance upon the enactment and continuing effect of this article and the qualification of the elderly portion or portions, not to exceed 100 living units, of the housing development for exemption from all property taxes and a payment in lieu of taxes, as established in this article, and in consideration of the authority's offer, subject to the authority's ability to obtain sufficient federal subsidies and sell housing development bonds at favorable rates and satisfactory completion by the sponsor of the authority's underwriting standards and procedures, to finance the housing development, hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge from the sponsor for public services in lieu of all property taxes on the elderly portion or portions not to exceed 100 living units of the housing development described in this article. The annual surcharge shall be equal to three and eighty-five hundredths percent of the difference between contract rents, actually collected from the elderly portion or portions, not to exceed 100 living units, of the housing development described in this article, and utilities attributed to the elderly portion or portions, not to exceed 100 living units, of the housing development described in this article. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 5, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 17-25. - Contractual effect of this article. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 15(a)(5) of the Act (MCL 125.1415a(5)) to the contrary, a contract between the city and the authority to provide tax exemptions and accept payments from the sponsor in lieu thereof as previously described is effected by enactment of this article. The adoption of this article by the city is not a covenant by the authority to issue a mortgage loan to Swartz Creek Limited Dividend Housing Association. Issuance of a mortgage loan by the authority will be subject to the authority's ability to obtain sufficient federal subsidies and to sell housing development bonds at favorable rates and satisfactory completion by the sponsor of the authority's underwriting standards and procedures. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 6, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 17-26. - Payment of service charge. 
    The payment of a service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this article shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable to the city, except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December thirty-first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 7, 9-8-80) 
Sec. 17-27. - Duration. 
    This article shall remain in effect and shall not terminate so long as the mortgage loan remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the property. 
(Ord. No. 170, § 8, 9-8-80) 
Chapter 18 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Any ordinance prescribing traffic and parking restrictions pertaining to specific streets saved from repeal, § 1-6(11); traffic regulations in cemeteries, § 5-7; filling stations, Ch. 7; offenses, Ch. 10; throwing projectiles from or at motor vehicles, § 10-191; motor vehicles in parks, § 11-52. 
State Law reference- Michigan vehicle code, MCL 257.1 et seq., regulation by local authorities, MCL 257.605, 257.606, 257.610. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Operation of a vehicle without security; misdemeanor; penalty. 
    The owner of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the operation of a motor vehicle within the City of Swartz Creek shall maintain insurance upon the motor vehicle as required by Chapter 31 of Act 218, PA 1956, as amended, being sections 500.3101 to 500.3179 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who fails to maintain insurance on a motor vehicle as required by this section is responsible for a misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment for not more than 90 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 1, 8-23-93) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 297, adopted Aug. 23, 1993, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, codification of §§ 1 and 2 of said ordinance as §§ 18-1 and 18-2 herein was at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 18-2. - Production of evidence of insurance; civil infraction; penalty. 
    An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who operates or permits the operation of a motor vehicle within the City of Swartz Creek shall be required to produce upon the request of a police officer evidence that the motor vehicle is insured under Chapter 31 of Act 218, PA 1956, as amended, being sections 500.3101 to 500.3179 of the Michigan Compiled Laws and section 328 of Act 300, PA 1949, as amended, being section 257.328 of the Michigan Compiled Laws. An owner or operator of a motor vehicle who fails to produce evidence under this section when requested to produce that evidence is responsible for a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. 
(Ord. No. 297, § 2, 8-23-93) 
Note- See editor's note following § 18-1 herein. 
Secs. 18-3-18-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MOTOR VEHICLE TRAFFIC CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 358, adopted July 10, 2000, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 18-21-18-45, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. Former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 18-21. - Adoption. 
    The Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, as amended from time to time, is adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 2, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 375, § 1, 1-12-04; Ord. No. 409, § 1, 4-23-12, eff. 6-1-12 ) 
Sec. 18-22. - Reference to local authorities. 
    References in the Michigan Vehicle Code to "local authorities" shall mean the City of Swartz Creek. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 2, 7-10-00) 
Sec. 18-23. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of section 625(1)(c) of the Michigan Vehicle Code are punishable by community service for not more than 360 hours, imprisonment for not more than 180 days, and/or a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $700.00; 
(b)  The penalties provided by the Michigan Vehicle Code are adopted by reference, provided, however, that the city may not enforce any provision of the Michigan Vehicle Code, except for violations of section 625(1)(c), for which the maximum period of imprisonment is greater than 93 days. 
(Ord. No. 358, § 5, 7-10-00; Ord. No. 409, § 2, 4-23-12, eff. 6-1-12 ) 
Secs. 18-24-18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PARKING, STOPPING AND STANDING[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parking, stopping and standing, MCL 257.606(1), (a). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 18-46-18-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PARKING VIOLATIONS BUREAU 

Sec. 18-66. - Established; supervision. 
(a)  Pursuant to Section 8395 of the Revised Judicature Act, State of Michigan, as added by Act No. 154 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1968 (MCL 600.8395), as amended, a parking violations bureau, for the purpose of handling alleged parking violations within the city, is hereby established. 
(b)  The parking violations bureau shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 1, 3-10-69) 
Sec. 18-67. - City manager to establish location; appoint administrative personnel, adopt operational rules. 
    The city manager shall, subject to the approval of the council, establish a convenient location for the parking violations bureau, appoint qualified city employees to administer the bureau and adopt rules and regulations for the operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 2, 3-10-69) 
Sec. 18-68. - Disposition of violations. 
    Only violations scheduled in section 18-71 of this article shall be disposed of by the parking violations bureau. The fact that a particular violation is scheduled shall not entitle the alleged violator to dispose of the violation at the bureau and in any case the person in charge of such bureau may refuse to dispose of such violation, in which event any person having knowledge of the facts may make a sworn complaint before any court having jurisdiction of the offense as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 3, 3-10-69) 
Sec. 18-69. - Disposition of violation at discretion of violator, right to go to court. 
    No violation may be settled at the parking violations bureau except at the specific request of the alleged violator. No penalty for any violation shall be accepted from any person who denies having committed the offense and in no case shall the person who is in charge of the bureau determine, or attempt to determine, the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to such alleged violation. No person shall be required to dispose of a parking violation at the parking violations bureau. All persons shall be entitled to have any such violation processed before a court having jurisdiction thereof if they so desire. The unwillingness of any person to dispose of any violation at the parking violations bureau shall not prejudice him or in any way diminish the rights, privileges and protection accorded to him by law. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 4, 3-10-69) 
Sec. 18-70. - Traffic ticket or notice deemed an allegation of a parking violation. 
    The issuance of a traffic ticket or notice of violation by a police officer of the city shall be deemed an allegation of a parking violation. Such traffic ticket or notice of violation shall indicate the length of time in which the person to whom the same was issued must respond. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 5, 3-10-69) 
Sec. 18-71. - Schedules of fines. 
    Parking violations shall be punishable by fines and fees set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 70, § 6, 3-10-69; Ord. No. 289, § 1, 9-28-92; Ord. No. 418, § 1, 11-24-14 ; Ord. No. 426 , § 1, 12-14-15; Ord. No. 435 , § 3, 11-26-18) 
Sec. 18-72. - Impounding of vehicles; failure to answer parking notices or citations. 
(a)  The city may impound a vehicle found on public property or on a public street whose owner failed to answer six or more parking violation notices or citations resulting from violations of the Michigan Vehicle Traffic Code. The impoundment may take place whenever the city identifies or encounters the vehicle. 
(b)  Accrued charges for any parking violation notices or citations owed by the owner shall include any previously incurred fees, fines, costs, or penalties arising out of the ownership or operation of the impounded vehicle, or any other vehicle owned or operated by such person. Accrued charges shall also include previously unpaid and current reasonable charges for impound and storage of the vehicle. The owner shall also pay an impound fee as determined by city council resolution. 
(c)  If the owner or operator disputes liability as to the impoundment fees or previously incurred impoundment fees, fines, costs, or penalties, they may have the vehicle released from impoundment by posting a cash deposit equal to the impound fee, the tickets, fines, and costs of towing and storage not to exceed $500.00, to the city, pending final adjudication of the disputed liability. Upon the posting of the required cash deposit, the city shall execute a release of the vehicle from impoundment and, upon delivery of such release to the operator of the impound lot, the owner's possession of the vehicle shall be restored. If the district court determines that the owner or operator of the vehicle did not fail to answer six or more parking violation notices or citations regarding illegal parking the city shall refund the entire deposit and pay all towing and storage fees. If, however, the owner or operator is determined to have failed to answer the notices or citations, the city shall apply the cash deposit to the fees, fines and costs assessed by the district court, and refund the balance, if any, to the person making the deposit. 
(Ord. No. 433 , § 1, 8-13-18) 
Secs. 18-73-18-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SCHOOL PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Offenses pertaining to schools, § 10-261 et seq. 
State Law reference- Regulation of traffic or school grounds, MCL 257.961. 

Sec. 18-91. - Reckless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle upon property of the community schools located within the city, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in willful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property is guilty of reckless driving, which upon conviction is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 1, 9-12-83) 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, MCL 257.626. 
Sec. 18-92. - Careless driving. 
    Any person who drives any vehicle upon property of the community schools located within the city, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, in a careless or negligent manner that is likely to endanger any person or property, but without wantonness or recklessness, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 2, 9-12-83) 
State Law reference- Careless driving, MCL 257.626b. 
Sec. 18-93. - Parking. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle upon property of the community schools located in the city in the following places: 
(1)  Any area designated as a no parking area; 
(2)  Designated fire lanes; 
(3)  Designated handicapped parking areas; 
(4)  Within 15 feet of any fire hydrant; 
(5)  Designated emergency exits. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 3, 9-12-83) 
Sec. 18-94. - Speed restrictions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to exceed the speed limit designated and posted on the property of the community schools located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 4, 9-12-83) 
Sec. 18-95. - Penalties. 
(a)  Violations of the provisions of sections 18-92, 18-93 or 18-94 shall be punishable as civil infractions. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of section 18-91 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 197, § 5, 9-12-83) 
Chapter 19 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Utility franchises and municipal ownership, Ch. 15. 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, Ch. 4; planning, Ch. 13; subdivisions, Ch. 16; franchises, licenses and permits, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - WATER 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 406, § 1, adopted February 8, 2019, effective March 15, 2010, repealed Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 19-21-19-39. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. II, Div. 1, §§ 19-21-19-32 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Sec. 19-21. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Abutting shall mean adjacent to or contiguous to or located immediately across any road, street, alley, right-of-way or easement from the relevant watermain. 
    Additional facilities or structures shall mean any additional construction of buildings or real property appurtenances at a specific location that would create or tend to create additional demand for water service. 
    Apartment shall mean one or more buildings constructed on a single parcel of property where each building contains at least two living units and the property and buildings are owned by a separate entity(s), and marketed for lease or rental. 
    Applicant shall mean the person, organization or corporation who requests water service be made available at a specific location, applies for the required connection permit, pays the required connection charges and agrees to pay for such service at that location. (Also see "customer") 
    Approval shall mean the official grant of permission by, or acceptance of, the county agency, State of Michigan, or the City of Swartz Creek, by signature of the duly authorized representative(s). 
    Authorize shall mean to give preliminary, but not final, approval of, or permission for, a specific action. 
    Backflow shall mean water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants or pollutants entering a potable water system from any source other than its intended source due to a reversal of flow. 
    Backflow preventer or backflow prevention device shall mean a mechanical device or piping arrangement which is installed on the customer's side of the water meter to prevent the reverse flow of water from the customer's water facilities into the potable water system. 
    Back-pressure shall mean a type of backflow occurring when the customer's facilities are connected or subject to a pressure source in excess of the operating pressure of the potable water system thus allowing undesirable and questionable quality water, wastes, or other contaminants or pollutants to be pumped back into the potable water system. 
    Back-siphonage shall mean water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants or pollutants entering a potable water system from any source other than its intended source caused by a sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water system. 
    Brokerage shall mean the act of marking-up the established water rate to ones tenants for the purpose of receiving a commission or making a profit. 
    Building shall mean any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and used or built for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles, goods, merchandise, equipment, materials or property of any kind. This definition shall include, but is not limited to tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, sheds, garages, barns, car ports, animal kennels, store rooms, or vehicles serving in any way the function of a building described herein. 
    Building water service line shall mean the pipe from the watermain to the premises served whose purpose is to provide water service to any building or structure, and is also sometimes referred to as "water service line," "service line," or "service lead." 
    City shall refer to the City of Swartz Creek, a governmental corporation in the State of Michigan. 
    City council shall refer to the legislative body of the City of Swartz Creek. 
    Combined fire and domestic service line shall mean a building water service line whose primary purpose is to supply water for general consumption and usage, but which also supplies water for fire protection. 
    Commercial user shall mean any user whose premises is used to offer services and/or products such as retail and wholesale stores, gasoline stations, car washes, restaurants, schools, churches, hotels, motels, nursing homes, public and private clubs, theaters, governmental buildings and institutions. 
    Commodity charge shall mean the wholesale or retail charge per unit volume of water. 
    Condominium shall mean a development consisting of not less than two living units, which is established in conformance with Act 59 of the Public Acts of Michigan. 
    Connection charges shall mean a general term referring to the specific development charges that must be satisfied in order to receive water service. Water connection charges include connection permit fees as established by resolution of the Swartz Creek City Council and Genesee County, and applicable service tap and meter installation fees which cover the cost of tapping the watermain, installing a corporation stop-cock, installing a copper service line from the main to the road right-of-way line, installing a curb stop and box, and setting the meter and remote device. 
    Connection permit shall mean the document used as an application for water service and, if authorized by Swartz Creek City and issued by the county, shall serve as the approval for connection to a public water supply system. 
    Consumer shall mean the person or persons who actually receive and utilize water service at a specific location, but shall not necessarily be the applicant, customer, or property owner. 
    Contamination shall mean an impairment of the quality of the potable water by wastewater, industrial fluids, or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree, which could create an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Corporation stop shall mean a valve ranging in size up to two-inch in diameter inserted in the watermain for connection of the water service line. 
    County shall mean the Genesee County Drain Commissioner's Office-Division of Water and Waste Services. (Also see "division") 
    County agency shall mean the Genesee County Drain Commissioner. 
    County capital improvement fee or CCIF shall mean the charge for connection to the county water system, which is set in the amount of $1,000.00 for each unit of connection. 
    County water system shall mean the water transmission and distribution system operated and maintained by the county through the county agency consisting of authorized personnel, water source, plants, equipment, works, instrumentalities, lines, properties and appurtenances now or hereafter existing, used or useful in the obtaining of a water supply, its production, treatment, distribution and all other necessary functions. 
    Cross-connection shall mean any unprotected connection or structural arrangement of piping or fixtures between a public or a customer's potable water system or any other source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable water system any water of questionable quality, wastes, or other contaminants or pollutants. 
    Curb stop shall mean the valve which is part of the water service line and is located at or near the road right-of-way line, property line or easement line, and is operated by city personnel or authorized personnel of a municipality responsible for the operation and maintenance of its water system. 
    Curb stop box shall mean an approved cast iron or ductile iron housing, which encloses, protects and provides access to the curb stop. 
    Customer shall mean the person responsible for payment of all water service used at a specific location, and is further defined as the person who requested that water service be made available at the specific location, applied for the required connection permit, paid the required connection charges and agreed to pay for such service at that location (see wholesale customer and retail customer). 
    Customer's installation shall mean all pipes, shut-offs, valves, fixtures, equipment and appliances of any kind and nature forming a part of an installation for utilizing water service. Customer's installations are located on the customer's side of the point of delivery, whether such installation is owned outright by the customer or is used by the customer under lease or otherwise. 
    Degree of hazard shall mean the likelihood of incidence occurring based on the type of connection and hazards present. Degree of hazard shall be classified as "low," "medium" or "high." 
    Detector check valve shall mean a single or double check valve equipped with a bypass and meter to detect leakage or unauthorized use of water. 
    Developer shall mean any person or legal entity engaged in developing or subdividing land for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
    Development shall mean a subdivision, condominium, apartment complex, mobile or manufactured home park, commercial, office or industrial park or complex, PUD, etc. In addition, development shall refer to any land development project undertaken by a developer for residential, commercial or industrial use as well as the act of improving or developing property for residential, commercial or industrial use. 
    Director of public service or director shall refer to the Director of Public Service of the City of Swartz Creek or another duly authorized official carrying out the duties of the office of the director of public service. 
    Division shall mean the Genesee County Drain Commissioner's Office-Division of Water and Waste Services. 
    Domestic service line shall mean a water service line whose primary purpose is to supply water for general consumption and usage. Also see building water service line. 
    Dwelling shall mean a living unit, house, mobile or manufactured home, apartment or building used primarily for human habitation. The word dwelling shall not include hotels, motels, tourist courts or other accommodations for transients, nor shall it include dormitories, rooming houses, business or industrial facilities. 
(1)  Single-family shall mean a building containing not more than one living unit on a single lot, or a living unit within a multiple-family development where each living unit is constructed on a separate lot. Mobile and manufactured homes are considered single-family dwellings. 
(2)  Multiple-family shall mean a building, which contains two or more living units. 
    Extension shall refer to new water system facilities constructed from the existing water system to enable the provision of water service and/or fire protection. 
    Fire hydrant assembly shall mean the fire hydrant, auxiliary valve and box, and six-inch or larger supply line connecting the fire hydrant to the watermain. 
    Fire protection connection line shall mean the water service line extending from the public water system to a customer's building and which supplies an automatic sprinkler system or fire suppression system. Point of delivery for fire protection connection lines shall be at the road right-of way line or at the limits of the easement when an easement is granted. 
    Franchising shall refer to the making or securing of contracts for the delivery of water service through the facilities of the public water supply system to any municipality by anyone other than the city. 
    Industrial fluid shall mean a fluid or solution, which may contain chemical, biological or other contaminates or pollutants in a form or concentration that would constitute a health hazard or create an aesthetically undesirable condition if introduced into the potable water system. 
    Industrial user shall mean any user whose premises is used for manufacturing, or as a processing facility, or that is engaged in producing a product. 
    Intermediate transmission lines shall mean those pipes generally 12 inches to 16 inches in diameter, which not only transport water to one or more local service areas, but also provide local service in one or more service areas. 
    Local distribution lines shall mean those pipes generally six inches to 12 inches in diameter, which serve the abutting properties within a local service area. 
    Master meter pit shall mean the below grade concrete vault or structure which houses an approved compound, turbine or magnetic flow master meter, piping, fittings, bypass line, valves and related equipment and appurtenances. 
    Master metered customer shall mean a customer or municipality who receives its water through a master meter and is responsible for the operation and maintenance of all water system facilities supplied through the master meter. 
    Meter or water meter shall mean the measuring device installed to accurately measure and register water used by a customer. 
    Meter and strainer shall mean the measuring device installed to accurately measure and register water used by a customer and the device that is installed on the water line in advance of the meter whose purpose is to collect any debris that may be coming from the water supply line prior to entering the meter. 
    Meter pit shall mean that structure that is used to enclose the meter, meter set and all devices related to the strainer, meter or recording device. The meter pit shall be constructed and installed according to the county's standard details. 
    Meter set plumbing shall mean the fittings, connections, and valves adjacent to the water meter including the inlet valve, outlet valve, and the couplings, nipples and spacers necessary for a complete meter installation, but does not include the meter. 
    Meter tampering shall mean when any person shall willfully alter, injure, or knowingly permit injury to any water meter or other measuring and recording apparatus in such a manner as to cause loss or damage or otherwise interfere with its ability to correctly and accurately measure and register water consumption; or to remove or bypass the water meter or make any connection upstream of the meter for the purpose of using water without the consent of the city such that the consumed water will not be measured and reported for payment. 
    Mobile home or manufactured home park shall mean a parcel of property zoned under the provisions of the applicable local zoning regulations whose allowed and recognized use is the business of renting spaces or lots upon which mobile or manufactured homes are placed and occupied as single-family dwellings, and shall include any associated and allowed laundry, recreational and common facilities incidental thereto. 
    Municipality shall mean a local unit of government including cities, townships and villages. This term generally refers to the City of Swartz Creek unless otherwise stated. 
    Non-potable shall mean water, which is not safe for human consumption or which is of questionable quality. 
    Off-site facilities shall mean primary transmission lines, intermediate transmission lines or local distribution lines and related facilities which must be constructed in order to connect the on-site facilities of a new development to the nearest point in the public water supply system at which adequate capacity is available to meet the requirements and demands of the development. 
    On-site facilities shall mean watermains, service lines, fire hydrants, and appurtenances installed within a residential, commercial, or industrial development. It includes those facilities in peripheral streets and easements constructed wholly or in part for use by the development. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, association, society, company, group, public or private corporation, public agency or instrumentality. 
    Point of delivery shall mean the location where the customer receives water from the public water supply system. The point of delivery for water service is at the water curb stop and box, which will normally be located at the road right-of-way line or easement line. Point of delivery for master metered customers shall be immediately upstream of the master meter pit. 
    Pollution shall mean the presence of any foreign substance in water, which tends to degrade its quality, so as to constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable, but which does not constitute a health hazard. 
    Potable shall mean water, which according to recognized and established standards is safe and suitable for human consumption. 
    Premises shall mean each lot, parcel of land, or building having any connection to the water system. 
    Pressure relief valve shall mean a device designed and intended to reduce the force by which water enters the plumbing system of a building, which valve must meet the specifications for design and installation prescribed in Appendix P. 
    Primary transmission lines shall mean those pipes which are generally 20 inches diameter and larger, whose only function is to transport water to and through one or more local service areas and to which building water service lines are not permitted unless authorized by the director of the county system. 
    Private water system shall mean a non-municipally-owned system of water pipes, valves, fittings and equipment used to distribute water within a specific service area, such as within a manufactured home park. 
    Property owner shall mean the person who is shown as the taxpayer of record for a particular premises. 
    Public water supply system shall mean the county water system and all municipally operated and maintained water systems, which are connected directly or indirectly to the county water system. 
    Remote device shall mean an electronic device usually installed on the exterior of a building and used to obtain meter consumption readings by authorized representatives of the city. 
    Residential user shall mean any user whose premises is a domicile for single- or multiple-family use. 
    Retail customer shall mean any residential, commercial or industrial user of the city that purchases water from the city and is billed for water service at the rate established by resolution of the city council. 
    Secondary water supply shall mean any water supply on or available to a premises other than the approved public potable water supply. These secondary waters shall include, but are not limited to, water from another purveyor's potable water system, or any natural source(s) such as wells, springs, rivers, streams, etc. These waters may be polluted or contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
    Service shall mean the readiness and ability on the part of the city to furnish water to the customer on demand. The maintenance of minimum water pressure of 20 pounds per square inch at the point of delivery shall constitute the rendering of service, irrespective of whether or not the customer makes use thereof. Service shall also mean the act or method of providing or supplying water or making water available for use by the customer. 
    "Shall" is mandatory, "May" is permissive. 
    Straight piping shall mean the act of installing a piece of pipe in the meter set plumbing at the location where the meter would normally set for the purposes of using unmetered water. Straight piping is a form of meter tampering, which results in water theft. Curb box is to be in "off" position until meter is set. 
    Subdivision shall mean a division of a lot, parcel or tract of land into two or more lots, plots or sites for the purpose of sale, rent, lease, building development or other use. 
    Tap or tapping shall mean the drilling and threading of an opening in a watermain for the insertion of a corporation stop-cock. 
    Tenant or renter shall mean someone who pays rent to use land or a building that is owned by someone else on the public record. 
    Used water shall mean water which has passed through the service point of delivery of the public water supply system and which is no longer under the sanitary control of the purveyor. 
    Wastewater shall mean the liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions together with any groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter the wastewater collection system. 
    Watermains shall mean primary and intermediate transmission lines and local distribution lines. 
    Water system or potable water system shall be a general term referring to the entire public water utility system that services the needs of the customer, including transmission, distribution and fire protection lines, storage facilities, pumping facilities, meters and metering devices, and all other related appurtenances incidental thereto. 
    Wholesale customer shall mean any municipality that purchases water from the county agency for resale to the retail customers within its jurisdiction, and is billed for water service at the applicable wholesale water rates established by the county agency. The City of Swartz Creek is a wholesale customer. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-22. - General prohibitions. 
(a)  Unauthorized use of water system prohibited. No unauthorized person shall uncover, tap, make any connection to or otherwise use the public water supply system or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
(b)  Tampering with or altering water system prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to meddle, tamper with, alter, deface, or make changes to any public water supply system facilities or appurtenances thereof including the building water service line to any premises, or any building plumbing fixtures ahead of the meter, or to interfere in any way with a meter or meter set plumbing. 
    Should it appear that water has been stolen by way of altering any piping, unauthorized connections, straight piping, meter tampering, or otherwise, the city shall have the right to discontinue service until all defects, alterations, and tampering have been corrected, and appropriate compensation and restitution has been made by the offending person. 
    When a water meter is found to have been tampered with or unmetered water has been otherwise diverted or used, the customer shall be billed at the current commodity rate for the estimated unauthorized volume as determined by the city. The consumption shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption records or any other appropriate basis at the discretion of the city in accordance with generally accepted utility practices. 
(c)  Unauthorized operation prohibited. No person shall operate any valve, fire hydrant, pump, blow-off, flushing connection, curb stop, meter bypass or other water system facility unless authorized or permitted to do so by the city. Fire hydrants may be operated by fire department personnel for emergency use and related fire prevention activities. 
(d)  Interconnection of private water systems or secondary water supplies to water system prohibited. No person shall interconnect or permit the connection of any private water system, community well, or secondary water supply to the public water supply system unless authorized to do so by the city and county. 
(e)  Supplying separately owned properties or multiple buildings through single meter prohibited. Separately owned properties shall not be supplied with water through a single meter. Separately owned properties shall not be supplied through a privately maintained distribution system, if public water supply is available. Each building or structure on the same property must have its own domestic meter and domestic service line to the watermain unless special arrangements have been approved by the city. Any property discovered to have two or more buildings supplied by a single water service line and meter shall be immediately corrected by the installation of separate domestic service lines and meters at the property owner's sole cost and expense unless the local municipality shall authorize such non-conforming service to continue. 
    This section shall not, however, prohibit single metering of property owned as a cooperative, condominium, mobile or manufactured home park, or apartment complex as long as service is provided to and metered on common property and there is a legitimate association or corporation to apportion, collect and remit all fees and charges and accept notices. No such corporation or association shall charge or collect from unit owners more than the rates and charges established by the local municipality, plus actual administrative costs. 
(f)  Construction of watermains, hydrants, and related facilities and appurtenances without required plan review, approval and permits prohibited. No person shall commence construction of any watermains and related water system facilities and appurtenances which are intended to be connected either directly or indirectly to the public water supply system until plans and specifications for such improvements have been submitted to, reviewed by, and endorsed "approved" by the city, and until all necessary easements and all applicable permits of any kind and nature have been issued for such improvements, and inspection and permit fees have been paid. 
(g)  Cross connections prohibited. No physical cross connection shall be installed or maintained on any lines carrying potable water from the public water supply system. Any pipes, pumps, tanks, equipment or facilities supplied from or with the potential of being supplied from any non-potable source shall be suitably protected against the backflow of pollutants or contaminants by means of city approved backflow prevention devices. 
(h)  Brokering prohibited. No person shall mark-up the established water rate to one's tenants for the purpose of receiving a commission or making a profit. The only mark-up that is allowed is that to cover reasonable costs for meter reading, billing, and administration. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-23. - Service applications. 
(a)  Connection permits. A person desiring to obtain water service from the public water supply system shall first apply for the required water connection permit to the city. 
    If the availability of water service to the premises is confirmed, the applicant shall pay all municipal connection permit fees in accordance with the fee schedule as established by resolution of the city council. The authorized application for a connection permit shall then be submitted to the county for review and, if approval is given, the connection permit shall be issued by the county. No connection permit shall be issued unless all applicable CCIF have been paid. If a B-permit for connection is issued prior to the paying of the CCIF, the applicant shall be responsible for the fees. 
(b)  Service tap and meter installation fees. It shall be the applicant's responsibility to ensure that a meter has been installed and service initiated by the city before utilizing any water service or facilities. 
(1)  Connection and meter fee. After obtaining the required connection permit, an applicant for water service shall present the connection permit to the city and pay the required service tap and meter installation fee which covers the city's cost of tapping the watermain and installing a service line from the watermain to the road right-of-way line (point of delivery), and for furnishing and installing the water meter and remote device after the customer's installation has been satisfactorily completed and connected. Service tap and meter installation fees shall be the actual cost of installation and materials to the city. After receiving the appropriate service tap and meter installation fees from the applicant, the city will arrange for the installation of a watermain tap and service line from the watermain to the customer's property line (road right-of-way line) and install a curb box and curb stop. The customer's installation shall connect at the curb stop. After the customer's installation is satisfactorily completed and connected, the customer or the customer's contractor or plumber can request the city to install and wire the meter and remote device by scheduling such installation 48 hours in advance. 
(2)  Capital improvement fee. Before any property receives a permit to connect directly or indirectly to the water system capital improvement fees are to be computed and paid to the city and county according to the residential equivalent units. A single-family residence is equal to one unit. These fees shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(c)  Application for water service. Whenever a private system with private services (such as mobile home park, condominium association, or other entity) has a single water service line and meter supplying the premises, the account shall be made in the name of the mobile home park, condominium association, or other entity. Water service shall not be provided until the entity files with the city written proof of its legal authority to apportion, collect and remit all fees and charges, and accept notices. The entity must also provide evidence of its legal authority to operate the private water distribution system. The applicant must also certify in writing that adequate arrangements have been made to enable the city to install an outside remote device. 
(d)  Franchise agreements. The property owner of any premises situated in an adjacent municipality which fronts a border-line road between the city and the other municipality or which abuts the boundary line between the city and another municipality may request to be provided water service by the city provided that the municipality within which the premises resides does not have water system facilities available to service said premises. 
    Before any premises in an adjacent municipality can receive water service by the city, both municipalities must approve such an arrangement by formal resolution of their respective governing boards, and an appropriate franchise agreement covering all terms, conditions and cost of such provision of service must be executed by each municipality, the property owner, and the county agency. No franchise agreement for water service shall be executed without the consent and approval of the county agency. 
(e)  Change in occupancy or ownership of premises. When a premises is to be vacated, or when there is to be a change of ownership thereof, the property owner shall be responsible for contacting the city and requesting a shut-off of service and closing of the customer's account. When such a request is made in writing, the city will make a final meter reading and prepare a final billing for the customer. The new property owner shall be responsible for contacting the city and making arrangements for water service to be reactivated. 
    If a tenant wishes to close their account and/or shut off the water to the premises, they must notify the city in writing. The city then reserves the right to pre-authorize any such service or account termination with the owner of the property. The customer or property owner shall pay a service termination fee, which fee shall be in accordance with the schedule of rates and charges as established by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-24. - Billing practice. 
(a)  Bills to retail customers. Retail customer billings, which are prepared by the city, are rendered quarterly. Such bills are normally mailed out on the first of the month and are due and payable 20 days from the date of billing. All remittances by mail must be received on or before the due date to entitle the customer to pay only the "net" amount. When the due date falls on a legal holiday, Saturday or Sunday, the net amount will be accepted on the first business day following. 
(b)  Late payment charges. For all bills not paid when so due, a penalty of four percent of the amount of such bill shall be added. Late charges shall be assessed on the amount of the bill that is past due, and interest shall be compounded quarterly. Failure to receive a bill shall not entitle a customer to pay the net amount unless it can be shown from the county's or municipality's records that the bill was not sent or that an error was made in processing the account or the bill. A dispute over the amount of any billing shall not relieve the customer from making payment when payment is due, and will not entitle the customer to a waiver of any late charges for failure to make payment by the required due date unless the municipality shall authorize the customer to withhold payment pending the issuance of a revised bill. It is the customer's responsibility to inform the local municipality of any changes in their billing address and phone number. 
(c)  Base rate for water service. The retail rates to be charged and collected by the city for water furnished to customers shall be in accordance with the prevailing schedule of rates and charges as developed by the city and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. This rate shall include a fixed readiness to serve charge and incremental retail rate based upon consumption. 
(d)  City, other entities not to receive any free service. No free service shall be furnished by the system to the city or to any persons, entity, public or private or any agency or instrumentality, except for unmetered emergency fire flows. The city shall pay for all the water used by it at the rates established by resolution of the city council. 
(e)  Estimated bills. If a meter reader cannot obtain a meter reading at a premises on the regular reading date for any reason, or if the meter shall fail to register properly, an estimated bill shall be sent. The water charge shall be estimated based upon actual consumption in a comparable billing period(s) in preceding years or determined by computing the average daily consumption for the period the meter was in operation and extending the average for the entire period. If there is no reliable history of prior use at the premises served by the defective meter, then the water charge shall be estimated based upon the average daily consumption for a period of days of service after the meter's repair or replacement and extended back to the beginning of the previous billing cycle. The water charge for periods less than a full billing period shall be prorated according to the number of days for which service is provided. 
(f)  Reporting excessive water bills. Retail customer inquiries concerning excessive water bills or bill disputes must be made to the city in writing. If required, a representative of the city will visit the premises, verify the meter reading, inspect the meter and attached valves for leaks, review historical consumption history, and report its findings to the customer. Inquiries and subsequent corrections may be requested for a time period not to exceed eight quarterly billing cycles. No allowance or adjustment to any water bill shall be made for leaks of any nature occurring on the customer's side of the point of delivery. 
(g)  Bill adjustments. When it has been established that a customer's water bill is in error resulting in an over-charge or under-charge, the required billing adjustment (credit or debit) will be made on the customer's next bill, unless the city finds that a gross error (+ or - 100 percent of the last years' average bill) has occurred and agrees that a revised bill should be rendered. The city shall have the authority to issue credits or make adjustments to its retail customers' bills. 
(h)  Back billing for service rendered. Whenever water service has been furnished to a premises and the city either has not rendered a bill for service or the bills rendered do not reflect the full service provided, a back bill shall be sent to the customer. Where the responsibility for the improper billing is solely that of the city, the period for which the back bill is computed will be limited to two years preceding the date that the error or omission is discovered, and the rates used in computing any back bill shall be those in effect at the time that service was provided. 
    However, if the customer, by its actions or lack thereof, or the actions of any of its contractors, plumbers or agents or lack thereof, is partially or wholly responsible for the inaccurate billing, then the period for which the back bill is computed shall be up to six years preceding the date that the error or omission is discovered. Likewise, should it appear that water has been stolen by way of altering any piping, unauthorized connections, straight piping, meter tampering or otherwise, the customer shall be back billed for the estimated water consumed. Such unauthorized consumption shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption records or any other appropriate basis at the discretion of the city in accordance with generally accepted utility practices, and such unauthorized consumption shall be billed at the current commodity rate for the estimated unauthorized volume as determined by the city. Water service may be terminated to any premises where water theft has occurred. Service shall not be restored until all charges including fines, penalties, turn on and turn off charges and estimated water usage and related charges have been paid to the satisfaction of the city. 
(i)  Termination of service for non-payment. The city shall have the right to terminate water service to any retail customer for non-payment of its water bill. Upon termination, service will not be restored until all past due balances are paid. Applicable turn-off and turn-on charges will be assessed to the customer or property owner. 
    Should it appear that water has been stolen by way of altering any piping, unauthorized connections, unauthorized operation, straight piping, meter tampering, or otherwise, the city shall have the right to discontinue service until all defects, alterations, and tampering have been corrected, and appropriate compensation and restitution has been made by the offending person. 
(j)  Enforcement of bill payments. Pursuant to state law, including without limitation, the provisions of MCL 141.121, the charges, including any penalties or interest thereon as provided for in this article, are hereby made a lien on the premises to which said charges apply. Whenever any such charge against any such premises shall be delinquent for six months or more, the city shall certify annually by April 1 of each year to the city assessor the amount of such delinquency. Upon such certification, the city assessor shall enter the charges upon the next tax roll as a charge against the premises to which the services shall have been rendered, and such charges shall be collected and the lien enforced in the same manner as provided for the collection of general city taxes; provided, however, that where the city is notified in writing that a tenant is responsible for the payment of such bills, per section 19-24, then the charges for service occurring after the date of notification shall not become a lien against the premises. 
(k)  Tenant as customer. A property owner may establish a tenant or renter of a premises as the customer and make that customer responsible for payment of all water bills. The city shall be notified in writing that a tenant is responsible for the payment of such bills, the notice to include a copy of the lease of the affected premises, if there is one. The tenant must also furnish a cash deposit of not less than $400.00 in the case of residential property or $700.00 in the case of industrial or commercial property as security for the payment of such charges and services. The director may increase this deposit if a history of high usage is apparent, up to a maximum equivalent of two-quarters worth of water usage. Upon vacating of the premises or termination of lease or service, the security deposit shall be returned less any outstanding balance for water service. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-25. - Watermains and valves. 
(a)  Materials and specifications. The materials of construction of any public or private watermains, valves, hydrants, fittings and appurtenances, and the methods used in excavating, installing, connecting, jointing, restraining, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the current edition of the Standard Specifications and Construction Specifications in Swartz Creek and all applicable regulations of the State of Michigan and local municipality. 
(b)  Watermain extensions at builder or developer expense. Extensions of the public water supply system to provide water service to residential, commercial or industrial developments shall be provided at the developer's expense. A developer of any residential, commercial or industrial development shall be required to extend and connect to the public water supply system if such facilities are available. Public water supply system facilities shall be deemed available if the developer's site is located within 500 feet of the public water supply system or within such additional distance as may be established by ordinance of the city. Any extension of the public water supply system shall be to the furthest limits of the developer's property. This requirement shall not apply to the construction of a single-family residence on an existing parcel of land or platted lot. 
    The city may consider a variance to the requirement that the public water supply system be extended to the furthest limits of any development project when all of the following conditions are met: 
 Development involves a residential corner parcel. 
 Development involves a single building or structure. 
 The public water supply system already fronts one side of the corner parcel and extends the full length of the frontage, or is located on the opposite side of the road directly across from and accessible to the proposed development. 
 Required domestic service will be one inch or smaller. 
 A separate fire protection connection line is not required for the building. 
    Such variances will be decided by the city council on a case by case basis. 
(c)  Continuity of service. The city reserves the right at all times, without notice to affected customers, to shut off the water in a main for the purpose of making repairs or extensions, or for any other necessary purpose. It is the intention of the city to provide advance notice to affected customers when time permits, but in an emergency situation such advance notice of service interruption may not be given. The city shall not be liable for damage to the facilities and equipment of any premises occurring as a result of such shut-down, or from the bursting of any main, or due to any accidental failure of the public water supply system from any cause whatsoever. Under normal operation the city will make every attempt to maintain a minimum pressure of 35 pounds per square inch (PSI) in the public water supply system as required by regulatory requirements. Any customer whose facilities or operations require the provision of a specified flow rate or water pressure shall be required to install such collateral facilities as may be necessary to ensure that such pressures and flow rates can be maintained. 
(d)  S-permits and Act 399 permits. No person shall commence construction or alteration of any watermains or related water system facilities and appurtenances which are connected to or intended to be connected either directly or indirectly to the public water supply system until plans and specifications for such improvements and alterations have been submitted to, reviewed by, and endorsed "Approved" by the city and county through the county agency, and until all necessary easements and all applicable permits of any kind and nature have been issued for such improvements, and inspection and permit fees have been paid. 
    A county S-permit shall be required for the alteration of any existing public water supply system facilities or for the construction of any public watermains, which will connect directly or indirectly to city water system, which is connected directly or indirectly to the county water system. Likewise, an Act 399 permit from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ) is required for the construction of any public watermains which will connect directly or indirectly to the city water system of which is connected directly or indirectly to the county water system. 
    The commencement of any watermain construction or alteration without obtaining the required county S-permit shall be a violation of these water use policies. The city shall have the right to prohibit or sever the connection of any unapproved or unpermitted watermain facilities, to prohibit or stop the alteration of any facilities for which an S-permit has not been issued, to deny or terminate service, and to take all other corrective or remedial actions as may be required to enforce these policies and to repair, restore or correct all damage or non-compliance. All costs incurred by the city in undertaking such corrective or remedial actions shall be reimbursed by the offending party. 
    The commencement of any watermain construction without obtaining the required Act 399 permit shall be a violation of the Safe Drinking Water Act (Act 399, P.A. 1976 and current revisions), and shall subject the offending party(s) to all fines and penalties prescribed and dictated thereby. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-26. - Building water service lines. 
(a)  Sizing. The building water service line to any building shall be of sufficient size to permit a continuous, adequate flow of water to all fixtures at all times. The minimum size of the domestic service line for a residential building shall be three-quarters inch. The size of the building water service line to any multi-unit residential building or any commercial or industrial building shall be as required and specified by the architect, designer, developer or the city. The city shall not be responsible for, or obligated to, size any building water service line or to project actual flow requirements for any applicant or customer. 
(b)  Materials and specifications. The materials of construction of any building water service line and appurtenances, and the methods used in excavating, installing, connecting, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the current edition of the Standard Specifications and Construction Specifications in Swartz Creek and all applicable regulations of the State of Michigan. 
(c)  Customer's installation. The customer may request to have the meter installed at the property line or inside the building. 
(1)  Meters installed in the building : Requests to have the meter installed in the building must first ensure the following occurs: 
The customer is responsible for installing the building water service line from the house to the point of delivery (curb box), and for installing the necessary piping, valves, and fittings inside the building to receive the meter (meter set plumbing). The building water service line from the road right-of-way line (point of delivery) to the meter set plumbing inside the building shall be a minimum of tree-quarters inches in size and constructed with type "K" soft temper copper tubing conforming to ASTM B-88 and B-251. All splices and connections shall be made with flared fittings. The building water service line shall be installed to a minimum depth of 48 inches. Connection at the point of delivery shall be made in a workmanlike manner and in accordance with procedures by the city. 
The city will flush the entire building water service line and set the water meter and remote device as soon as possible after the customer's installation is satisfactorily completed and connected at the point of delivery, and the meter set plumbing is ready to accept the water meter. Straight piping at the meter set plumbing and use of any water prior to the installation of a meter is strictly prohibited. A violation of this provision shall constitute water theft. 
(2)  Meters installed near the ROW or easement. The customer is responsible for installing the building water service line from the house to the point of delivery (ROW) and for installing the necessary piping, valves, and fittings to receive the meter (meter set plumbing). 
The city will flush the entire building water service line and set the water meter and remote device as soon as possible after the customer's installation is satisfactorily completed and connected at the point of delivery, and the meter set plumbing is ready to accept the water meter. Straight piping at the meter set plumbing and use of any water prior to the installation of a meter is strictly prohibited. A violation of the provision shall constitute water theft. 
(d)  Approval of plumbing and connections required. No water service line shall be connected and meter installed until the plumbing and connections incident thereto shall have been inspected and approved by the local building official, plumbing inspector or other person having jurisdiction for such inspections and approval. 
(e)  Repair and replacement. The portions of the building water service line located within a utility easement or within the road right-of-way including the curb stop and curb box will be operated and maintained by the city. Maintenance, repair and/or replacement of the building water service line between the curb stop and meter set plumbing shall be the responsibility of the customer and/or property owner. 
(f)  Improper installation. If at any time it is discovered that the building water service line has been installed improperly or contrary to or in violation of these policies or the current edition of the Standard Specifications and Construction Specifications in Swartz Creek, the customer shall be required by the city to correct any such violation or non-conforming elements at the customer's expense. The city may withhold water service to the premises until required corrections have been made. 
(g)  Leaks in customer's installation. The customer or property owner shall keep the customer's installation free from leaks at all times. Where a leak appears in a customer's water service pipe on the customer's side of the point of delivery allowing water to escape that does not register on the meter, the city shall give the customer written notice thereof and the customer shall immediately proceed to repair such water service line. Should the same not be repaired, or should there be no evidence of any attempt to repair same within 72 hours after written notice to repair has been given, the city may discontinue service by shutting the water off at the curb stop. If, in the judgment of the city, it is believed that any leak in the customer's installation is of such nature as to endanger public safety, public or private property, constitute a public nuisance, or result in the waste of any substantial amount of unmetered water, the city may discontinue service without prior notice to the customer and shall not restore service until such leak is repaired. 
(h)  Demolition. Whenever a building or structure is to be permanently demolished, or is to be demolished to make way for another building or structure, the city shall not issue a permit for such demolition until the property owner or the demolition contractor provides them with a signed copy of the county's service termination permit and procedures form. Such form will confirm whether or not the building to be demolished is connected to the public water supply system and/or wastewater collection system, and provides additional requirements for the temporary or permanent termination of service when so connected. 
    City or county personnel shall be present at the work site when the water service line and/or wastewater service line is disconnected to inspect the work and to ensure that the termination of service is performed in accordance with county procedures and that no damage occurs to the public water supply system or wastewater collection system. All such services that are abandoned, and not scheduled for re-use, shall be demolished. 
(i)  Indemnification. The customer or property owner shall indemnify, save harmless, and defend the city against all claims, demands, cost or expense, for loss, damage or injury to persons or property in any manner directly or indirectly arising from the installation of the customer's water service line (customer's installation) or from the transmission and use of water by the customer or any consumer from any of the customer's water service lines, plumbing, facilities, fixtures and appurtenances. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-27. - Fire protection service. 
(a)  Materials and specifications. The materials of construction of any fire protection connection line and appurtenances, and the methods used in excavating, installing, connecting, jointing, restraining, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the current edition of the Design Standards and Construction Specification of Swartz Creek and all applicable regulations of the State of Michigan. 
(b)  Fire protection connection separate from domestic service line connection. Whenever a fire protection connection line is installed on private property, and the operation and maintenance of such line will not revert to the city at start-up (including, but not limited to, all fire protection connection lines four inches and smaller), a separate domestic service line shall also be extended from the watermain to the building. Under this arrangement, the fire protection connection line shall not be tapped or used for the general domestic water supply of the premises. 
    Whenever a fire protection connection line six inches or larger is installed on private property, and the operation and maintenance of such line will revert to the city at start-up as evidenced and effectuated by the granting of required easements and rights-of-ways to the city, a separate domestic service line may be connected to the fire protection connection line at a point outside the building which falls within the easement, and a curb stop and curb box installed. No domestic service line shall be connected to any fire protection connection line inside the building. The final configuration of the domestic service line under this arrangement shall be approved by the city prior to construction. 
(c)  Fire sprinkling system review. Prior to the installation of any fire protection connection line and fire suppression system, the developer, contractor or fire protection system installer shall provide a copy of the construction or architectural drawings showing proposed yard piping and fire protection system piping to the city for review, approval, and required permit. Such plan review will be performed in order to establish the degree of hazard for potential backflow and to ensure that required backflow prevention devices will be installed. Applicable permit and inspection fees shall be in accordance with the city's current schedule of rates and charges. In general, only one fire protection connection line will be allowed per premises. Additional fire protection connection lines will be approved only if specifically required by building or fire codes. 
(d)  Easements and rights-of-ways. Whenever the city agrees to assume the responsibility for operating and maintaining a fire protection connection line, such facilities shall become a part of the public water supply system, and the property owner shall grant and convey appropriate easements and rights-of-ways as shall be required by the city to permit ingress and egress for operation and maintenance. Said easements shall extend along the entire length of the fire protection connection line. 
(e)  Residential and commercial combined fire and domestic service line for limited area fire protection. Sprinkling piping serving not more than six sprinklers for an isolated area may be connected to the building water service line having a capacity sufficient to provide 0.15 gallons per minute per square foot (6.1 liters per minute per square meter) of floor area throughout the entire enclosed area. All limited area fire suppression sprinkler system connections must be made after the meter and each connection must have an approved backflow prevention device and be inspected by the city for compliance with cross connection regulations set forth in this article. The city shall not be responsible for specifying or sizing the building water service line to provide the required fire flow rates. Sprinkler protection installed under the above guidelines shall comply with all NFPA standards and codes, and the customer or property owner shall have such installations inspected and approved by the appropriate authority having jurisdiction over such installations. 
(f)  Charge for unauthorized use. Fire protection connection lines are intended exclusively for fire protection and may not be used for the general domestic water supply of any premises. If it is discovered that the fire protection connection line is used for irrigation, cooling, or for the general domestic supply of any premises, the city shall have the right, ten days after notification to the customer or property owner by first class mail, to discontinue service until all defects, alterations, and tampering have been corrected, and appropriate compensation and restitution has been made by the offending person. 
(g)  Repair and replacement. The portions of any fire protection connection line located within a public utility easement or within the road right-of-way including the isolation valve and valve box or manhole will be operated and maintained by the city. Maintenance, repair and/or replacement of the fire protection connection line beyond the point of delivery shall be the responsibility of the customer and/or property owner unless the city has assumed the operation and maintenance of such lines and has been granted an easement by the property owner, in which case the point of delivery shall be the limit of the easement at the outside face of the building. 
(h)  Discontinuance of fire protection services. The city may terminate supply to a fire protection connection line under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  Without consent or notification only in the event of a watermain break or a major connection leak that could cause serious damage to public or private property. 
(2)  Ten days after notification to the customer and property owner by first class mail that there is leakage from any portion of the fire protection connection line and the customer or property owner has not taken action to correct such leakage. 
(3)  If unauthorized use is not terminated within ten days after notification to the customer and property owner by first class mail to cease such unauthorized use. 
(4)  On a temporary basis upon written request of the customer and/or property owner for the purpose of making repairs to the fire protection connection line or fire suppression system facilities at the premises. 
(5)  On a long-term basis, upon receipt of a letter from the customer and/or property owner requesting that service be terminated, along with written notification to the local fire department and insurance carrier. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-28. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  Materials and specifications. The materials of construction of any fire hydrant and appurtenances, and the methods used in excavating, installing, connecting, jointing, restraining, testing, and backfilling the trench shall conform to the current edition of the Design Standards and Construction Specification of Swartz Creek as well as all requirements of the State of Michigan. 
(b)  Fire hydrant use. Fire hydrants are installed for the primary purpose of emergency use by authorized fire department personnel and for flushing of watermains by the city responsible for the operation and maintenance of its own water system. No unauthorized person shall operate or use any fire hydrant unless permitted to do so by the city, and such use or operation shall not commence until all necessary permits have been obtained and security deposits paid. Local fire departments are authorized to operate and use fire hydrants without a permit in the event of an emergency. 
(c)  Special hydrant use permit and charges-Temporary service. Temporary water service for circuses, fairs, carnivals, swimming pool filling, water hauling, street sweeping, construction, hydro-seeding, etc. may be provided at designated fire hydrants in accordance with this article governing special hydrant use. In addition to special hydrant use, the city shall seasonally; on or about the first of May through the end of September, place in service one or more water metering stations for access to the public water system. The policy governing their use shall be revised annually and these revisions shall include charges, fees and other conditions related to their use. 
    Pursuant to the city's policy, any prospective hydrant user, other than users of the city's seasonally placed water stations, shall first obtain written consent from the city for the use of any hydrant. The request for temporary hydrant service shall be signed and dated by the individual or legal entity seeking use, shall include the name, billing address and phone number of the prospective user, and shall indicate the desired use, requested meter size, location of hydrant, and duration of proposed temporary service. The city shall require a deposit in an amount set by the director of public services, an amount no less than the replacement cost of the hydrant meter, isolation valve, and backflow prevention device. 
    When temporary service is to be terminated, the city will perform a final inspection of the hydrant, and remove the hydrant meter, isolation valve and backflow prevention device. Any damage to the hydrant not noted, hydrant meter, or fittings will be repaired and the cost deducted from the hydrant user's security deposit. If the cost of any repairs exceeds the amount of the security deposit, the balance will be borne by the hydrant user. Any lost or stolen metering equipment shall be paid for by the hydrant user. Following termination, a final billing will be prepared and sent to the hydrant user. All billings for temporary service, including the final billing, shall be due and payable 20 days from the date of the billing. The security deposit or any remaining balance thereof will be refunded to the hydrant user after all billing charges have been paid. 
(d)  Confiscation of illegal hydrant connections-Charges for unauthorized use. Any hydrant connection, hoses and equipment used for the unauthorized operation of a fire hydrant shall be confiscated by the city. Confiscated equipment may be recovered upon payment of appropriate consumption service charges and associated hydrant repair and maintenance costs occasioned by such unauthorized usage. The offending person shall be assessed a $500.00 fine as well as actual expenses incurred to correct the illegal connection. Any confiscated equipment not recovered within 30 days shall become the property of the city. 
(e)  Operation of hydrants. After the hydrant connection has been installed, the hydrant shall be operated using the isolation valve supplied with the meter. Isolation valves shall be opened and closed slowly so as not to create or cause any line surges or water hammer in the watermain. A special hydrant use permit may be revoked for improper use of any hydrant. At the end of each day or whenever work is stopped, hydrants shall be shut off and left in normal operating condition for fire protection purposes. Whenever weather or seasonal conditions are such that there is potential for freezing, hydrants shall be turned off and pumped down by the hydrant user at the end of each day. In the event that a leak develops around the barrel, stuffing box, or caps of the hydrant, the hydrant shall be shut off and the leak reported to city. Any damage or breakage occurring to the hydrant shall be immediately reported to the city. 
(f)  Damage to hydrants. Any person who directly or indirectly causes damage to a fire hydrant, either willfully or accidentally, shall be charged for all actual or incidental cost incurred by the city for the repair of the hydrant. Any person who willfully damages any fire hydrant shall also be subject to all fines and penalties as prescribed by local ordinance. 
    Any person or property owner desiring to have an existing hydrant relocated shall make arrangements for such relocation with the city, and shall deposit the estimated cost of any such relocation in an escrow account with the city. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-29. - Meters. 
(a)  Meters required. All premises using water through the facilities of the public water supply system shall have their water flow measured by a meter furnished and installed by the city. In addition, a remote device will be furnished and installed on the outside of the building. All meters and metering equipment shall conform to the material standards of the city. No person shall install, use, or cause to be installed or used, any meter or metering equipment not approved or standardized by the city. No person, other than an authorized employee of the city shall disturb, break, sever the seal, remove, change the location of, alter, or interfere in any way with the water meter or the remote device after it has been installed. Any person found to have done any of the above shall be guilty of a municipal civil infraction. 
(b)  Ownership and protection of meters and appurtenances. The customer or property owner shall be designated as the custodial owner of the meter. It shall be the customer's or property owner's responsibility to protect the meter from damage, loss or vandalism. Any damage or loss of a meter which is a direct result of the negligence of the customer or property owner, such as vandalism, neglect, freezing, or damage resulting from tampering with the meter, or any damage of an accidental nature is properly chargeable to the customer or property owner and will be billed at the current cost of repair or replacement. The city reserves the right to replace any meter which is not properly registering or recording water consumption, and such replacement will be done at no cost to the customer or property owner provided that such inaccuracy is not related to tampering or other meter damage caused by the customer, property owner or other unauthorized person. 
(c)  Consumption exceeding operating range of meter. Meters damaged by operating them at greater volume than the maximum delivery capacity for the particular class of meter (as outlined in the AWWA standards for cold water meters, or as recommended by the meter manufacturer) shall be repaired or replaced by the city. The cost of such repairs shall be charged to the customer or property owner. Whenever it is determined that the meter purchased by the customer or property owner is either too small or too large to adequately or accurately measure the actual water consumption at the customer's or property owner's premises, the city may order the customer or property owner to have the appropriate sized meter installed at the customer's expense. 
(d)  Change in meter size. Water meters are the property of the customer or property owner and are purchased and paid for as part of the service tap and meter installation fees. Requested changes in the size of a water meter shall be handled as follows: 
(1)  Increase in size. A customer or property owner desiring a larger water meter shall pay to the city the applicable service tap and meter installation fee if the building water service line must also be upsized to accommodate the larger meter. If the existing building water service line is already sized for the larger meter, the customer or property owner will only be required to pay the cost of a new meter. The old meter shall remain the property of the customer or property owner, and no credit or exchange fee will be given by the city for the old meter. In addition, the customer or property owner will be required to pay the applicable water service charges associated with the larger meter size. The customer or property owner will be responsible for installation of the appropriate sized piping from the building to the point of delivery, and for necessary piping modifications to the meter set plumbing to accept the new meter. 
(2)  Reduction in size. A customer desiring a smaller water meter shall pay to the city the cost of the smaller meter. A reduction in the size of the building water service line is not required in this case. The old meter shall remain the property of the customer or property owner, and no credit or exchange fee will be given by the city for the old meter. Likewise, no rebate of connection charges will be made to the customer or property owner for reducing the size of the meter; however, future water service charges to the customer or property owner will be based on the new meter size. The customer or property owner will be responsible for necessary piping modifications to the meter set plumbing to accept the new meter. 
(e)  Meter set plumbing. Meter set plumbing is the responsibility of the customer or property owner, and the configuration and materials of construction shall be in accordance with the city's current details and standards. Water meters will not be installed and service activated until the meter set plumbing and building water service line are properly installed and connected. Setting of a meter by the city does not constitute an admission by the city that the customer's installation or building plumbing has been properly installed, nor does it relieve the contractor, plumber, or the customer or property owner of the responsibility for correcting or repairing any non-conforming or improper work. 
(f)  Location of meter and remote device. The customer or property owner shall provide an accessible location inside the building satisfactory to the city for the installation of the meter and remote device wiring. The customer or property owner shall provide a suitable location on the exterior of the building at the front or on the side as close to the front as possible for mounting the remote device. Meters shall always be set in an upright and horizontal position. Meters may not be located in crawl spaces, bathrooms, bedrooms, or where oil, sewage or similar contamination is present or possible. In general, the meter shall be placed just inside the building wall nearest the watermain. 
(g)  Access to customer's premises. The duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all premises and shall have access to the meter and remote device for the purpose of inspection, observation, installation, maintenance, testing and meter reading. While performing the necessary work on private property the duly authorized employee(s) of the city will observe all safety rules applicable to the premises. 
    The customer or property owner shall at all times keep the meter and remote device free from obstacles including shrubs, debris, stored materials, etc. that would prevent convenient access to the meter, remote device or adjacent valves. Failure to do so could result in termination of service. 
    If at any time a customer or property owner refuses a duly authorized employee of the city access to the meter or remote device, the city may immediately terminate service to the customer's or owner's premises upon verbal notification. 
(h)  Meter testing requests. A customer may request the city to test a meter whenever the customer has reason to believe that the meter is not functioning properly. Such requests must be submitted to the city in writing and be accompanied by the required meter testing fee. If the meter when tested is not registering accurately, it will be repaired or replaced at no cost to the customer, and the meter testing fee which accompanied the customer's meter testing request will be returned to the customer (Subject to section 19-24). Likewise, the appropriate billing adjustment will be made on the customer's next bill. If, however, the meter when tested does register accurately, the expense of the test will be borne by the customer, and the meter testing fee accompanying the customer's request will not be returned. The required meter testing fee shall be in accordance with the city's prevailing schedule of rates and charges. 
(i)  Meter accuracy. A meter shall be considered accurate if when tested it registers within two and one-half percent more or less than the actual quantity of water passing through it. If a meter registers in excess of two and one-half percent more than the actual quantity of water passing through it, the meter will be considered "fast" to that extent. If a meter registers in excess of two and one-half percent less than the actual quantity of water passing through it, the meter will be considered "slow" to that extent. 
(j)  Adjustments for "fast" or "slow" registration. When a meter test indicates that a meter has been registering "fast" as defined above, the city will credit the customer with a volume equal to the percent of "fast" multiplied by the volume of water used during the previous six months, except when a meter change or meter repair has been performed in the interim period. 
    When a meter test indicates that a meter has been registering "slow" as defined above, the city will bill the customer for an additional volume equal to the percent of "slow" multiplied by the volume of water used during the previous six months, except when a meter change or meter repair has been performed in the interim period. In these instances, when a meter change or meter repair has been performed within the previous six months, any adjustment will be limited to the period subsequent to the meter change or repair. 
(k)  Seasonal meter shut-offs. Water meters installed for lawn sprinkling or for other recurring seasonal use may be turned-off at the request of the customer or property owner during periods when service is not needed or used. Customers desiring to have such seasonal service stopped must submit the proper form to the city. Likewise, any customer going on vacation or leaving their property vacant may also request to have their water service stopped during such periods by submitting the proper form to the city. Customers desiring to have such service reactivated must request this in writing. Customary turn-off and turn-on charges will be assessed to the customer whenever service is stopped or reactivated, and such charges shall be in accordance with the city's prevailing schedule of rates and charges. Note that shutting off the water to the premises does not terminate the account or relieve the account of the readiness to serve charges. 
(l)  Lawn sprinkler meters. No credit adjustment will be made to a customer's wastewater bill for water used to irrigate lawns or shrubs unless such water is recorded on a separate lawn sprinkler meter. Any customer not wishing to be billed wastewater charges for lawn and shrub irrigation shall arrange to have a separate irrigation meter installed. 
(m)  Water meters for water consumption not returned to the wastewater system. Any water customer may make arrangements to have a separate meter installed for the measurement of water consumption not returned to the wastewater system. Typical examples include lawn sprinkling, and make-up water for air conditioning chillers. Absolutely no connections shall be allowed for water that can reasonably be suspected to enter the sanitary sewer system (examples include service tubs, internal plumbing diversions or faucets, or connections to a garage or area with a floor drain). The water consumed through such a meter will not be subject to the quarterly wastewater service charge. 
    A customer desiring a separate water meter shall obtain the required permit, purchase the appropriately sized meter and meter reading devices from the city, and make necessary modifications to the building plumbing to accept the new meter. Once the piping modifications have been completed the city will set the meter. The city shall have the right to inspect the customer's installation to confirm that none of the water supplied through the separate meter will be returned to the wastewater system and that all requirements of the cross connection regulations are in place. 
    Billing for secondary meters shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(n)  Wastewater customers on private wells. Wastewater customers on private wells who discharge wastewater directly or indirectly into the city's wastewater collection system may have a meter installed on their well and be billed for wastewater service according to water consumption recorded on the well meter. 
Customers  desiring a well meter shall obtain the required permit, purchase the appropriately sized meter from the city, and make necessary piping modifications to accept the new meter. Once the piping modifications have been completed the city will set the meter. 
    The city may perform quarterly meter maintenance on all well meters and the cost of such maintenance shall be paid for by the customer. In the event that a well meter fails and cannot be repaired, the customer will be responsible for the cost of a new meter. In the event that a well meter fails to properly record water consumption, or the meter reader is unable to obtain a meter reading on the regular reading date for any reason, an estimated wastewater bill will be sent. In such cases the wastewater charge shall be estimated based upon actual consumption in a comparable billing period in preceding years, or based upon any other appropriate method of estimation in accordance with generally accepted utility practices. 
    Once a customer opts to install a well meter for wastewater billing purposes, future wastewater service charges shall be based on well meter consumption, and the customer shall not have the option of removing the meter and returning to a flat rate sewer billing. 
(o)  Meter maintenance and replacement. Meter maintenance associated with individual domestic meters and developer owned master meters will be provided by the city as required to ensure accurate measurement and recording of water consumption. Necessary meter repairs and replacement of individual domestic water meters or developer owned master meters will be done by the city at no cost to customers of the public water supply system (see exclusions in sections 19-24 and 19-26). Non-water system customers with well meters shall be required to pay the cost of necessary meter maintenance, repairs and replacement. 
(p)  Master meter pits, valves, piping and equipment. Whenever a master meter is required by the city, such meter and appurtenant meter pit, valves, piping and equipment shall conform to the current edition of the Design Standards and Construction Specifications of Swartz Creek and all other applicable standard meter pit details as developed by the city. 
(q)  Ownership of master meter pits. The cost of purchasing, constructing and installing a master meter, master meter pit and appurtenant valves, piping and equipment shall be that of the local municipality or developer whose facilities will receive water through said master meter. For private systems, such as mobile home courts, when the facilities are completed, they shall remain the property of the developer. For public utilities, such as municipal entities, the meter pits and appurtenances shall become the property of the city. 
(r)  Operation and maintenance of master meters, meter pits and equipment. developer owned master meter pits and appurtenant metering equipment shall be operated and maintained by the city at no cost to customers of the public water supply system. 
(s)  Easements and right of access. Developer owned master meter pits and facilities shall be located on private property outside of the public road right-of-way, and public utility easements shall be granted by the developer to the city for operation and maintenance of these master meter pits and associated metering facilities. The city shall at all times have right of access to any master meter pit for the purpose of inspection, meter reading, operation, maintenance, repair or replacement of equipment. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-30. - Plumbers and contractors. 
(a)  Water services to be installed by licensed plumbers and contractors. All work in connection with the installation and/or repair of the customer's building water service line and meter set plumbing shall be performed by a licensed plumber or contractor authorized to do business in the State of Michigan and County of Genesee. This requirement shall not prohibit the property owner from performing such work at the property owner's primary residence. 
(b)  Defective work. The applicant for water service shall be held responsible for all work covered by the water connection permit issued to them. The applicant for water service shall be responsible for the quality of workmanship and for the use of proper materials of construction complying with the current edition of the Design Standards and Construction Specifications of Swartz Creek, whether such work is performed directly by them or is performed by a licensed contractor or plumber hired by them. 
    Whenever the city finds any defect in the customer's installation prior to initial turn-on, the meter will not be set and service initiated until such defects have been corrected to the satisfaction of the city. Any failure occurring to the customer's installation after initial turn-on whether due to defective materials or workmanship, or other causes, shall be repaired and paid for by the customer or property owner. The city may terminate service until such repairs have been made. 
(c)  Plumber's and contractor's responsibility to comply with rules. Any plumber or contractor failing to comply with any provision of this article, or who shall refuse or fail to correct any of its work which is defective or irregular after being requested to do so, shall be prohibited from performing such work in the future. 
(d)  Turning-on or turning-off water. Contractors and plumbers shall not be allowed to turn water on or off at the corporation stop-cock or curb stop of any water service line or at any watermain valve unless authorized to do so by the operating city to make repairs or to test their work. All other persons are strictly forbidden from turning water on or off at the corporation stop-cock or curb stop, or from operating any watermain valve. Water service to any premises shall only be reactivated by duly authorized personnel of the city. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Sec. 19-31. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Liability of city-Right to restrict water use. The city and their duly authorized representatives shall not be liable for any damage resulting from the bursting of any watermain or service line, from the shutting off of any watermain for repairs, extensions or connections, or from the accidental failure of the public water supply system from any cause whatsoever. In case of emergency the city and its duly authorized representatives shall have the right to restrict the use of water in any reasonable manner for the protection of the potable water supply and the public water supply system. 
(b)  Inspection and inspection fees. The city shall perform construction inspection on all water system extensions for which it will retain custodial authority for the operation and maintenance of said facilities following completion and acceptance of such facilities for public use. The city shall observe final testing and disinfection of water system extensions when a development owner will retain custodial authority for the operation and maintenance of said water system facilities upon completion and acceptance for public use. Development owners who operate and maintain their own water system facilities shall be required to comply with all applicable rules and regulations of the Safe Drinking Water Act (Act 399, P.A. 1976 and current revisions). 
    The fees and charges for main-line or final inspection shall be paid by the developer, contractor or applicable entity in accordance with the city's prevailing schedule of rates and charges as adopted by the city council. 
(c)  Right of access. The duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of performing maintenance, repairs, inspection, observation, measurement, meter installation, meter reading, sampling, testing, and other activities related to the operation of the public water supply system. Refusal to permit such access to authorized personnel may result in the termination of service. If the city is unable to access properties due to a lack of cooperation or abandonment, the city may terminate service 
(d)  Standard specifications. All watermain facilities connecting either directly or indirectly to the city water system shall conform to all applicable requirements of the Design Standard and Construction Specifications of Swartz Creek (current edition), and other applicable rules and regulations of the State of Michigan. 
(e)  Responsibility of owner. The customer or property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of all water service lines, plumbing facilities and watermain facilities beyond the point of delivery. 
(f)  Additional rules and regulations. The city and its duly authorized representatives shall have the right to enact or establish additional rules and regulations necessary to enforce or administer this article and to carry out its responsibilities under Act 342, under the Safe Drinking Water Act, and under other Federal, State and Genesee County Regulations. 
(g)  Drilling, use of wells prohibited. The drilling and use thereof of wells, the water from which is intended for human consumption, is prohibited unless all of the following circumstances apply: 
(1)  The proposed use for any new or replacement well is for service to a single family residential structure. 
(2)  The parcel served does not have access to public water main at the right-of-way or private water main established to serve a condominium or other planned project; or the structure to be served is 500 feet or more from a public or accessible private water main. 
(3)  The parcel served is two acres in size or larger and is recorded on the 2015 assessment roll. 
(4)  The Genesee County Health Department approves the drilling of said well. 
    If any existing well, after the effective date of this article shall cease to provide potable water, then in that event the premises served by such well shall be connected to the water system as provided in this article. However, under no circumstances shall an existing well be connected, directly or indirectly, with any portion of the system provided by the city. 
(h)  Fiscal year of the water supply system. The water supply system shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning on July first of each year ending June thirtieth of the following year. 
(i)  Enforcement of this article. The provisions of this article shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus, or otherwise in any court having competent jurisdiction. Any violation of this article is deemed to be a nuisance per se. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ; Ord. No. 428 , § 1, 3-14-16) 
Sec. 19-32. - Backflow prevention and cross connection control. 
(a)  Introduction. The intent of this section is to establish a program for the identification, detection and elimination of unprotected cross connections within the public water supply system in order to prevent contamination of the city's public potable water supply from the backflow or back-siphonage of non-potable sources of water or water borne contaminants or pollutants. This section provides guidelines for the proper use of backflow prevention devices, and identifies facilities where the potential for cross connections and the backflow of contaminants will require the use of approved backflow prevention devices. 
    No physical connection shall be installed or maintained between lines carrying a public potable water supply and pipes, pumps or tanks supplied from or with the potential of being supplied from any non-potable source. Where dual supplies are necessary or desired, lines carrying water from the public water supply system shall be protected against back flow of polluted or contaminated water by means of approved backflow, back-pressure, or back-siphonage devices. 
(b)  Adoption by reference. The city hereby adopts by reference the water cross connection rules of the State of Michigan, being Rules 325.11401 through 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code ("Rules"), and the City of Swartz Creek Cross Connection Control Program ("program") as prepared by the City of Swartz Creek Department of Public Services and dated October 9, 2001, two copies of which rules and program shall be maintained on file with the city clerk and be available for public inspection during all regular office hours of the city. Any person or firm violating any of the provisions of the rules or the program shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be subject to the penalties and sanctions provided for in this Code. 
(c)  Inspections. It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and follow-up inspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as provided for in and as authorized by the rules and the program. 
(d)  Right to enter. As provided for in the rules and the program and as permitted by law, duly authorized employees and/or representatives of the city shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or water supply system thereof for cross connections. 
(e)  Cross connections in violation of this division. As provided for in the rules and the program and as permitted by law, the city is authorized and directed, after providing reasonable notice thereof, to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of the rules, the program and this division. 
(f)  Potable water system to be protected from contamination. The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous place as: 
"WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING" 
(g)  This division supplementary to state plumbing code. This division does not supersede the state plumbing code, but is supplementary to it. 
(h)  Violations of this division a misdemeanor. Any person or customer found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this division or any written order of the city department of public services, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 406, § 2, 2-8-10, eff. 3-15-10 ) 
Secs. 19-33-19-56. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CONNECTION CHARGES 

Sec. 19-57. - Adoption by reference. 
    The city hereby adopts by reference the water cross connection rules of the State of Michigan, being Rules 325.11401 through 325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code ("Rules"), and the City of Swartz Creek Cross Connection Control Program ("program") as prepared by the City of Swartz Creek Department of Public Services and dated October 9, 2001, two copies of which rules and program shall be maintained on file with the city clerk and be available for public inspection during all regular office hours of the city. Any person or firm violating any of the provisions of the rules or the program shall, except as otherwise provided by law, be subject to the penalties and sanctions provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 1, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 19-58. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the city to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as provided for in and as authorized by the rules and the program. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 2, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 19-59. - Right to enter. 
    As provided for in the rules and the program and as permitted by law, duly authorized employees and/or representatives of the city shall have the right to enter, at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the city for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or water supply system thereof for cross connections. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 3, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 19-60. - Cross connections in violation of this division. 
    As provided for in the rules and the program and as permitted by law, the city is authorized and directed, after providing reasonable notice thereof, to discontinue water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of this division exists, and to take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. Water service to such property shall not be restored until cross connections have been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of the rules, the program and this division. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 4, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94; Ord. No. 363, § 1, 10-9-01) 
Sec. 19-61. - Potable water system to be protected from contamination. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this division and by the state and city plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous place as: 
"WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING" 
(Ord. No. 150, § 5, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 19-62. - This division supplementary to state plumbing code. 
    This division does not supercede the state plumbing code, but is supplementary to it. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 6, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-94) 
Sec. 19-63. - Violations of this division a misdemeanor. 
    Any person or customer found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this division or any written order of the city department of public services, in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 150, § 7, 3-26-79; Ord. No. 305, § 2, 12-12-95) 
Secs. 19-64-19-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWAGE DISPOSAL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 408, § 1, adopted July 11, 2011, repealed Art. III, §§ 19-81-19-132. Section 2 of said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Art. III, §§ 19-101.1-19-123.1, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 19-101.1. - Purpose and scope of the sewer use article. 
A.  The purposes of this article are: 
1.  To establish uniform requirements for discharges from the City of Swartz Creek (the "local unit") (including discharges by all users located within the local unit) to the Genesee County Publicly Owned Treatment Works ("POTW"), and to enable the local unit and the county agency (also referred to as the "GCWWSD") to comply with applicable State and Federal Laws as required by the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (also known as the "Clean Water Act"), as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq.; the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR part 403); Part 31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 324.3101 et seq., as amended ("Water Resources Protection"); and the rules, Michigan Administrative Code, R § 323.2301 et seq., as amended, promulgated pursuant to Sections 3103, 3106 and 3109 of Part 31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, as amended. 
2.  To prevent the discharge of pollutants into the POTW that do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; that would interfere with the operation of the POTW; that would pass through the POTW into the receiving waters or the atmosphere, the environment, or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; that would inhibit or disrupt the POTW's processing, use, or disposal of sludge; that would cause health or safety problems for POTW workers; or that would result in a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or of other applicable laws and regulations. 
3.  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and sludges from the POTW. 
4.  To regulate the discharge of wastewater and/or pollutants to the POTW and to enforce the requirements of this article through the issuance of permits and through other means as provided by this article. 
5.  To authorize and require all inspection, monitoring, reporting and enforcement activities as necessary to insure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements and other applicable laws and regulations. 
6.  To provide for the equitable distribution and recovery of costs from users of the POTW sufficient to administer regulatory activities and to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement and replacement of the POTW. 
B.  This article applies to any person that discharges to the POTW from within the local unit. This article also applies to any person owning, using, constructing or maintaining any private system or facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage or wastewater within the local unit. 
C.  The county agency has established and organized the Genesee County Water and Waste Services Division ("GCWWSD") to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of Act 342 and this article. 
D.  As required by Act 342, a contract or agreement between the county agency and the local unit must be entered into before the local unit may discharge into the POTW. As a condition or requirement of the contract or agreement, the local unit is required to adopt, and to keep continually in force and up to date, an ordinance that, except as specifically approved in advance by the GCWWSD, must be identical to the sewer use ordinance adopted by Genesee County (as that ordinance is amended from time to time by the county upon the recommendation of the county agency) (the "Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance"). This article is being adopted by the local unit pursuant to the contract or agreement between the county agency and the local unit and as required by the Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance and other applicable State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
E.  The local unit hereby designates, empowers and authorizes the county agency, acting through the GCWWSD, to act as the agent and representative of the local unit for purposes of administering and enforcing this article within the local unit. This includes, but is not limited to, the power and authority of the GCWWSD, as deemed necessary by the GCWWSD, to immediately and independently investigate, enforce, and prosecute (administratively or judicially, and civilly or criminally) any violation of this article or of any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the GCWWSD under this article or the Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance, and to otherwise implement the requirements of this article and the Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance. 
F.  It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any wastewater or pollutant to the POTW or to any storm sewer or natural outlet within the local unit or in any area under the jurisdiction of the local unit, except in accordance with the provisions of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. If any user discharges or proposes to discharge wastewaters or pollutants that are prohibited or limited by this article, the county agency may take any action as provided by this article or other applicable laws or regulations to assure and require compliance with the provisions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-101.2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms shall have the following meanings as used in this article: 
    "Act" means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC. 1251 et seq. 
    "Act 342" means the "County Public Improvement Act of 1939", as amended, being MCL 46.171 et seq., which Act authorizes, in pertinent part, the establishment by the county of a system or systems of sewer, or sewage disposal improvements and services and disposal facilities and services within or between cities, villages, townships, charter townships, or any duly authorized and established combinations thereof, within or without the county, and mains, trunks, connecting lines, and disposal facilities therefore. 
    "Authorized representative." When used in reference to a nondomestic user, "authorized representative" means as follows: 
A.  If the user is a corporation, a responsible corporate officer. "responsible corporate officer" means: a president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation; or the principal manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures of more than $25,000,000.00 in second quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
B.  If the user is a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
C.  If the user is a Federal, State or local governmental entity, the principal executive officer, ranking elected official, or director having responsibility for the overall operation of the discharging facility. 
D.  A duly authorized representative of an individual designated in (A), (B) or (C) above, if the representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge to the POTW originates. 
(1)  To be considered "duly authorized," the authorization must be made in writing by an individual designated in (A), (B) or (C) above. The authorization must specify either an individual or a position having responsibility for the overall operation of the facility (such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well or well field, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company or entity). The written authorization must be submitted to the POTW manager prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the authorized representative. 
(2)  If an authorization under (D)(1) above is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company or entity, a new written authorization must be submitted to the POTW manager prior to or together with any reports to be signed by the newly authorized representative. 
    "Best Management Practice" or "BMP" means any practice, program, procedure, control, technique or measure (used singularly or in combination), that a user is required to adopt or implement to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances to the POTW, as determined necessary by the POTW manager. BMPs include, but are not limited to: schedules of activities; pollution treatment practices or devices; prohibitions of practices; good housekeeping practices; pollution prevention, minimization and reduction measures; educational practices and programs; maintenance procedures; other management programs, practices or devices; treatment requirements; notice, reporting, and record-keeping requirements; and operating procedures and practices to control or contain site runoff, spillage or leaks, batch discharges, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from product and raw materials storage. BMPs may be structural, non-structural, or both. In determining what BMPs will be required of a user in a particular case, the POTW manager may consider all relevant technological, economic, practical, and institutional considerations as determined relevant and appropriate by the manager, consistent with achieving and maintaining compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
    "BOD" (denoting biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of dissolved oxygen used in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20 degrees C., expressed in milligrams per liter. 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system of a building which receives the discharge from wastewater and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer. The building drain shall be deemed to begin five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (such as a grinder pump). The building sewer shall be deemed to begin five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment process or facility needed for compliance with pretreatment standards or requirements. 
    "Categorical user" means a user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard. 
    "Categorical Pretreatment Standard" or "Categorical Standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Clean Water Act, 33 USC 1317, which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    "Cesspool" means an underground pit into which domestic waste is discharged and from which the liquid seeps into the surrounding soil or is otherwise removed. 
    "CFR" means Code of Federal Regulations. 
    "Chlorine demand" means the difference between the amount of chlorine available at the end of the contact time, expressed in mg/l. 
    "COD." A measure of oxygen-consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specified test. It does not differentiate between stable and unstable organic matter and thus does not necessarily correlate with biochemical oxygen demand. Also known as oxygen consumed (OCR) and dichromate oxygen consumed (DO), respectively. 
    "Combined sewer" means a public owned and maintained sewer designed and intended to receive both wastewater and storm water for discharge to the POTW. 
    "Compatible pollutant" means a pollutant which, as determined by the POTW manager, is susceptible to effective treatment by the POTW as designed, and which will not interfere with, or pass through, the POTW, and which is otherwise not incompatible with the treatment processes or in excess of the capacity at the POTW. The term "compatible" is a relative concept that must be determined on a case-by-case basis. In determining whether or not a pollutant is compatible with the POTW, the manager may consider, without limitation, the nature and qualities of the pollutant, and the concentration, mass, and flow rate at which the pollutant is (or is proposed to be) discharged. Thus, for example, even pollutants such as BOD, fats, oils or grease, phosphorous, suspended solids, and fecal coliform bacteria, which are typically considered "compatible" may be determined incompatible, if discharged in concentrations or flows that would cause interference or pass through or exceed the POTW's capacity. Specifically excluded from the definition of compatible pollutant are "heavy" metals, PCBs, and any pollutants that will likely contribute or cause operational or sludge disposal problems or unacceptable discharges to the receiving waters. 
    "Composite sample" means a series of individual samples taken at regular intervals over a specific time period and combined into a single sample (formed either by continuous sampling or by mixing discrete samples) representative of the average stream during the sampling period. For categorical sampling, a composite sample shall consist of at least four individual samples taken within a 24-hour period. 
    "Cooling water" means water used for cooling purposes only, including both contact and noncontact cooling water. 
    "Cooling water (contact)" means water used for cooling purposes only that may become contaminated or polluted either through the use of water treatment chemicals (such as corrosion inhibitors or biocides) or by direct contact with process materials and/or wastewater. 
    "Cooling water (noncontact)" means water used for cooling purposes only that has no direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, final product, or waste, and that does not contain a detectable level of contaminants higher than that of the intake water (for example, the water discharged from uses such as air conditioning, cooling, or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat). 
    "County" means Genesee County, Michigan. 
    "County agency" means the public body or official as designated by the Genesee County Board of Commissioners pursuant to the provisions of Public Act 342 of the 1939 Public Acts of Michigan, being MCL 46.171 et seq., as amended (the "County Public Improvement Act"). The county agency has established and organized the Genesee County Water and Waste Services Division ("GCWWSD") to administer, implement and enforce the provisions of Act 342 and this article. Accordingly, for purposes of this article, "GCWWSD" may also be used to refer to the "county agency." 
    "County capital improvement fee" or "CCIF" refers to the charge authorized to be assessed to all new applicants for a connection permit to the POTW after May 1, 2002, which charge is used to defray the costs of new construction and expenses related thereto for increasing the capacity of the Genesee County Sewage Disposal, Transportation, and/or Treatment System Components, respectively, to accommodate new users. 
    "Daily maximum" means the maximum discharge of pollutants or flow (expressed in terms of concentration, mass loading, pounds, gallons or other unit of measurement) that shall not be exceeded on any single calendar day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. Where daily maximum limitations are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged during the day. If a composite sample is required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a single calendar day shall be based on the composite sample collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If grab samples are required for a parameter, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded on a calendar day shall be based on the average of all grab samples collected for that parameter on that calendar day. If only one grab sample is collected for a parameter on a given day, the determination whether the daily maximum limitation for that parameter has been exceeded for the day shall be based on the results of that single grab sample. 
    "Days" means, for purposes of computing a period of time prescribed or allowed by this article, consecutive calendar days. 
    "Debt service charges" means the charges levied to customers of the wastewater system, which are used to pay principal, interest and administrative costs of retiring the debt incurred for construction of the wastewater system. 
    "Dilute" means to weaken, thin down or reduce the concentration of pollutants in wastewater. 
    "Discharge" means the introduction of waste, wastewater, effluent or pollutants into the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether directly (such as through an approved sewer connection or other approved discharge point as authorized by this article) or indirectly (including, but not limited to, sources such as inflow and infiltration). 
    "Domestic septage" means liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank, cesspool, portable toilet, Type III marine sanitation device, or similar storage or treatment works that receives only domestic waste. Domestic septage does not include liquid or solid material removed from a septic tank, cesspool, or similar facility that receives either commercial wastewater or industrial wastewater and does not include grease removed from a grease interceptor, grease trap, or other appurtenance used to retain grease or other fatty substances contained in restaurant waste. 
    "Domestic treatment plant septage" means biosolids generated during the treatment of domestic waste in a treatment works and transported to a receiving facility or managed in accordance with a residuals management program approved by the MDEQ. 
    "Domestic user" means a user that discharges only segregated normal strength domestic waste into the POTW. 
    "Domestic waste" means wastewater (or water-carried waste) of human origin generated by personal activities from toilet, kitchen, laundry, or bathing facilities, or by other similar facilities used for household or residential dwelling purposes ("sanitary sewage"). Domestic waste shall not include any waste resulting from industrial or commercial processes, including, without limitation, any hazardous or toxic pollutants. Wastes emanating from sources other than residential dwelling units which are to be considered domestic wastes shall be of the same nature and strength and have the same flow rate characteristics. 
    "Dwelling unit." For purposes of assigning residential equivalent units, a "dwelling" unit shall contain, at a minimum, sleeping facilities, a toilet, a bath or shower, and a kitchen. 
    "Effluent" means wastewater or other liquid, partially or completely treated, flowing from a reservoir, basin treatment process or treatment plant. 
    "Excessive" means at such a flow, rate, magnitude or amount that, in the judgment of the POTW manager, it may cause damage to any facility or the POTW; may be harmful to the wastewater treatment processes; may adversely affect the management or operation of the POTW or POTW sludge management or disposal; may cause pass through or interference; may violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; may adversely affect the quality of the receiving waters or the ambient air quality; may endanger worker health and safety; may constitute a public nuisance; may be inconsistent with the requirements, purposes or objectives of this article; or may otherwise adversely impact the public health, safety or welfare or the environment. 
    "EPA" means the United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
    "Existing source" means any source of discharge that is not a new source as defined by this article. 
    "Fats" or "FOG" means fats, oil or grease consisting of any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, or any other non-volatile material of animal, vegetable or mineral origin that is extractable by solvents in accordance with standard methods. 
    "Food establishment septage" means material pumped from a grease interceptor, grease trap, or other appurtenance used to retain grease or other fatty substances contained in restaurant wastes and which is blended into a uniform mixture, consisting of not more than one part of that restaurant-derived material per three parts of domestic septage, prior to land application or disposed of at a receiving facility. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, serving, or dispensing of food, from the handling, storage, processing or sale of produce, or from the canning or packaging of food. It is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and its natural or added moisture content. 
    "GCWWSD" means the Genesee County Water and Waste Services Division (see "county agency). 
    "General user permit" means a permit issued to any user other than a significant industrial user as provided by this article to control discharges to the POTW and to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
    "Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance" means Ordinance No. 0605 adopted by the Genesee County Board of Commissioners on November 21, 2006, as amended from time to time. 
    "Grab sample" means an individual sample that is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    "Grinder pump" means, in a grinder pump system, the device to which the building sewer connects and which grinds and pumps the sewage to the public sewer for transportation to the POTW. 
    "Grinder pump system" means the publicly owned grinder pump, controls and pressure discharge pipe, including all control boards, controls, floats, pumps, storage tanks and appurtenances thereto which provides the connection between the privately owned building sewer and the public sewer system. 
    "Hazardous waste" means any substance discharged or proposed to be discharged into the POTW, that (1) if otherwise disposed of would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261 or under the rules promulgated under the State Hazardous Waste Management Act (Part 111 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 324.11101 et seq., as amended); or (2) is otherwise a waste or a combination of waste and other discarded material including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material that because of its quantity, quality, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible illness or serious incapacitating but reversible illness, or may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment if improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed, as determined by the POTW. 
    "Holding tank waste" means any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
    "Incompatible pollutant" means any pollutant that is not a compatible pollutant. 
    "Industrial user" means any nondomestic user that, by any means, contributes, causes or permits the contribution, introduction or discharge of wastewater or pollutants into the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether directly or indirectly. 
    "Industrial user permit" means a permit issued to a significant industrial user, or to such other user as determined appropriate by the POTW manager, as provided by this article to control discharges to the POTW and to ensure compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
    "Infiltration" means any waters entering the POTW from the ground through such means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or manhole walls. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from, inflow. 
    "Inflow" means any waters entering the POTW from sources such as, but not limited to, building downspouts; roof leaders; cellar, yard, and area drains; foundation and footing drains; cooling water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross connections from storm sewers and combined sewers; catch basins; storm waters; surface runoff; street wash waters; or drainage. 
    "Inspector" means any person (and the person's authorized representatives) designated by the POTW to observe the construction of and connection of building sewers to the public sewer system, to ensure conformance with the sewer connection requirements of this article, and to otherwise act as provided by this article. 
    "Inspection fee" means the amount charged to each applicant by the local unit and/or the POTW at the time an application is made to the local unit and/or the POTW solely for permission to connect to the public sewer. This sewer connection inspection fee includes, but is not limited to, covering the routine cost of inspecting and approving the physical connection of a building sewer and service connection to the public sewer, and the issuance of a sewer connection permit. 
    "Instantaneous maximum concentration" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any instant in time (independent of the flow rate or duration of the sampling event). If the concentration determined by analysis of any grab sample, composite sample, or discrete portion of a composite sample exceeds the instantaneous maximum concentration, the instantaneous maximum concentration shall be deemed to have been exceeded. Any discharge of a pollutant at or above a specified instantaneous maximum concentration is a violation of this article. 
    "Interference" means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
A.  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; or 
B.  Is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations) Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
    "Lateral sewer" means that portion of the sewer system located under the street or within the public right-of-way from the property line to the trunk line and which collects sewage from a particular property for transfer to the trunk line. 
    "Local limits" means a specific enforceable prohibition, standard or requirement (numerical or non-numerical) on discharges by nondomestic users established by the POTW to meet the purposes and objectives of this article and to comply with applicable State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
    "Local unit" means the City of Swartz Creek, Michigan, acting by and through its duly authorized agents, deputies and representatives. 
    "May" is permissive. 
    "MAC" means the Michigan Administrative Code. 
    "MDEQ" means the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    "Medical waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, or dialysis wastes, and includes any medical or infectious wastes as defined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
    "mg/l" means milligrams per liter. 
    "Monthly average" means the sum of the concentrations (or mass loadings, expressed in terms of pounds per day, or such other unit of measurement) of a pollutant divided by the number of samples taken during a calendar month. The concentrations (or loadings) that are added are single numbers for single calendar days for all days during the calendar month for which analyses are obtained (whether by the user or the POTW), but the concentrations (or loadings) may be based upon a sample or samples taken over either all or part of that day and upon single or multiple analyses for that day, as determined by the POTW manager. If no samples are taken during particular months because less than monthly sampling is required for a pollutant parameter (e.g., a specified quarterly monitoring period), the monthly average for each month within the specified monitoring period shall be deemed to be the sum of concentrations (or loadings) for the monitoring period divided by number of samples taken during the monitoring period. 
    "Multiple-family residential dwelling" means any structure used for residential dwelling purposes, other than a single-family detached dwelling. 
    "NAICS" or "North American Industrial Classification System" means the system of classification for business establishments adopted by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, as amended. 
    "Natural outlet" means any naturally formed outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    "New source" means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section provided that: 
A.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
B.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
C.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
    Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (B) or (C) of this section, above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. Commencement of construction of a new source shall be determined in a manner consistent with 40 CFR § 403.3(k)(3). 
    "Noncontact cooling water." See "cooling water (noncontact). 
    "Nondomestic user" means any user other than a domestic user (i.e., any user that discharges anything other than segregated normal strength domestic waste into the POTW). 
    "Nondomestic waste" means any wastewater (or water- or liquid-carried waste) other than domestic waste. 
    "Normal strength domestic waste" means a domestic waste flow for which the levels of pollutants (including, without limitation, BOD, TSS, ammonia nitrogen, or phosphorous) are below the surcharge levels for any parameter as established by this article. Further, to be considered normal strength, the wastewater must have a pH between 6.5 and 8.5, must not exceed any local limit, and must not contain a concentration of other constituents that would interfere with POTW treatment processes. 
    "NPDES permit" means a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act. 
    "Operation and maintenance costs" means all costs, direct and indirect (other than debt service), necessary to ensure adequate wastewater treatment on a continuing basis, to keep odors under control, to conform with all related Federal, State and local requirements, and to assure optimal long-term facility management. operation and maintenance costs include depreciation and replacement costs. 
    "Outfall" means the point (or points) of discharge by a user to the POTW, approved by the POTW and specified in a user permit. 
    "Pass through" means a discharge that exits the POTW into Waters of the State (or Waters of the United States) in quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit or of any requirement of applicable local, State or Federal Laws and Regulations (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation), or otherwise detrimentally impacts the receiving stream. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, association, society, corporation, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Pollutant" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
A.  Any material that is discharged into water or other liquid, including, but not limited to, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste. 
B.  Properties of materials or characteristics of wastewater, including, but not limited to, pH, heat, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, and odor. 
C.  Substances regulated by categorical standards. 
D.  Substances discharged to the POTW that are required to be monitored by a user under this article, that are limited in the POTW's NPDES permit, or that are required to be identified in the POTW's application for an NPDES permit. 
E.  Substances for which control measures on users are necessary to avoid restricting the POTW's residuals management program; to avoid operational problems at the POTW; or to avoid POTW worker health and safety problems. 
    "POTW" (publicly owned treatment works). The complete sewage disposal, transportation and treatment system of Genesee County, Michigan, as defined by the Act, the County Public Improvement Act, and this article, including any devices, processes and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling or reclamation of wastewater, sewage or sludge, as well as sewers (including all main, lateral and intercepting sewers), pipes and other conveyances used to collect or convey wastewater or sewage to the treatment works, as now or hereafter added to, extended or improved. The term "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons who are, by contract or agreement with the county agency, users of the POTW. References in this article to approvals, determinations, reviews, etc., "by the POTW" shall mean by the county agency, the POTW manager, or their authorized representatives. The term "POTW" may also be used to refer to the GCWWSD (acting through the county agency) as the entity that has jurisdiction over the discharges to, and discharges from, the POTW (the "control authority"), as appropriate to the context in which the term is used. 
    "POTW board of appeals" means the three-person panel selected by the county agency to hear an appeal from any person aggrieved by a decision of the POTW manager and to make a recommendation to the county agency as to an appropriate disposition of the appeal. 
    "POTW treatment plant." The portion of the POTW that is designed to provide treatment (including recycling or reclamation) of wastewater. 
    "POTW manager" or "manager" means the person designated by the county agency as being responsible to administer the POTW's industrial pretreatment program, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities as provided by this article. References to "POTW manager" or "manager" shall include the manager's authorized representatives. 
    "Premises" means a lot, tract, or parcel of land, or a building or structure, having any connection, directly or indirectly, to the POTW, or from which there is a discharge to the POTW. 
    "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater before or instead of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the POTW. The reduction or alteration may be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; process changes; or other means, except for the use of dilution (unless expressly authorized by any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement and the POTW manager). Appropriate pretreatment technology includes control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection against surges or slug loadings, subject to applicable requirements of local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
    "Pretreatment requirement" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard, imposed on a nondomestic user. 
    "Pretreatment standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act or Part 31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 324.3101 et seq., including general and specific prohibitive discharge limits and local limits established in this article pursuant to MAC R § 323.2303, and Categorical Standards. 
    "Private wastewater disposal system" means a cesspool, septic tank, or similar device which discharges to a suitable drainage field. 
    "Process wastewater" means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
    "Properly shredded garbage or other solid material" means garbage or other solid material that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in the POTW (or so as to otherwise not result in interference), with no particle greater than one-half-inch in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority. 
    "Reasonable potential." as used in this article, a determination of "reasonable potential" by the POTW manager means a determination made by the manager that a certain condition, state, result or circumstance exists, or is likely to exist, based upon the quantitative or qualitative factors or information deemed by the manager to be relevant and appropriate to the determination, consistent with the purposes and objectives of this article. 
    "Replacement" means the replacement in whole or in part of any equipment, appurtenances, accessories or facilities in the POTW to ensure continuous treatment of wastewater in accordance with the POTW's NPDES permit and other applicable local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
    "Replacement costs" means expenditures and costs for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the system to maintain the capacity and performance for which the system was designed and constructed. 
    "Residential dwelling" means any structure designed for habitation, including but not limited to houses, mobile homes, apartment buildings, condominiums, and townhouses. 
    "Residential equivalent unit" or "REU" means a standard basis of measuring the relative quantity of sewage, including the benefits derived from the disposal thereof, arising from the occupancy of a single-family detached residential dwelling (but such term shall not necessarily be related to actual use arising from any particular dwelling). The relative relationships between the various users of the system shall be as determined by the county agency. The assignment of REUs to a particular user shall be determined from time to time by the county agency, based upon the use to which the user's property is put. The assignment of REUs for any use shall, in the sole discretion of the county agency, be based upon the most similar use and shall be enumerated in a document established, maintained, and, amended, as necessary by the county agency; a copy of which shall be made available for inspection and copying upon request. 
    "Sanitary sewage." See "domestic waste." 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a sewer intended to carry liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. 
    "Sanitary sewer cleanout septage" means sanitary sewage or cleanout residue removed from a separate sanitary sewer collection system that is not land applied and that is transported by a vehicle licensed under Part 117 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (MCL § 324.11701 et seq., as amended; "Septage Waste Servicers") elsewhere within the same system or to a receiving facility that is approved by MDEQ. 
    "Seepage pit" means a cistern or underground enclosure constructed of concrete blocks, bricks or similar material loosely laid with open joints so as to allow the overflow or effluent to be absorbed directly into the surrounding soil. 
    "Septage waste" means the fluid mixture of untreated and partially treated sewage solids, liquids, and sludge of human or domestic origin which is removed from a wastewater system. Septage waste consists only of food establishment septage, domestic septage, domestic treatment plant septage, or sanitary sewer cleanout septage, or any combination of these. 
    "Septic tank" means a watertight receptacle receiving sewage and having an inlet and outlet designed to permit the separation of suspended solids from sewage and to permit such retained solids to undergo decomposition therein. 
    "Service connection" means the portion of the public sewer which extends either to or onto the parcel of land adjacent to the path of the public sewer, and includes the sewer main, tee/wye, valve, check valve, connector pipes, the sewer lead, the grinder pump system, electrical controls and connections at the electric meter (but not including the meter) and appurtenances, but not including the building sewer. 
    "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, or damage to treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean an economic loss caused by delays in production. 
    "Sewage." See "wastewater." 
    "Sewer" means any pipe, tile, tube or conduit for carrying wastewater or drainage water. 
    "Sewer lead" means that portion of the service connection which connects to the sewer main located in the public right-of-way and extends to the property line. 
    "Sewer service charge" means the sum of the applicable connection fee, inspection fee, user charge, surcharges and debt service charges. 
    "Shall" is mandatory. 
    "SIC" or "Standard Industrial Classification Code" means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget. 
    "Significant industrial user" or "SIU" means any nondomestic user: 
A.  Subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
B.  Any other nondomestic user that: 
(1)  Discharges to the POTW an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater); 
(2)  Contributes a process waste stream that makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
(3)  Is otherwise designated by the POTW as a significant industrial user on the basis that the user has a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or because the POTW determines that an industrial user permit for the user's discharge is required to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. 
The POTW manager may determine that a user that meets the criteria of subsections (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this definition above is not currently a significant industrial user, if the manager finds that the user has no reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement, or that a industrial user permit is not required to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. A determination that a user is not a significant industrial user (or that a permit is therefore not required) shall not be binding and may be reversed by the manager at any time based on changed circumstances, new information, or as otherwise determined necessary by the manager to meet the purposes and objectives of this article. 
    "Single-family detached residential dwelling" means a stand-alone structure in which only one family is intended to reside and that is not attached to any other residential dwelling unit. 
    "Sludge" means accumulated solid material separated from liquid waste as a result of the wastewater treatment process. 
    "Slug" means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
    "State" means the State of Michigan. The term shall include, where applicable, any administrative agency of the state having jurisdiction in the subject matter of this article, including (but not limited to) the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
    "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer or drain, either natural or artificial, intended to carry storm water, snowmelt, and surface runoff and drainage, but not wastewater. 
    "Storm water" means any flow (such as storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage) occurring during or following, and resulting from, any form of natural precipitation, and is that portion of flow in excess of that which infiltrates into the soil of the drainage area. 
    "Surcharge" means the additional charges made by the POTW for the treatment of wastewater containing pollutants in excess of specified concentrations, loadings or other applicable limits, or for other purposes specified by this article. 
    "Suspended solids" (SS) or "total suspended solids" (TSS) means solids that float on the surface of, or are suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids and which can be removed by laboratory filtering or other standard methods. 
    "Toxic pollutant" means any pollutant or combination of pollutants that is or can potentially be harmful to the public health, the POTW, or the environment, including, without limitation, those listed in 40 CFR § 401.15 as toxic under the provisions of the Clean Water Act, or listed in the Critical Materials Register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or as provided by local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations. 
    "Trucked or hauled waste or pollutants." Any waste proposed to be discharged to the POTW from a mobile source, including, without limitation, holding tank waste. 
    "Trunk line" means the main sewer line located under any street or within any public right-of-way which collects and transmits the sewage of the various properties served by the sewer system. 
    "ug/l" means micrograms per liter. 
    "Upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
    "User" means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution, introduction or discharge of wastewater into the POTW, whether intentional or unintentional, and whether directly or indirectly. 
    "User debt retirement charge" means the charge levied on all users of the POTW for the cost of any bond debt of which debt repayment is to be met from the revenues of such works. 
    "User operating and maintenance charge" means the charge levied on all users of the POTW for the cost of operation and maintenance, including replacement and depreciation of such treatment works. 
    "User permit" means an industrial user permit or a general user permit. 
    "Wastewater" means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic waste from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions (including, without limitation, contaminated groundwater and landfill leachate), whether treated or untreated, that is contributed, introduced or discharged into the POTW. The term includes any water that has in any way been used and degraded or physically or chemically altered. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    "Waters of the State" means all rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface, or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of Michigan or any portion thereof, and as otherwise specified by applicable laws and regulations. 
    "Waters of the United States" means all waters as defined by 40 § 122.2 and as otherwise specified by applicable laws and regulations. 
    "Wye branch" means a local service connection to the sewer that is made at an angle similar to a "wye" so that a sewer cleaning rod will not come into the sewer at a right angle and penetrate the far side, but will travel down the course of the sewer. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 2. - USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED 

Sec. 19-102.1. - Unlawful deposition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other waste ordinarily regarded as wastewater, upon or below, the surface of public or private property within the jurisdiction of the local unit, except by discharging such wastewater into an approved connection to a public sanitary sewer where available or an approved private wastewater disposal system. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-102.2. - Discharge prohibited without required approvals, permits, and treatment. 
    Except as otherwise expressly permitted by local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations, and subject to obtaining all required permits and approvals from governmental agencies (including, without limitation, the local unit, the county agency, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, and the U.S. EPA) and providing any required treatment, it shall be unlawful to discharge, or permit or cause to be discharged, either directly or indirectly: 
A.  Polluted water, sewage or wastewater to any natural outlet within the local unit, to any Waters of the State (or Waters of the United States), or to any public sewer; or 
B.  Unpolluted water of any kind, including, without limitation, storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, artesian well water, drainage water (surface or subsurface), industrial noncontact cooling water, air-conditioning water, swimming pool water, or industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. Unpolluted water may be discharged only to a sewer that is specifically designated as a combined sewer or storm sewer or to a natural outlet, and only if all applicable permits and approvals have first been obtained from the POTW and other governmental bodies or agencies and only if not prohibited by applicable local, State or Federal Laws or Regulations. If any person drains any unpolluted water from his property by means of conductors, eaves troughs, roof downspouts or otherwise, into a combined sewer, storm sewer, or natural outlet in violation of applicable laws or regulations or without securing the prior approval of the POTW, or into a sanitary sewer, the POTW shall order its disconnection at the property owner's expense, and if the property owner refuses to obey the order of the POTW, then the POTW shall disconnect the connection and the costs shall be charged to the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-102.3. - Unlawful construction. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for disposal of sewage. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-102.4. - Required connection to available sanitary sewer. 
    The owner of any house, building, structure, premises, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the county and/or the local unit, and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way, in which there is located, or may in the future be located, a public sewer or combined sewer within 100 feet of the property line, is hereby required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer, in accordance with the provisions of this article, when given official notice to do so, provided that such connection shall not be required to be made less than six months nor more than 18 months after the sewer is made available for connection thereto. An exception shall be made when all of the following apply: 
(1)  The proposed use for any new or replacement private sewage disposal system is for service to a single family residential structure. 
(2)  The parcel served does not have access to public sewer collection line at the right-of-way or private sewer line established to serve a condominium or other planned project; or the structure to be served is 500 feet or more from a public or accessible private sewer collection line. 
(3)  The parcel served is two acres in size or larger and is recorded on the 2015 assessment roll. 
(4)  The Genesee County Health Department approves the installation of said private sewage disposal system. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ; Ord. No. 429 , § 1, 3-14-16) 
Sec. 19-102.5. - Waste discharge prohibited except through approved sewer connection. 
    All discharges to a sewer shall be through an approved sewer connection or at another discharge point expressly approved by the POTW in accordance with this article. No person shall discharge any waste or other substances into a manhole, catch basin or inlet. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 3. - PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL 

Sec. 19-103.1. - Private treatment and disposal requirements. 
    If a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Article 2, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with all requirements of the Genesee County Health Department. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-103.2. - Public sewer becomes available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Article 2, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article; and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-103.3. - Operation and maintenance of private facilities. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the local unit and/or the county agency. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-103.4. - Statement regarding public health requirements. 
    No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Michigan Department of Public Health or other governmental agencies. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-103.5. - Private wastewater disposal requirements. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all local, county, State, and Federal Requirements. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal systems employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than determined necessary by the local unit and county or state health officials, as applicable. No septic tank, cesspool, subsurface disposal facility or other private sanitary sewer system shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 4. - CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 

Sec. 19-104.1. - Sewer maintenance. 
    At the time of original construction of the public sewer, the POTW shall install that portion of the building sewer from the public sewer to the lot or easement line off all occupied premises. The POTW shall maintain, at its expense, the public sewer. Those customers making connections at the time of original construction of the public sewer shall install, at their expense, that portion of the building sewer from said lot or easement line to their premises. The customer shall maintain, at his expense, the building sewer. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-104.2. - Customer connection requirements. 
    Those customers making connections subsequent to the time of original construction of the public sewer shall install, at their expense, that portion of the building sewer from the public sewer to the lot or easement line in addition to that portion of the building sewer from said lot or easement line to their premises. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-104.3. - Disruption of service. 
    Neither the POTW nor the local unit shall be held responsible for claims made against it by reason of the breaking of any mains or service laterals, or by reason of any other interruption of the service caused by the breaking of machinery or stoppage for necessary repairs; and no person shall be entitled to damages nor have any portion of a payment refunded for any interruption. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-104.4. - Service inspections. 
    The premises receiving sanitary sewer service shall, at all reasonable hours, be subject to inspection by duly authorized personnel of the POTW and/or the local unit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 5. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 19-105.1. - Building sewer connection permits. 
    There shall be three classes of building sewer connection permits: (1) residential, (2) commercial, and (3) industrial. In any case, the owner or the owner's agent shall make application to the POTW on a special form furnished by the POTW. The connection permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered necessary and appropriate in the judgment of the POTW. The owner or the owner's agent shall also apply to the local unit to obtain a connection permit from the local unit on the form furnished by the local unit. The applications to the POTW and the local unit shall be on payments of such fees as established from time to time by the county agency and the local unit. The established CCIF and applicable local connection fees shall be paid to the POTW and the local unit, respectively, at the time the application is filed. No person shall uncover, make any connections with or open into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or any appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written connection permit from the POTW and the local unit. Agents of the POTW, the local unit, Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or U.S. Environmental Protection Agency shall have the right to enter all properties for the purpose of inspecting and copying all records which are required to be kept pursuant to this division. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.2. - Plans and specifications required; construction permits. 
A.  All applicants for sewer connection permits shall first submit to the local unit and the POTW plans and specifications of all plumbing construction within the building or premises, and such plans and specifications shall meet the requirements of the state plumbing code, this [article], the County Sewage Disposal District Number 1 regulations, and all provisions, rules and regulations of the state department of health. In any case where there is a conflict between the requirements of the plumbing code and the requirements of this article, the requirements of this article shall control. 
B.  After such plans and specifications have been approved by the POTW and the city manager, a construction permit may be issued, subject to a final inspection and approval by the local unit and the POTW when construction is completed and ready for connection with the public sewer system. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.3. - Permit issuance and plan approval. 
    The issuance of a permit or approval of construction plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of this article or any other applicable law or regulation. In no case shall a discharge to the public sewer system commence without receiving prior review and approval by the local unit and the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.4. - Installation and connection costs to be borne by owner. 
    All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner or the person installing the building sewer for the owner shall indemnify the POTW and the local unit from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.5. - Multiple buildings. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. Other exceptions will be allowed only by special permission granted by the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.6. - Existing building sewers. 
    Old building sewers or portions thereof may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and testing by the inspector, to meet all requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.7. - Pipe materials. 
    The building sewer shall be constructed of either of the following types of pipe meeting the current ASTM specifications: 
A.  Plastic (PVC) ASTM D 3034-SDR 26. 
B.  Ductile iron, ANSI/AWWA C151/A2.51-02. 
    If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of ductile iron as specified above, except that other types of pipe may be used if laid on a suitable improved bed or cradle as approved by the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.8. - Pipe joints and connections. 
    All building sewer joints and connections shall be made gas tight and watertight and shall conform to the requirements of the current building and plumbing codes. The joints shall be of rubber ring, flexible compression type, similar and equal to joints specified for pipe. The joints and connections shall conform to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.9. - Pipe size and slope. 
    The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the inspector, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. Minimum grade shall be as follows: 
Residential Installation 
6-inch pipe- 1/8 ? per foot or 1? per 8 feet (1%) 
4-inch pipe-1/4? per foot or 2? per 8 feet (2%) 
Commercial Installation 
6-inch pipe-.72? per 8 feet (.75%) or 1.5? per 16 feet 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.10. - Building sewer location. 
    Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the buildings at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to, or within three feet of, any bearing wall that might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with current ASTM specifications, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected by the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.11. - Low building sewers. 
    In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drains shall be lifted by artificial means and discharged to the building sewer, subject to approval by the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.12. - Wye branch connection designation. 
    The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the wye branch designated for the property if such branch is available at a suitable location. Any connection not made at the designated wye branch in the main sewer shall be made only as directed by the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.13. - Building sewer inspection. 
    The applicant for the building sewer shall notify the inspector when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the inspector. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.14. - Protection and restoration. 
    All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the GCWWSD and the local unit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.15. - Capacity required. 
    No connection to a public sewer will be required or allowed unless there is capacity available (in both wastewater volume and strength) in all downstream sewers, pump stations, interceptors, and force mains, including, but not limited to, adequate capacity to accept, treat and dispose of BOD, TSS, or similar materials as required by applicable local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations, as determined by the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.16. - Pretreatment of any discharge may be required. 
    Pretreatment of any discharge to the public sewer, including, but not limited to, grease, oil, and sand interceptors, shall be provided when, in the opinion of the POTW manager, they are necessary. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-105.17. - Grease, oil and sand interceptors. 
    A grease, oil and sand interceptor (trap) shall be installed and maintained in continuously efficient operating condition at the expense of the property owner when, in the determination of the POTW manager, an interceptor is necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand, or other harmful ingredient. An interceptor shall be required for every restaurant, fast food outlet, automotive repair shop or garage, car wash, or any other type of establishment or use as determined necessary by the POTW manager. An interceptor shall not be required for a single-family detached residential or multiple-family residential dwelling unit when used solely for residential living purposes. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW manager, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature, and shall be of substantial construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which when in place shall be gas-tight and water-tight. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
_____
DIVISION 6. - REGULATION OF DISCHARGES TO THE POTW 

Sec. 19-106.1. - Discharge prohibitions. 
    The general discharge prohibitions under section 19-106.1(A) and the specific discharge prohibitions under section 19-106.1(B) apply to every user whether or not the user is subject to any other national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements, and whether or not the discharge is made pursuant to a user permit issued pursuant to this article. 
A.  General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly to the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater that will pass through or interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. 
B.  Specific prohibitions. No user shall discharge or contribute to the POTW, directly or indirectly, any of the pollutants, substances, or wastewater as provided by this subsection. This subsection sets forth the minimum requirements for a user's discharges to the POTW. Additional or more restrictive requirements may be required of particular users by a user permit, or as otherwise authorized or required by this article or other applicable laws and regulations. 
(1)  Pollutants in concentrations that exceed the daily maximum or monthly average concentrations listed below in this subsection: 
(a)  Discharges to Anthony Ragnone Treatment Plant: 
Parameter (mg/l) 1 IMC (mg/l) 1 Daily Max. (mg/l) 1 Monthly Avg. 
(mg/l) 1 Arsenic - 0.62 - Cadmium - 0.11 - Chromium (T) - 4.1 - Copper - 1.0 - Cyanides (T) 0.22 - - Lead - 1.8 -- Mercury - NQ 2 - Molybdenum - 1.7 - Nickel - 1.6 - Selenium - 0.23 - Silver - 0.16 - Zinc - 1.14 - Acetone 60 - - Methyl Ethyl Ketone 105 - - Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) - 100 3 - BOD 5 - 1,000 4 - Phosphorous (T) - 100 5 - TSS - 1,000 6 - FOG - 100 7 -  
  
Notes for section 19-106.1 B.(1)(a) follow section 19-106.1 B.(1)(c), below. 
  
;adv=q;(b)  Discharges to District 3 (Linden) Wastewater Treatment Plant: 
Parameter (mg/l) 1 IMC (mg/l) 1 Daily Max. (mg/l) 1 Monthly Avg. 
(mg/l) 1 Arsenic - 0.24 - Cadmium - 0.11 - Chromium (T) - 4.1 -- Copper - 0.63 - Cyanides (T) 0.22 - - Lead - 1.8 -- Mercury - NQ 2 - Molybdenum - 0.32 - Nickel - 1.6 - Selenium - 0.23 - Silver - 0.11 - Zinc - 1.14 - Acetone 60 - - Methyl Ethyl Ketone 105 - - Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) - 100 3 - BOD 5 - 1,000 4 - Phosphorous - 100 5 - TSS - 1,000 6 - FOG - 100 7 -  
Notes for section 19-106.1(B)(1)(b) follow section 19-106.1(B)(1)(c), below. 
(c)  Discharges to District 7 (Argentine) Wastewater Sewage Lagoon: 
Parameter (mg/l) 1 IMC (mg/l) 1 Daily Max. (mg/l) 1 Monthly Avg. 
(mg/l) 1 Arsenic - 0.14 - Cadmium - 0.11 - Chromium (T) - 4.1 - Copper - 0.63 - Cyanides (T) 0.22 - - Lead - 0.33 - Mercury - NQ 2 - Molybdenum - 0.18 - Nickel - 1.3 - Selenium - 0.23 - Silver - 0.11 - Zinc - 1.14 - Acetone 60 - - Methyl Ethyl Ketone 105 - - Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) - 43 3 - BOD 5 - 860 4 - Phosphorous - 23 5 - TSS - 540 6 - FOG - 100 7 -  
Notes applicable to sections 19-106.1(B)(1)(a), (b) and (c), above, are as follows: 
IMC = Instantaneous Maximum Concentration. 
T = Total. 
1   Discharges which contain more than one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the POTW. The more restrictive discharge limits will be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge, including, without limitation, the specific compounds, if any, listed in section 19-106.1.B of this article. 
2   NQ = Non-quantifiable concentration, defined as at or above the quantification level of 0.2 ug/l using U.S. EPA Method 245.1 (or at or above other quantification levels applicable under alternative test methods required by the POTW or by other applicable laws or regulations). Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring of a user's discharge shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1, unless the POTW manager requires U.S. EPA Method 1631 (or other appropriate method). The quantification level shall be 0.2 ug/l for Method 245.1 or 0.5 ng/l for Method 1631, unless higher levels are approved by the POTW manager because of sample matrix interference. 
3   Any discharge of ammonia nitrogen in excess of 20 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this article. 
4   Any discharge of BOD in excess of 250 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this article. 
5   Any discharge of phosphorous (T) in excess of 20 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this article. 
6   Any discharge of TSS in excess of 300 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this article. 
7   Any discharge of FOG in excess of 100 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge as provided by this article. 
The IMC, daily maximum, and monthly average limits listed above in this section 19-106.1(B)(1) (or as listed elsewhere in this article or in any user permit or order) for each pollutant parameter are the concentrations which may not be exceeded and at which enforcement begins. The surcharge threshold concentrations as specified in notes 3 through 7 (above) are the concentrations above which surcharges may be imposed. Discharges exceeding the surcharge thresholds, but which are less than the IMC, daily maximum, and monthly average limits (and which do not violate any other applicable prohibitions, limitations, standards, or requirements), are not violations of this article, but are subject to surcharges as provided by this article. All violations of applicable discharge prohibitions and limitations and all instances of non-compliance with applicable discharge requirements constitute a violation of this article, subject to applicable fines, penalties and other enforcement actions. In no event shall the imposition of a surcharge for a discharge which does not meet the applicable prohibitions, limitations or requirements be construed as authorizing the illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this article. 
(2)  For any discharge that would otherwise be prohibited by section 19-106.1(B)(1), above, the POTW may impose a specific alternative limit (SAL) for all or any portion of the discharge (or for all or any pollutant parameter thereof) pursuant to a user permit or by POTW order. Each SAL must be approved in advance by the POTW manager. The following conditions and requirements shall apply to all SALs: 
(a)  The POTW shall not be required to approve or require a SAL, but may do so at its sole discretion. The POTW may terminate or modify the SAL, and/or require compliance with different or additional discharge standards or requirements as determined necessary or appropriate at any time. 
A SAL shall not create any property rights or privilege of any kind whatsoever, nor shall it be construed to authorize any injury to private or public property or any invasion of personal rights, nor any violation of local, State or Federal Laws or Regulations. 
A SAL may include any terms, conditions or requirements determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW manager, including, but not limited to, terms, conditions and requirements regarding sampling, analysis, fees, reimbursement, surety, indemnification, and insurance. 
i.  The POTW shall establish each SAL based on an allocation of the amount of remaining available loading from the POTW's maximum allowable industrial loading (MAIL) for a given pollutant at the time when the SAL is approved and assigned. Each SAL may also be subject to a maximum (not-to-exceed) concentration as determined necessary by the POTW to protect the receiving sewer, the POTW, public health and safety, the environment, or to otherwise achieve the purposes, objectives and requirements of this article. The MAILs and not-to-exceed concentrations for pollutants of concern are set forth in section 19-106.1(B)(2)(f) and (g), below. All SAL allocations shall be in the amounts, and subject to the terms, conditions and requirements, as deemed necessary and appropriate by the POTW. 
(d)  Violation of any SAL (or of any of the terms, conditions or requirements of a SAL) shall be a violation of this article and subject to applicable fines, penalties, and other enforcement actions. 
(e)  The total mass of a pollutant of concern allocated to septage wastes, trucked wastes, and all other nondomestic users (and taking into account all SALs that have been assigned by the POTW at the time), shall not exceed the following MAILs in the aggregate: 
(i)  Anthony Ragnone Treatment Plant: 
Parameter Daily Max. (lbs. \ day) Arsenic 6.64 Cadmium 5.00 Chromium (T) 213 Copper 38.2 Cyanides (T) 3.84 Lead 56.1 Mercury * Molybdenum 13.3 Nickel 39.1 Selenium 2.27 Silver 4.91 Zinc 95.1 Acetone 1,230 Methyl Ethyl Ketone 2,500 Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) 1,720 BOD 5 17,700 Phosphorous (T) 1,540 TSS 17,200 FOG 1,100  
Notes: The notes for section 19-106.1(B)(2)(f)(i) follow section 19-106.1(B)(2)(f)(iii), below. 
(ii)  District 3 (Linden) Wastewater Treatment Plant: 
Parameter Daily Max. (lbs. \ day) Arsenic 0.321 Cadmium 0.309 Chromium (T) 7.26 Copper 1.80 Cyanides (T) 0.529 Lead 3.42 Mercury * Molybdenum 0.406 Nickel 2.36 Selenium 0.316 Silver 0.124 Zinc 13.2 Acetone 224 Methyl Ethyl Ketone 293 Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) 1,480 BOD 5 6,880 Phosphorous 231 TSS 10,200 FOG 1,750  
Notes: The notes for section 19-106.1(B)(2)(f)(ii) follow section 19-106.1(B)(2)(f)(iii). 
(iii)  District 7 (Argentine) Wastewater Sewage Lagoon: 
Parameter Daily Max. (lbs. \ day) Arsenic 0.0247 Cadmium 0.0377 Chromium (T) 1.99 Copper 1.24 Cyanides (T) 0.174 Lead 0.0581 Mercury * Molybdenum 0.0318 Nickel 0.236 Selenium 0.125 Silver 0.751 Zinc 3.32 Acetone 121 Methyl Ethyl Ketone 108 Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) 17.6 BOD 5 230 Phosphorous 6.18 TSS 143 FOG 78.2  
Notes for sections 19-106.1(B)(2)(f)(i), (ii), and (iii), above, are as follows: 
T = Total. 
*  The mercury MAIL shall be determined by the MDEQ's Level Currently Achievable (LCA) for mercury currently in effect, as follows: 
LCA, mg/L MAIL, lb/day 0.000010 3.01 × 10 -2 0.000005 1.29 &times 10 -2 0.0000025 4.34 &times 10 -3 0.0000013 2.16 &times 10 -4  
The LCA is established by the MDEQ as part of its U.S. EPA-approved Mercury Permitting Strategy. However, the POTW manager, at the POTW manager's discretion, may apply a lower MAIL such as in association with the county's mercury minimization program. 
(f)  SALs shall not exceed Federal Standards applicable to categorical industries; nor shall any SAL exceed the following maximum concentrations, and subject to any other local, State and Federal Standards and Requirements: 
Parameter IMC (mg/L) 1 Arsenic - Cadmium - Chromium (T) - Copper - Cyanides (T) 2.0 Lead - Mercury 0.020 Molybdenum - Nickel - Selenium - Silver - Zinc - Acetone 1,300 Methyl Ethyl Ketone 270 Ammonia Nitrogen 
(NH3 as N) - 2 BOD 5 - 2 Phosphorous (T) - 2 TSS - 2 FOG 500 2  
Notes: 
T = Total 
IMC = Instantaneous Maximum Concentration. 
1   Discharges which contain two or more pollutants that contribute to fire/explosion potential or fume toxicity may be subject to more restrictive IMCs, as determined to be necessary by the POTW manager. The corresponding concentrations will be calculated based on the additive effects of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge. 
2   Subject to application of applicable surcharge thresholds and payment of surcharges as provided by section 19-106.1(B)(1). 
(3)  Pollutants in concentrations that exceed the instantaneous maximum, daily maximum or monthly average concentrations listed below in this subsection: 
Parameter: 
PCBs: The instantaneous maximum concentration, daily maximum and monthly average discharge limit for PCBs is non-detect. Except as otherwise required by the POTW manager, compliance with this limit shall be determined as follows: 
A compliance limit of "non-detect" shall be used for instantaneous maximum concentration, daily maximum and monthly average. Any discharge of PCBs at or above the quantification level is a specific violation of this article. 
PCB sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring of a user's discharge shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 608. The quantification level shall be 0.1 ug/l, unless higher levels are determined appropriate by the POTW manager because of sample matrix interference. Total PCBs shall be defined as the sum of the Aroclors 1016, 1221, 1232, 1242, 1248, 1254 and 1260. In addition, any detected Aroclor-specific measurements shall be reported. 
_____ 
(4)  Any liquid, solid, gas or other pollutant (including, but not limited to, gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel or fuel oil) which by reason of its nature or quantity is sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to create a fire or explosion hazard or be injurious in any other way to persons, the POTW, or to the operation of the sewerage system, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140° F or 60° C using test methods specified in 40 CFR § 261.21. 
(5)  Pollutants that may cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, or that due to their corrosive properties are capable of causing injury to persons or POTW personnel or harm to fish, animals or the environment. Discharges that have a pH lower than 6.5 or greater than 9.5 shall not be discharged. 
(6)  Any solid, insoluble or viscous substance in concentrations or quantities which may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW, may create an encumbrance to the POTW operations, or which otherwise may result in interference, including, but not limited to, grease, animal entrails or tissues, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, cement, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, strings, fibers, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes or tumbling and deburring stones. 
(7)  Any pollutant, including, but not limited to, oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that may cause pass through or interference with the POTW or constitute a slug load, or is otherwise discharged to the POTW in excessive amounts. 
(8)  Wastewater (or vapor) having a temperature that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, or heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 104° Fahrenheit (40° C). No discharge to the POTW shall have a temperature less than 32° Fahrenheit (0° C) or greater than 150° Fahrenheit (65.7° C), unless approved in advance by the POTW manager. 
(9)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(10)  Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. This prohibition includes, but is not limited to, wastewaters which contain liquids, solids or gases that cause gases, vapors or fumes from the discharge to exceed ten percent of the immediately dangerous to life and health (IDLH) concentration. Discharges which contain more than one pollutant which may contribute to fume toxicity shall be subject to more restrictive limitations, as determined necessary by the POTW. The more restrictive discharge limits shall be calculated based on the additive fume toxicity of all compounds identified or reasonably expected to be present in the discharge. 
(11)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except those introduced into the system at discharge points designated by the POTW, subject to the prior approval of the POTW manager and prior issuance of a user permit. 
(a)  The POTW manager shall determine whether to allow the discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants based on the particular nature, character or quantity of the proposed discharge in accordance with the discharge prohibitions, limitations and requirements provided by this division. 
(b)  The POTW manager may impose any conditions on the discharge determined necessary to ensure compliance with this division, including, without limitation, conditions regarding the time, place, and manner of discharge, restrictions on the quantity and quality of the discharge, and sampling requirements. 
(c)  The discharge shall not commence without prior notice to, and authorization from, the POTW manager, and a representative of the POTW shall be present at all times during the discharge. 
(d)  All trucked or hauled wastes to be discharged to the POTW must be accompanied by a completed waste manifest form signed by the permittee and the hauler as provided by the minimum requirements of this section. The permittee shall certify in writing on the manifest as to the source of all wastes in the load proposed to be discharged and that the wastes have been pretreated as required by applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The hauler shall certify in writing on the manifest that no wastes other than those listed on the manifest have been accepted by the hauler. The manifest must be reviewed by the POTW manager prior to commencing discharge of the load. Failure to accurately record every load, falsification of data, or failure to transmit the form to the POTW manager for review prior to discharge shall constitute a violation of the permit and may result in revocation of the permit and/or the imposition of fines and penalties as provided by this division. 
(e)  The permittee's discharge of hauled wastes shall be subject to sampling by the POTW at any time, including, without limitation, prior to and during discharge. The POTW manager may require the permittee to refrain from, or suspend, discharging until the sample analysis is complete. 
(f)  Trucked or hauled pollutants will be accepted only if transported to the POTW in compliance with State and Federal Hazardous Waste and Liquid Industrial Waste Laws. 
(g)  Each discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants will be accepted only after payment to the POTW of a trucked or hauled pollutant discharge fee to cover the POTW's administrative expenses and any additional treatment, handling or inspection expenses incurred by the POTW in connection with the discharge. The fee shall be established, paid, and collected as provided for IPP fees by Article 21. This discharge fee shall be in addition to any sewer rates, fees, charges, or surcharges otherwise required by this article. 
(h)  Prior to accepting a proposed discharge of trucked or hauled pollutants, the POTW may be required to evaluate the capacity of the POTW to accept such wastes by means, including, but not limited to, a headworks analysis or treatability study, as determined necessary by the POTW. All such evaluation and analysis shall be at the sole cost of the user proposing the discharge and shall be paid in full by the user whether or not the discharge of the trucked or hauled pollutants is ultimately approved by the POTW. The POTW may require the user to post a deposit or other form of surety, as determined sufficient and appropriate by the POTW, to ensure payment by the user of all such costs. 
(12)  Wastewater with objectionable color or light absorbency characteristics that may interfere with treatment processes or analytical determinations, including, without limitation, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
(13)  Any garbage or other solid material that has not been properly shredded. 
(14)  Solvent extractibles, including, without limitation, oil, grease, wax, or fat, whether emulsified or not, in excess of applicable local limits; or other substances that may solidify or become viscous (with a viscosity of 110 percent of water) at temperatures between 32° Fahrenheit and 150° Fahrenheit in amounts that may cause obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the operation of the POTW. 
(15)  Soluble substances in a concentration that may increase the viscosity to greater than ten percent over the viscosity of the water or in amounts that will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(16)  Any substance which exerts or causes a high or unusual concentration of inert suspended solids, including, but not limited to, lime slurries, diatomaceous earth and lime residues. 
(17)  Any wastewater which contains suspended solids of such character, quantity or concentration that special attention is required, or additional expense incurred, to process such materials at the POTW. 
(18)  Any substance which exerts or causes a high or unusual concentration of dissolved solids, including, but not limited to, sodium chloride or sodium sulfate. 
(19)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids that either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(20)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of a half-life or concentration that may exceed limits established by applicable State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations. 
(21)  Any pollutant that results in excess foaming during the treatment process. Excess foaming is any foam that, in the opinion of the POTW manager, may interfere with the treatment process. 
(22)  Wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(23)  Any hazardous waste as defined by this article. 
(24)  Any medical or infectious wastes, as defined by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality. 
(25)  Any substance that may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation, reuse or disposal, or otherwise interfere with the reclamation, reuse, or disposal process. In no case shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act; under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as RCRA, and including state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA); the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act; or any more stringent state or local regulations, as applicable. 
(26)  Any unpolluted water, noncontact cooling water, storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage (except to a storm sewer or a combined sewer as authorized by this article and other applicable laws and regulations and subject to the prior approval of the POTW manager). 
(27)  Any contaminated groundwater or landfill leachate determined by the POTW to have a reasonable potential to adversely affect the operation of the POTW, to result in pass through or interference, or to violate any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(28)  Any substance that will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit, the receiving water quality standards, or associated local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations. 
(29)  Any substance which causes a high chlorine demand, including, but not limited to, nitrite, cyanide, thiocyanate, sulfite and thiosulfate. 
(30)  Any wastewater which exceeds applicable categorical pretreatment standards, requirements or limits prescribed by local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations. 
(31)  Any compatible or incompatible pollutant in excess of the allowed limits as determined by applicable local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations. 
(32)  Any sludge, precipitate or waste resulting from any industrial or commercial treatment or pretreatment of any person's wastewater or air pollutants. 
(33)  Residue (total on evaporation) in an amount that will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(34)  Water or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment to only such degree that the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters. 
(35)  Any pollutant, substance, or wastewater that, either directly or indirectly, and either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, has a reasonable potential to: 
(a)  Create a chemical reaction with any materials of construction to impair the strength or durability of sewer structures; 
(b)  Cause a mechanical action that will damage or destroy sewer structures; 
(c)  Impede or restrict the hydraulic capacity of the POTW; 
(d)  Interfere with normal inspection or maintenance of sewer structures; 
(e)  Place unusual demands upon the wastewater treatment equipment or processes by biological, chemical or physical means; or 
(f)  Cause a hazard to human life or create a public nuisance. 
C.  Pollutant reduction plans. If determined necessary by the POTW manager to prevent interference or pass through, to protect the POTW, to comply with applicable Federal or State Laws or Regulations, to comply with the POTW's NPDES permit, or to otherwise meet the purposes and objectives of this article, any user determined by the POTW manager to have a reasonable potential to discharge any regulated pollutant (including, but not limited to, mercury or PCBs) to the POTW may be required to develop, submit for approval, and implement a reduction plan ("RP") for the pollutant, as provided by this section. The RP may be imposed as a condition to a user permit, or may be required independently and even if a user permit has not been issued to the user. 
(1)  At a minimum, the RP shall contain such requirements and conditions, as determined necessary by the POTW manager to ensure that the pollutant reduction efforts will be effective in achieving the goals of this article (including, but not limited to, requirements and conditions regarding user source identification; best management practices; schedules of compliance; monitoring, sampling and analysis; reporting; treatment system for removal of the pollutant from the discharged wastewater; written procedures for disposal of contaminated wastes and wastewater; employee training, and on-going employee training requirements regarding pollutant related issues; elimination, if feasible, of any purchased materials containing the pollutant; and any other elements determined necessary and appropriate under the circumstances by the POTW manager). 
(2)  The goal of an RP shall be to maintain the amount of one or more pollutants or substances at or below the applicable discharge limits or levels, or such other goals as required by the POTW. The POTW manager may, in the POTW manager's discretion, consider cost-effectiveness during the development and implementation of an RP. 
(3)  The POTW manager may require any user to submit an RP that describes the control strategy designed to proceed toward achievement of the specified goal and shall at a minimum include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following as determined necessary by the POTW manager on a case-by-case basis: 
a.  Periodic monitoring for the pollutant in the user's discharge. 
b.  Periodic monitoring of the potential sources of the pollutant in the user's discharge. 
c.  A commitment by the user that reasonable control measures and/or best management practices will be implemented when sources of the pollutant are discovered. Factors to be considered by the POTW may include the following: 
(i)  Significance of sources. 
(ii)  Economic considerations. 
(iii)  Technical and treatability considerations. 
(iv)  Such other factors as determined appropriate by the POTW manager. 
d.  An annual status report. The report shall be sent by the user to the POTW and shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(i)  All RP monitoring results for the previous year. 
(ii)  A list of potential sources of the pollutant in the user's discharge. 
(iii)  A summary of all actions taken by the user to reduce or eliminate the identified sources of the pollutant or substance. 
(4)  As determined necessary by the POTW manager, the manager may require a user to develop, submit and implement an RP for any pollutant or substance regulated by this article. The POTW manager may also modify an approved RP at any time as determined necessary by the POTW manager to meet the goals and objectives of this article. 
(5)  Failure to submit an approvable RP within the specified deadlines or to fully and timely comply with any condition or requirement of an approved RP shall constitute a violation of this article, subject to the fine, penalty, and other enforcement provisions of this article. 
(6)  Holding enforcement action in abeyance. If the effluent sample analysis results of a user's discharge exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or quantification level for a pollutant, the POTW manager may, in the POTW manager's sole discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any enforcement action regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance, subject to the terms, conditions, and requirements of this subsection 19-106.1(C)(6), as follows: 
a.  If an approved RP is already in place: If effluent sample analysis results exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is already in place, then the POTW manager may, in the POTW manager's sole discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any enforcement action regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance for the period that the sample represents if the RP (and all terms, conditions and requirements thereof) is being fully and continually performed in good faith by the user, as determined by the POTW manager, and subject to all of the requirements and conditions of subsection 19-106.1(C)(6)(c). 
b.  If an approved RP is not already in place: If effluent sample analysis results exceeds the applicable discharge limit, detection level, or quantification level for a pollutant for which an approved RP is not already in place, then the POTW manager may, in the POTW manager's sole discretion, nevertheless allow that discharge to continue and may hold any enforcement regarding the prohibited discharge in abeyance, subject to all of the requirements and conditions of subsection 19-106.1(C)(6)(c), and provided further as follows: The user with the non-compliant discharge shall develop and implement an RP approved by the POTW manager to minimize the user's discharges of the pollutant in question to the POTW. The RP shall meet all of the requirements of this section 19-106.1(C). 
c.  The following requirements and conditions shall apply to any situation under this subsection 19-106.1(C)(6) in which an enforcement action is held in abeyance as provided by this subsection (regardless of whether or not an RP was in place at the time of the non-compliance): 
(i)  The user with the non-compliant discharge shall have a POTW-accessible point for monitoring all discharges from the user to the POTW, as approved by the POTW. All costs and expenses for and related to the installation and maintenance of this monitoring point and any required sampling devices shall be paid for solely by the user. 
(ii)  The user with the non-compliant discharge shall routinely self-monitor its discharges to the POTW for the pollutant in question using the sampling methods, procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol required by the POTW manager and at the frequency specified by the POTW manager. All costs and expenses of this sampling and analysis shall be paid for solely by the user. 
(iii)  The POTW may collect any additional samples of the user's discharge as determined necessary by the POTW manager, all costs and expenses to be paid for by the user. 
(iv)  If the user complies with all of the requirements and conditions for the RP as specified by the POTW manager, and if the POTW manager determines that all reasonable and cost-effective actions based on the economic, technical, and treatability considerations, including, but not limited to, all elements of the user's RP, have been, and continue to be, fully and satisfactorily implemented by the user, then the POTW may, in its discretion, hold enforcement action in abeyance and allow the user to continue the non-compliant discharge. 
(v)  Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection 19-106.1(C)(6) to the contrary, and regardless of whether a user fully complies with all requirements and conditions of this section and/or of an approved RP, the POTW manager shall have the unconditional right to prohibit and terminate any non-compliant discharge at any time and without prior notice, and to take any enforcement action in response thereto, including any enforcement action that had previously been held in abeyance under this subsection 19-106.1(C)(6). 
(vi)  Notwithstanding any provision of this subsection 19-106.1(C)(6) to the contrary, the POTW manager shall not hold an enforcement action in abeyance as provided by this subsection unless the POTW manager has first obtained approval from the MDEQ to do so for the specific pollutant parameter in question; provided that such prior approval shall not be required for discharges of mercury or PCBs. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-106.2. - Pretreatment standards and requirements. 
A.  Compliance with applicable standards and requirements. The national categorical pretreatment standards as established for specific industries under 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N are hereby made a part of the requirements of this article in accordance with Federal and State Laws and Regulations, and are incorporated by reference as if fully set forth in this article. A user shall comply with all categorical pretreatment standards and any other pretreatment requirements established under the Act that are applicable to that user. A user shall also comply with all other applicable pretreatment standards and requirements established under this article or under State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
B.  Deadlines for compliance. Compliance by existing sources with categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified by 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N. Existing sources that become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall be considered existing industrial users except where such sources meet the definition of "new source." New sources shall install and have in operating condition, and shall start-up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements before beginning to discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to exceed 90 days), new sources must meet all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
C.  Alternative categorical limits. Categorical pretreatment standards shall apply to a user subject to categorical standards, unless an enforceable alternative limit to the corresponding national categorical standards is derived using any of the methods specified in MAC R § 323.2313 (regarding removal credits, fundamentally different factor variances, net/gross calculations, equivalent mass per day limitations, and combined wastestream formula alternative limitations). The use of any alternative categorical limit shall be subject to the prior approval of the POTW manager. If local limits are more stringent than derived alternative categorical limits, the local limits shall control. 
D.  Compliance with other applicable laws and regulations. Users of the POTW shall comply with all local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations that may apply to their discharges to the POTW, including, but not limited to, Article II, Air Pollution Control, Part 55 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994 (the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act). 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-106.3. - Right of revision. 
    The POTW reserves the right to establish more restrictive prohibitions, limitations and requirements for discharges to the POTW to prevent interference or pass through, to protect the POTW, to comply with applicable Federal or State Laws or Regulations, to comply with the POTW's NPDES permit, or as otherwise determined necessary by the POTW manager. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-106.4. - POTW's right to refuse or condition discharge. 
    The POTW may refuse to accept, or may condition its acceptance of, all or any portion of any proposed or existing discharge to the POTW from any person, regardless of whether or not a user permit has been issued for the discharge, if the POTW manager determines that the discharge has a reasonable potential to: adversely affect the operation of the POTW; result in pass through or interference; violate any pretreatment standard or requirement; cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit; or if the impacts of the discharge on the POTW or the POTW's discharge are uncertain or unknown (because, for example, no local limits or headworks analysis has been conducted for particular pollutants in the discharge). If the POTW manager denies any person permission to commence or continue all or any portion of a discharge to the POTW, the person shall refrain from commencing to discharge or shall immediately terminate the discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter recommence discharge without written authorization from the POTW manager. Similarly, if the POTW manager denies any person permission to commence or continue all or any portion of a discharge to the POTW except subject to conditions determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW manager, the person shall refrain from commencing or continuing the discharge except in full compliance with those conditions. This includes, but is not limited to, the POTW's right to revise or revoke user permits; and to require a local unit to revise the local unit's ordinance consistent with any revisions made by the county to this article, as a condition to discharge. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-106.5. - Most restrictive standards and requirements apply. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the most stringent or restrictive standard or requirement applicable to a user's discharge shall control, whether established by this article, by any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this article, by state laws or regulations, including the POTW's NPDES permit, or by Federal Laws or Regulations. Further, if state or federal laws or regulations provide for standards and requirements not covered by this article that are otherwise applicable to a user's discharge, those standards and requirements shall apply to the user in addition to those required by this article, and the most restrictive of those additional standards or requirements shall control and shall be complied with by the user within the time period required by the law or regulation. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-106.6. - Dilution prohibited as substitute for treatment. 
    Unless expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement and subject to the prior approval of the POTW manager, no user shall ever increase the use of process water, mix separate wastestreams, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a Federal, State or local standard, requirement or limitation. The POTW may impose mass limitations on nondomestic users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements and in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. Combining a user's wastestream or modulating the release of pollutants upstream of the sampling point prior to the point of discharge into the public sewer shall not be construed as dilution, except as otherwise restricted by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements. No user intending to use dilution as a substitute for treatment shall do so without the prior approval of the POTW manager consistent with the requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 7. - USER PERMITS 

Sec. 19-107.1. - User permit required. 
A.  Industrial user permits. It is unlawful for any significant industrial user (SIU), or any other user as determined necessary by the POTW manager to carry out the purposes of this article, to discharge to the POTW without an industrial user permit as provided by this division. 
B.  General user permits. The POTW manager may require any user other than a SIU to obtain a general user permit to discharge to the POTW, subject to such terms and conditions as are determined necessary and appropriate by the POTW to achieve the purposes, policies and objectives of this article. 
(1)  A general user permit may contain, but shall not be required to contain, any of the terms and conditions that would apply to an industrial user permit issued to a SIU as provided by this division to comply with the general and specific discharge prohibitions of this article, including, but not limited to, discharge limitations, and requirements regarding sampling and monitoring; pretreatment; pollution prevention, minimization or reductions plans; accidental discharge, spill prevention, and containment requirements; flow equalization; and implementation of best management practices or a best management practices plan. 
(2)  To the extent determined appropriate by the POTW manager on a case-by-case basis, a general user permit issued under this subsection shall be subject to provisions otherwise applicable to permits for SIUs. However, all general user permits shall be non-transferable, and are subject to the permit fee and permit appeals provisions of this article. 
(3)  It is unlawful for any user required by the POTW manager to obtain a general user permit to discharge to the POTW without a general user permit as provided by this division. 
(4)  Failure to comply with a general user permit issued under this subsection constitutes a violation of this article. 
(5)  In no case shall a general user permit be construed to authorize the illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this article. 
C.  Any violation of the terms or conditions of a user permit is a violation of this article, subject to the fine, penalty, and other enforcement provisions of this article. Obtaining a user permit shall not relieve a user of its obligation to obtain other permits or approvals that may be required by other local, State or Federal Laws or Regulations. 
D.  The issuance of a user permit shall not convey to a user any property rights or privilege of any kind whatsoever, nor shall it be construed to authorize any injury to private or public property or any invasion of personal rights, nor any violation of local, State or Federal Laws or Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.2. - Determination of user status. 
A.  The POTW may require any user to submit information to the POTW for its use in determining whether the user's status, including, but not limited to, whether the user is a SIU, as well as to determine changes or the absence or inadequacy of changes in a user's facilities. 
B.  The POTW shall notify a nondomestic user of the POTW's belief that the user is, or may be, a SIU. Upon such notification, the user must complete and submit an application for an industrial user permit on a form furnished by the POTW. The failure of the POTW to so notify a nondomestic user shall not relieve any SIU of the duty to obtain a permit as required by this article. 
C.  Upon determination that user permit is required, no connection to the POTW shall be made and no discharge thereto shall occur until a permit is duly issued; provided, however, that the POTW may at its discretion issue a written authorization in place of a permit, which authorization shall be valid for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.3. - Permit application deadlines. 
    Each user must file an application for a user permit on the form provided by the POTW within the following deadlines: 
A.  Existing SIUs: Any SIU discharging into the POTW as of the effective date of this article shall submit a completed permit application form to the POTW as provided by this division within 60 days of being so directed and provided a form by the POTW. 
B.  Proposed new SIUs: Any SIU proposing to commence (or recommence) discharging into the POTW after the effective date of this article shall, at least 90 days prior to the anticipated date on which discharging will commence, request a permit application form and submit the completed application to the POTW. 
C.  Categorical users subject to new standard: A user which becomes subject to a new or revised national categorical pretreatment standard, and which has not previously submitted an application for a permit as required herein, shall apply to the POTW for an industrial user permit within 90 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. The POTW may also initiate this action; however, the failure of the POTW so to do shall not relieve a user of its obligation to obtain a permit. 
D.  Other users: Any other user directed by the POTW to complete and submit a user permit application shall do so within 60 days of being so directed by the POTW and provided a form by the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.4. - Permit application requirements. 
    All users shall submit the information required by this section on the user permit application form supplied by the POTW (or attached thereto) at a level of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the POTW to adequately evaluate the application, accompanied by payment of a permit application review fee. A separate application and supporting documentation shall be submitted for each separate location for which a user permit is required. 
A.  The name, address, and location of the facility or premises from which discharge will be made, including the names of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the facility or premises. 
B.  Corporate or individual name, Federal employer identification number, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
C.  Whether the user is a corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or other type of entity, and the name of the person(s) responsible for discharges by the user. 
D.  Name and title of the local authorized representative of the user who will have the authority to bind the applicant financially and legally, and who is authorized by the applicant as its agent to accept service of legal process, and the address and telephone number of such representative. 
E.  The Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) numbers of all processes at the location for which application is made, according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, as amended (or, if applicable, the North American Industrial Classification System (NAICS) designation). 
F.  Actual or proposed wastewater constituents and characteristics for each parameter listed in the permit application, including, but not limited to, any pollutants that are limited or regulated by any Federal, State, or local standards or requirements. The information provided for such parameters shall include all of the following: 
(1)  Pollutants having numeric or narrative limitations as provided by this article. 
(2)  Pollutants limited by National Categorical Pretreatment Standards regulations for similar industries. 
(3)  For each parameter, the expected or experienced maximum and average concentrations during a one-year period shall be provided. 
(4)  For industries subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements, the data required shall be separately shown for each categorical process wastestream. 
(5)  Combined wastestreams proposed to be regulated by the combined wastestream formula shall be specified. 
G.  For purposes of information required by the application, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the following: Procedures established by EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and as contained in 40 CFR § 136, as amended. If 40 CFR § 136 does not include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures in EPA publication "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants," April 1977, and amendments or revisions thereto, or where appropriate and applicable, in accordance with any other sampling and analytic procedures approved by EPA. 
H.  A listing and description of the following: plant activities, plant facilities, and plant processes on the premises for which the permit is being applied for. Processes which are subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements shall be so designated, and identification of which pollutants are associated with each process shall be stated. 
I.  A listing of raw materials and chemicals that are either used in the manufacturing process or could yield the pollutants referred to in this section. Any user claiming immunity from having to provide such information for reasons of national security shall furnish acceptable proof of such immunity. 
J.  A statement containing information on the spill containment and prevention of accidental/spill discharges program for each of the pollutants referred to in this section. The information provided shall include the following: 
(1)  The approximate average and maximum quantities of such substances kept on the premises in the form of the following: (a) raw materials; (b) chemicals; and/or (c) wastes therefrom; and 
(2)  The containment capacity for each of the above items. 
The following requirements apply for purposes of the spill containment and prevention statement required by this subsection: 
For raw materials, chemical solutions or waste materials that do not contain any substance on the critical materials register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, only substances which are in a form which could readily be carried into the sewerage system and which constitute a concentration of five percent or greater on a dry weight basis in the raw material, chemical solution or waste material are required to be included in the statement. Volumes of less than 55 gallons or the equivalent need not be included unless lesser quantities could cause interference or pass through to the sewerage system. 
For raw materials, chemical solutions or waste materials that contain any amount of any substance on the critical materials register promulgated by the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, the statement shall include the name of the substance and the expected concentration so that the POTW manager can determine whether or not it may constitute a threat to the POTW if a spill occurs. 
K.  The name and address of each laboratory performing analytical work for the user submitting the application. 
L.  A description of typical daily and weekly operating cycles for each process in terms of starting and ending times for each of the seven days of the week. 
M.  Average and maximum 24-hour wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; and a list of each national categorical process wastestream flow rate and the cooling water, sanitary water and storm water flow rates separately for each connection to the POTW, and list showing each combined wastestream. 
N.  A drawing showing all sewer connections and sampling manholes by the size, location, elevation and points or places of discharges into the POTW. 
O.  A flow schematic drawing showing which connections receive each national categorical process wastestream or other process wastestreams, and which connections receive storm water, sanitary water or cooling water. 
P.  A schematic drawing showing which sewers handle each combined wastestream. 
Q.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and the rate of production as pertains to processes subject to production-based limits under national categorical standards or requirements shall be specified. 
R.  Actual or proposed hours of operation of each pretreatment system for each production process. 
S.  A description and schematic drawing showing each pretreatment facility, identifying whether each such facility is of the batch type or continuous process type. 
T.  If other than potable water is used, identification of the user's source of intake water together with the types of usage and disposal method of each water source and the estimated wastewater volume from each source. 
U.  A statement regarding whether the requirements of this article and the national categorical pretreatment standards and requirements are being met on a consistent basis; and if not, what additional operation and maintenance work and/or additional construction is required for the user to comply with applicable standards and requirements. 
V.  A list of all environmental permits (and, if requested by the POTW manager, a copy of any environmental permit) held by the user applicable to the premises for which the user permit is being sought. 
W.  Whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet all applicable Federal, State and local pretreatment standards and requirements. If additional O&M or additional pretreatment will be required to meet the applicable standards and requirements, then the user shall indicate the shortest time schedule necessary to accomplish installation or adoption of the additional O&M and/or pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (including, without limitation, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, beginning operation, and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months, nor shall the total compliance period exceed 18 months. 
(2)  No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the POTW including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between submission of the progress reports to the POTW. 
X.  Any other information determined necessary by the POTW to adequately evaluate the application. To the extent that actual data is not available for a new source, the applicant shall supply estimated or expected information; 
Y.  All applications shall be signed and certified by an "authorized representative" of the user as defined by this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.5. - Permit issuance, denial, or determination that permit not required. 
A.  The POTW shall evaluate the application information furnished by a user and may require additional information as necessary to complete and properly review the application. No action shall be taken by the POTW on an application (and the 120-day review period as provided by this subsection shall not begin to run) until the application is determined to be complete by the POTW manager. Within 120 days after the submission of a complete application (unless the POTW and the applicant agree to extend this time period), the POTW shall either issue a user permit subject to terms and conditions provided by this article, deny the application, or determine that a permit is not required as provided by this article. 
B.  A user permit may be denied by the POTW: 
(1)  If the POTW determines that the proposed discharge, or continued discharge, will not comply with all applicable standards and requirements of this article; 
(2)  If the user refuses, fails or declines to accept the terms and conditions of a permit as proposed to be issued by the POTW; 
(3)  For any reason that would support a suspension or revocation of the permit as provided by this article; 
(4)  If the POTW determines that the POTW cannot adequately or reasonably treat the user's discharge (due to insufficient capacity, the quality or quantity of the pollutants, available POTW resources etc.); 
(5)  If the POTW is not satisfied that the user has not taken all reasonable steps to prevent, minimize or reduce pollutants in the user's discharge; 
(6)  To prevent the discharge of pollutants into the POTW, singly or in combination with other pollutants, for which there is a reasonable potential, as determined by the POTW manager, to: 
(a)  Not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements; 
(b)  Interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(c)  Pass through the POTW into the receiving waters or the atmosphere; 
(d)  Inhibit or disrupt the POTW's processing, use, or disposal of sludge; 
(e)  Cause health or safety problems for POTW workers; or 
(f)  Result in a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit or of other applicable laws and regulations; 
(7)  If the POTW determines that there is not, or will not be, sufficient capacity available (in both wastewater volume and strength) for a proposed discharge in all downstream sewers, pump stations, interceptors, and force mains, including, but not limited to, adequate capacity to accept, treat and dispose of BOD, TSS, or similar materials as required by applicable local, State or Federal Laws, Rules or Regulations; or 
(8)  For any other reason determined by the POTW manager as necessary and appropriate to protect the POTW or to meet the purposes and intent of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.6. - Permit conditions. 
A.  User permits shall be subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges, and fees established by the POTW. Further, user its incorporate by reference all provisions, regulations and requirements of the article without setting them forth in full therein. 
B.  Industrial user permits shall at a minimum include all of the conditions required by MAC 323.2306(a)(iii). In addition, user permits shall include any conditions determined reasonably necessary by the POTW manager to prevent pass through or interference, to protect the quality of the receiving waters, to protect worker health and safety, to facilitate POTW sludge management and disposal, to protect ambient air quality, to protect against damage to the POTW, or to otherwise achieve the objectives of this article, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
(2)  Limits on the average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater constituents or properties. 
(3)  Requirements for installation of pretreatment technology or construction of appropriate containment devices, or similar requirements designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works. 
(4)  Development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including additional management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental or unanticipated discharges. 
(5)  Requirements for installation, maintenance, repair, calibration and operation of inspection and sampling facilities and discharge flow monitors. 
(6)  Specifications for monitoring programs which shall include, but are not limited to, sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for tests, and reporting schedules. 
(7)  Compliance schedules. 
(8)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports. 
(9)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the POTW and affording the POTW access to those records. 
(10)  Requirements for notifying the POTW if self-monitoring indicates a violation as provided by section 19-108.4 of this article, and for repeat sampling and analysis as provided by section 19-109.6 of this article. 
(11)  Requirements for notification of any new introductions of wastewater constituents or of any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater being introduced into the POTW, including listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which the user has submitted initial notification under MAC R § 323.2310(15). 
(12)  Requirements for the notification of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by the permittee. 
(13)  Requirements for notification of accidental or slug discharges, or discharges that exceed a discharge prohibition. 
(14)  Requirements for notification and need for prior approval from the POTW manager for any proposed change in a sampling location. 
(15)  A statement regarding limitations on transferability of the permit. 
(16)  A statement of the duration of the permit. 
(17)  A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including those that become effective during the term of the permit. 
(18)  Requirements for a written certification signed by the permittee that acknowledges that the permittee has read and fully understands all terms and conditions of the permit; and acknowledges that the permittee accepts all of the terms and conditions of the permit as written and accepts full responsibility for complying with the permit as approved. 
(19)  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of discharge limitations, pretreatment standards and requirements, and compliance schedules. 
(20)  requirements regarding development by a user of a pollutant prevention, minimization or reduction plan (e.g., for mercury or PCBs) or requirements regarding use of best management practices to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances to the POTW, or otherwise meet the purposes, policies and objectives of this article. 
(21)  Other conditions as determined necessary by the POTW manager to ensure compliance with this article and other applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
    If the POTW determines that a user is discharging substances of a quality, in a quantity, or in a location that may cause problems to the POTW or the receiving stream, the POTW has the authority to develop and enforce effluent limits applicable to the user's discharge. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.7. - Permit modifications. 
    A user permit may be modified by the POTW at any time and for any reason determined necessary by the POTW manager to assure compliance with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, any of the following reasons: 
A.  To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State or local pretreatment standards or requirements, or other applicable requirement of law or regulation. 
B.  Material or substantial changes or additions to the permittee's operations, processes, or the character or quality of discharge that were not considered in drafting or issuing the existing permit. It shall be the duty of a user to request an application form and to apply for a modification of the permit within 30 days of any such change(s). The POTW may modify a permit on its own initiative based on its findings or upon reasonable cause to believe that any such change(s) has occurred or threatens to occur. 
C.  A change in any condition in the permittee's discharge, facility, production or operations, or in the POTW, that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the permittee's discharge to assure compliance with applicable laws, regulations or the POTW's NPDES permit. 
D.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to collection or treatment systems; the POTW's processing, use, or disposal of sludge; POTW personnel; or the receiving waters. 
E.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the user's permit. 
F.  Misrepresentation or failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or in any required report or notice. 
G.  Revision of, or a grant of a variance from, applicable categorical standards pursuant to 40 CFR § 403.13. 
H.  To correct typographical or other errors in the permit. 
I.  To reflect transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner or operator. 
J.  To add or revise a compliance schedule for the permittee. 
K.  To reflect changes or revisions in the POTW's NPDES permit. 
L.  To ensure POTW compliance with applicable sludge management requirements promulgated by EPA. 
M.  To incorporate any new or revised requirements resulting from reevaluation of the POTW's local limits. 
N.  to incorporate a request for modification by the permittee, as determined appropriate by the POTW and provided the request does not create a violation of any applicable requirement, standard, law, rule or regulation. 
    The permittee shall be informed of any changes in the permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of the change, unless a shorter time is determined necessary by the POTW to meet applicable laws, to protect human health or the environment, or to facilitate an enforcement action. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.8. - Permit duration. 
A.  Industrial user permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years, subject to modification, reissuance, suspension or revocation as provided by this division. At the discretion of the POTW, an industrial user permit may be issued for a period less than five years and may be stated to expire on a specific date. 
B.  General user permits may be issued for any time period determined appropriate by the POTW manager, subject to modification, reissuance, suspension or revocation as provided by this division. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.9. - Permit reissuance. 
A.  To apply for reissuance of an existing user permit, a user must submit a complete permit application to the POTW accompanied by payment of an application fee at least 90 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The application shall be submitted in a form prescribed by the POTW. It shall be the responsibility of the user to make a timely application for reissuance. 
B.  All user permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new user permit to that user. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.10. - Continuation of expired permits. 
    An expired user permit will continue to be effective until the permit is reissued only if: (a) the user has submitted a complete permit application at least 90 days prior to the expiration date of the user's existing permit; and (b) the failure to reissue the permit, prior to expiration of the previous permit, is not due to any act or failure to act on the part of the user. In all other cases, discharge to the POTW following expiration of a permit is unlawful. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.11. - Permit suspension and revocation. 
    User permits may be suspended or permanently revoked by the POTW for any reason determined necessary by the POTW to assure compliance with the requirements of this article, the POTW's NPDES permit, or other applicable laws and regulations, including, without limitation, any of the following reasons: 
A.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
B.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
C.  Failure to allow timely and reasonable access to the permittee's premises and records by representatives of the POTW for purposes authorized by this article, including, without limitation, inspection or monitoring; 
D.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
E.  Failure to pay fines or penalties; 
F.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
G.  Failure to pay permit fees; 
H.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
I.  Failure to comply with any term or condition of the permit, an order, the requirements of this article, or any final judicial order entered with respect thereto; 
J.  Failure to comply with any reporting or notice requirement; 
K.  Failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the permit application or during the permit issuance process, or misrepresentation of any relevant fact at any time; 
L.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the user permit application; 
M.  As determined by the POTW, the discharge permitted by the permit has a reasonable potential to endanger human health or the environment and the threat can be abated only by suspension or revocation of the permit. 
    Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, a user shall immediately terminate its discharge to the POTW and shall not thereafter recommence discharge without further authorization from the POTW manager as provided by this article. The POTW may reissue a revoked permit upon a showing satisfactory to the POTW manager that the permittee has corrected the violation or condition that led to the revocation. A person who has had a permit revoked may apply for a new permit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.12. - Limitations on permit transfer. 
A.  A user permit is issued to a specific user for discharge from a specific facility and operation and shall not be assigned or transferred or sold to a new or different owner, operator, user, discharger, facility or premises, or to a new or changed facility or operation, without the prior written approval of the POTW. If the transfer of a permit is approved, any succeeding transferee permittee must also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. The POTW shall approve the transfer of a permit only if all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The transferor (permittee) shall give at least 30 days' advance notice to the POTW of the proposed transfer of the permit (unless a shorter notice period is approved by the POTW in advance). The notice shall include a written certification signed by the proposed transferee that (a) states that the transferee has no present intent to change the facility's operations and processes; (b) identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; (c) acknowledges that the transferee has read and fully understands all terms and conditions of the permit; and (d) acknowledges that the transferee accepts all of the terms and conditions of the permit as written and accepts full responsibility for complying with the existing permit if the transfer is approved. 
(2)  As of the date of the proposed transfer, there are no unpaid charges, fines, penalties or fees of any kind due to the POTW and/or the local unit from the transferor or the transferee related to use of the POTW. 
(3)  Except as to the identity of the new discharger (the transferee), the application materials for the permit to be transferred as originally filed by the transferor, as well as the terms and conditions of the permit itself, are completely accurate with respect to, and fully applicable to, the discharge, facilities, and activities of the transferee. 
B.  If the transfer of a permit is approved, the POTW shall make the necessary minor modifications to the permit to show the transferee as the permittee, and a copy of the permit shall be provided to the transferee for signature and certification by the transferee as provided by section 19-108.10 of this article. The transferor (permittee) shall remain liable for any discharges to the POTW from the facility (along with any other persons actually discharging from the facility to the POTW) until a transfer of the permit has been approved as provided by this section. 
C.  This section is not intended to, and shall not be construed to, limit in any way the transfer of ownership of the property involved. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer a user permit that does not comply with the requirements of this section renders the permit void as of the date of the invalid transfer. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.13. - Duty to provide information. 
    Users shall furnish to the POTW any available information that the POTW requests to determine whether cause exists for modifying, revoking and reissuing, or terminating a user permit, to determine compliance with a permit, to determine whether a permit is required, or as otherwise determined necessary by the POTW. Users shall also, upon request, furnish to the POTW copies of any records required to be kept by a permit. The information and records requested by the POTW shall be provided by the user to the POTW within 24 hours of the request, unless an alternative time frame is specified by the POTW when making the request or unless the POTW allows additional time for the user to submit the requested information based on a showing by the user of good cause for any delay. The user's failure to submit the requested information to the POTW within 24 hours (or within any alternate time period approved by the POTW as provided by this section) shall constitute a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.14. - Permit appeals. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this section, an appeal to the POTW board of appeals of any final decision made by the POTW manager in connection with issuing or implementing a user permit shall be governed by Article 18 of this article. An appealing party must specify in its notice of appeal the action of the POTW being appealed and the grounds for the appeal. If a particular permit provision is objected to, the notice of appeal must specify the reasons for the objection, and the alternative provision, if any, sought to be placed in the permit. The effectiveness of a permit or any final decision made by the POTW manager shall not be stayed pending a decision by the POTW board of appeals. If, after considering the record on appeal including any statements provided by the POTW in response to the appeal, the POTW board of appeals determines that a permit or any provision of a permit should be reconsidered, the board shall remand the matter to the POTW manager for further action as determined appropriate by the board. Specific provisions of a permit that are remanded by the POTW board of appeals for reconsideration by the POTW manager shall be stayed pending further final action taken by the POTW manager as required by the decision of the board. A decision of the POTW board of appeals not to remand any matter shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.15. - Permits not stayed. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by section 19-107.14, no action taken or request filed by any permittee shall operate to stay the effect of any permit or of any provision, term or condition of any permit, including, without limitation, a request for permit modification, reissuance, or transfer, or a notification of planned changes or anticipated non-compliance. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-107.16. - Permit fees. 
    User permit fees shall be established, paid and collected as provided by this division and Article 21. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 8. - REPORTING AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS 
All nondomestic users (and any other user as required by the POTW manager) shall comply with the minimum reporting and notice requirements provided by this division, as follows: 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 

Sec. 19-108.1. - Reports by nondomestic users regarding categorical pretreatment standards and requirements. 
A.  Baseline monitoring reports. Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or 180 days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under MAC R § 323.2311(2) whichever is later, an existing nondomestic user subject to the categorical pretreatment standards and that currently discharges or is scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit a report to the POTW as required by MAC R § 323.2310(2). At least 90 days prior to commencement of discharge, new sources, and sources that become nondomestic users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard shall submit the reports to the POTW as required by MAC R § 323.2310(2). Any changes to the information required to be submitted by a nondomestic user pursuant to MAC R § 323.2310(2)(a) through (e) shall be submitted by the user to the POTW within 60 days of when the user becomes aware of the change. 
B.  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the discharge to the POTW, any nondomestic user subject to categorical pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit the reports to the POTW required by MAC R § 323.2310(3). 
C.  Periodic reports on continued compliance. Any nondomestic user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of the categorical pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the public sewer or POTW, shall submit the periodic reports to the POTW required by MAC R § 323.2310(4). These periodic reports shall be submitted at least once every six months (during the months of April and October unless alternate months are approved by the POTW), unless required more frequently by the applicable pretreatment standard, by the POTW, or by the state. The reports shall include a record of all average and maximum daily flows during the reporting period, except that the POTW may require more detailed reporting of flows. All flows shall be reported on the basis of actual measurement unless the POTW agrees, due to cost or nonfeasibility, to accept reports of average and maximum flows estimated using techniques approved by the POTW. The combined wastestream formula may be used for reporting purposes after the initial information has been furnished to the POTW, provided there has been no change to the elements composing the combined wastestream. The results of sampling of the discharge and analysis of pollutants appearing in the report shall be cross-referenced to the related flow and mass to determine compliance with National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.2. - Reports required for nondomestic users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards. 
A.  All nondomestic users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards shall submit to the POTW periodic reports providing information regarding the quality and quantity of wastewater and pollutants discharged into the POTW (including, without limitation, information regarding the nature, concentration (or mass), and flow of the discharge). These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report in accordance with the sampling, analysis and monitoring requirements provided by Article 9 of this article. 
B.  For significant industrial users, the reports shall be submitted at least once every six months for the preceding six months (during the months of April and October unless alternate months are specified by the POTW), unless required more frequently by the POTW. 
C.  If required by the POTW nondomestic users other than significant industrial users, the reports shall be submitted at least once every 12 months for the preceding 12 months (during the month of October unless an alternate month is specified by the POTW), unless required more frequently by the POTW. 
D.  The reports for all nondomestic users shall be submitted on forms provided by (or in a format required by) the POTW, and shall include, without limitation, the volume of wastewater; the concentration of pollutants; the names of all person(s) responsible for operating and maintaining any pretreatment equipment, pretreatment processes, or responsible for wastewater management at the user's facilities, with a brief description of each person's duties; information regarding materials or substances that may cause interference or pass through; and any other information deemed necessary by the POTW to assess and assure compliance with applicable discharge requirements or to safeguard the operation of the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.3. - Notice by user of potential problems. 
    All nondomestic users, whether or not subject to categorical pretreatment standards, shall notify the POTW immediately by telephone of all discharges by the user that could cause problems to the POTW, including, without limitation, accidental discharges, slug loadings, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, non-customary batch discharge, or discharges that exceed a discharge prohibition or limitation provided by this article. The notification shall include available information regarding the location of the discharge, its volume, duration, constituents, loading and concentrations, corrective actions taken and required, and other available information as necessary to determine what impact the discharge may have on the POTW. A detailed written report providing the same and any additional available information (including specifying the measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges) shall also be provided by the user to be received by the POTW manager within five days of the incident. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.4. - Notice by user of violation of pretreatment standards. 
    If sampling performed by an nondomestic user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation (and shall comply with other applicable requirements provided by section 19-109.6 regarding repeat sampling and analysis). 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.5. - Notice by user of changed discharge or change in user status. 
A.  A nondomestic user shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in its discharge, or of any facility expansion, production increase, or process modifications that could result in a substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in its discharge. 
B.  For purposes of this section, "promptly" means as soon as reasonably possible, but in no event less than 60 days before the change. 
C.  For purposes of this section, "substantial change" includes, without limitation, any of the following: 
(1)  The discharge of any amount of a pollutant not identified in the user's permit application or in the permit issued. 
(2)  An increase in concentration (or degree) of any pollutant that exceeds ten percent of the concentration (or degree) for the pollutant as indicated in any report required under section 19-108.1 or 19-108.2. 
(3)  An increase in discharge volume that exceeds ten percent of the volume as indicated in any report required under section 19-108.1 or 19-108.2. 
(4)  Any increase in the amount of any hazardous wastes discharged, including, without limitation, the hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under section 19-108.6 of this article. 
(5)  The discharge of any ground waters purged for a removal or remedial action. 
(6)  The discharge of any pollutants that are present in the discharge due to infiltration. 
(7)  A change in discharge that may convert a nondomestic user into a significant industrial user, or a nondomestic user into a categorical user. 
(8)  A change in discharge that would cause a change in the categorical standards that apply to the user. 
D.  In determining whether to accept any changed discharge, or, if so, under what conditions, the POTW shall evaluate the changed discharge pursuant to the general and specific discharge prohibitions under section 19-106.1 and other applicable provisions of this article. The user may be required to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a user permit application. 
E.  No user shall implement the planned changed conditions until and unless the POTW manager or his/her designee has responded to the user's notice. 
F.  This section shall not be construed to authorize a discharge that exceeds a discharge prohibition or limitation provided by this article or a permit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.6. - Notice by user regarding wastes that are otherwise hazardous. 
    Any nondomestic user that discharges to the POTW a substance that, if disposed of other than by discharge to the POTW, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261 or under the rules promulgated under the State Hazardous Waste Management Act (Part 111 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 324.11101 et seq., as amended) shall notify the POTW manager, the U.S. EPA Region V Waste Management Article Director, and the Chief of the Waste Management Section of the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, of the discharge as required by MAC R § 323.2310(15). 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.7. - Notice by user regarding installation of new pretreatment facilities. 
    Within five days after completing installation of new pretreatment facilities, the User shall notify the POTW manager in writing of the time and date when it intends to commence operation of the new facilities, and the identity of the person who will conduct any tests to be performed. The pretreatment facilities shall not be placed in regular operation until adequate tests have been conducted to establish that the discharges will comply with the requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. Upon prior written request by the POTW manager, the user shall allow a representative of the POTW to observe the tests at the time they are conducted. The cost of the tests shall be paid by the user. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.8. - Other reports and notices required by this division or by other applicable laws and regulations. 
    Users shall comply with all other reporting or notice requirements as provided by this article, by any notice, order or permit issued under this article, or as required by any other applicable law or regulation, including, without limitation, the reporting and notice requirements in connection with accidental discharge (Article 10), upset (Article 11), bypass (Article 12), and any other reports or notice requirements determined necessary by the POTW to assess and assure compliance with the requirements of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.9. - Requirements applicable to all required reports and notifications. 
    All reports and notifications submitted by a user to the POTW as required by this article (or by any order, permit or determination issued or made pursuant to this article) shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  All reports required by this article shall be based upon data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report. The data shall be representative of conditions occurring during the applicable reporting period. 
B.  If a user monitors any pollutant (or measures flow) more frequently than required by this article or a user permit, using the monitoring, sampling and analytical procedures as required by section 19-109.1, the results of all such additional monitoring shall be included in any report or notification submitted pursuant to this article. 
C.  The POTW manager may require that reports, notifications, and other required documents and data be submitted in a standardized format, as specified by the POTW manager. 
D.  If the POTW instead of a user collects all of the information, including flow data, required for a report required by sections 19-108.1 or 19-108.2, the POTW manager may in his or her discretion waive the requirement that the report be submitted by the user. 
E.  The reports, notifications, and other documents and data required to be submitted or maintained by this article shall be subject to all of the provisions as specified by MAC R § 323.2310(13). 
F.  Written reports and notifications will be deemed to have been submitted to the POTW, unless otherwise specified by the POTW manager, as follows: 
1.  If mailed, on the date postmarked. 
2.  The date of receipt of the report shall govern for reports or notifications which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, including, but not limited to, reports or notifications that are hand-delivered, faxed, or emailed. 
3.  Written reports and notifications may be submitted to the POTW by fax or email (or by any means other than mail or hand-delivery) only with the prior approval of the POTW on a case-by-case basis. The report or notification shall be sent to the fax number or email address specified by the POTW. 
G.  All written reports and notifications submitted by mail or hand-delivery shall be sent or delivered to the following address: 
POTW Manager
Anthony Ragnone WWTP 
9290 Farrand Road 
Montrose, MI 48457 
With a copy to: 
City of Swartz Creek
Director of Public Service 
8083 Civic Drive 
Swartz Creek, Michigan 48473 
H.  Failure to provide the reports and notifications required by this article constitutes an independent violation of this article. However, compliance with applicable reporting and notification requirements shall not relieve a user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such report or notification relieve a user of any fines, penalties, or other liability that may be imposed by applicable laws or regulations. Further, the reporting and notification requirements required by this article shall not be construed to authorize a discharge that exceeds a discharge prohibition or limitation under this article or other applicable laws or regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-108.10. - Signature and certification requirements. 
    All written reports and notifications required by this article shall be signed and certified as follows: 
A.  Required signatures. The reports and notifications shall be signed by an "authorized representative" of the user as defined in section 19-101.2 of this article. 
B.  Required certification. The reports and notifications shall include the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
C.  Exception. If the POTW elects to perform instead of the user all or any portion of the sampling or analysis otherwise required for a report or notification, the user will not be required to comply with the certification requirements for the sampling and analysis (or portion thereof) performed by the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 9. - SAMPLING, ANALYSIS, AND MONITORING REQUIREMENTS 
This division provides the sampling, analysis and monitoring requirements applicable to users of the POTW. It does not apply to domestic users except as may be determined appropriate in a specific case by the POTW. All users required by this article (or by any permit, order, decision or determination issued or made under this article) to sample, monitor and analyze their discharges to the POTW shall do so according to the minimum requirements provided by this division. Additional or more restrictive sampling, analytical or monitoring requirements may be required for a particular user by a permit, order, decision or determination issued or made under this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 

Sec. 19-109.1. - Sampling and analytical techniques and procedures. 
    All sampling, measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of discharges to the POTW shall be performed in accordance with the procedures approved by the U.S. EPA contained in 40 CFR part 136. If, as determined by the POTW manager, the sampling and analytical techniques contained in 40 CFR part 136 are not available, do not apply to the discharge or pollutants in question, are not appropriate under the circumstances for application to the discharge or pollutants in question, or where one or more alternate techniques are available under 40 CFR part 136, sampling and analysis shall be performed using validated sampling and analytical methods and procedures approved or required by the POTW manager. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.2. - Sampling frequency. 
    Users shall sample their discharges to the POTW at a frequency necessary to assess and assure compliance with the requirements of this article, any permit or order issued pursuant to this article, all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, other applicable State and Federal Laws and Regulations, or as otherwise determined necessary by the POTW manager consistent with the purposes and intent of this article. At a minimum, all significant industrial users shall sample their effluent two times per year (once every six months) or as often as provided by their permits, whichever is more frequent, and report the results to the POTW. Each discharge point to the POTW shall be sampled and reported individually. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.3. - Sample types. 
    Where representative samples are required to be taken, a user shall take a minimum of four grab samples for pH, temperature, cyanide, phenols (T), residual chlorine, oil and grease, sulfide, and volatile organics (and any other parameters designated by the POTW manager), unless a lesser or greater number of grab samples is approved or required in advance by the POTW manager. Grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous maximum discharge limits. For all other pollutants and sampling, 24-hour composite samples must be obtained through flow-proportional composite sampling techniques. The POTW manager may waive flow-proportional composite sampling for any user that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the POTW manger that flow-proportional sampling is infeasible. If flow-proportional sampling is waived, samples may instead be obtained through time-proportional composite sampling techniques, or through a minimum of four grab samples, if the user demonstrates to the satisfaction of the manager that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.4. - Sampling methods, equipment and location. 
    A user shall use the sampling methods, sampling equipment, and sampling location specified by the user's user permit, or, in the absence of a permit, as required by the POTW manager. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.5. - Costs of monitoring, sampling and analyses. 
    All required monitoring, taking of samples, and sample analyses, whether performed by the POTW or by a user, including, but not limited to, the costs or fees associated with inspection or surveillance, shall be at the sole cost of the user. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.6. - Self-monitoring. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this article, self-monitoring shall be conducted by each nondomestic user to insure compliance with all applicable requirements of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
B.  A user performing its own sampling shall submit the samples for analysis to a laboratory (which may include the user's own laboratory) approved by the POTW. 
C.  A user performing its own sampling or monitoring shall record and maintain for all samples and monitoring the date, exact location (which shall match sampling locations identified in the user's user permit, as applicable), time (including start time and stop time) and method of sampling or measurement, and the name(s) of person(s) taking the samples or measurements; sampler programming information; the sample preservation techniques or procedures used; the full chain-of-custody for each sample; the dates the analyses were performed and completed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques and methods used; the detection limits and/or quantification level used per parameter; quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) procedures used and QA/QC data; and the results of the analyses. 
D.  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user shall notify the POTW manager within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation, except that the user shall not be required to resample if (a) the POTW performs sampling at the user at a frequency of at least once per month, or (b) the POTW performs sampling at the user between the time when the user performs its initial sampling and the time when the user receives the results of the sampling that indicates the violation. 
E.  If a user uses its own laboratory for sample analysis, the POTW manager may require the user to send split samples to an independent laboratory at a frequency specified by the manager as a quality control check. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.7. - Sampling and analyses performed by POTW. 
A.  The sampling and analysis required by this article may be performed by the POTW instead of the user, as determined necessary by the POTW manager for purposes of this article. The POTW shall provide the user with copies of analytical results prepared by the POTW. If the results of any sampling and analysis performed by the POTW instead of the user show that a pretreatment standard has been violated, the POTW shall provide the user with copies of the analytical results within ten days after the results are available. 
B.  If the POTW performs the required sampling and analysis for a user, the user shall pay a sampling fee to the POTW to fully reimburse the POTW for the sampling, including administrative and overhead costs. The POTW may contract with an independent firm to perform the sampling and analysis and the user shall fully reimburse the POTW for amounts paid by the POTW to the independent firm. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.8. - Split samples and sample results. 
A.  If requested by the POTW, the POTW shall be provided with splits of any sample taken by a user. Splits shall be provided by the user to the POTW at no cost to the POTW. 
B.  If requested by a user prior to the collection of a sample of the user's discharge, the POTW shall leave a portion of the sample of the discharge taken from any sampling point on or adjacent to the premises for the user's independent analysis. 
C.  In cases of disputes arising over split samples, the portion taken and analyzed by the POTW shall be controlling unless proven invalid. The burden of proving the POTW's results invalid shall be on the user and at the user's sole cost. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.9. - Maintenance, repair and calibration of equipment. 
A.  A user who performs self-monitoring shall contract with an independent company (unless the requirement to use an independent company is waived in advance by the POTW manager as determined appropriate by the manager) to maintain, repair, and calibrate the sampling and flow measurement equipment and instruments used to monitor the user. 
B.  The maintenance, repair, and calibration shall be performed as often as necessary to ensure that monitoring data is accurate and representative, and consistent with the accepted capability of the type of equipment used, and shall be at the sole cost of the user. 
C.  A user shall keep a complete and accurate written record of all calibrations, inspections and maintenance done (including, without limitation, the date and time of the activity, a description of what was done and the methods used, the names of persons conducting the activity, and any required or recommended follow-up). The record shall also include a description of all problems discovered regarding the equipment whether in response to a regularly scheduled inspection or otherwise. 
D.  The POTW, in any event, may inspect and test a user's sampling and flow measurement equipment and instruments at all reasonable times. 
E.  In no case shall a user's failure to keep its equipment, instruments and facilities in good working order constitute grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-109.10. - Required sampling structures and devices. 
A.  The POTW may require any user to install at each discharge point a suitable control structure (such as a manhole or sampling vault) and necessary measuring and sampling devices (including automatic devices) to facilitate the observation, sampling, and measurement of the quantity, composition, and concentrations of discharges to the POTW. The structure and devices shall be maintained at all times in a safe, clean and proper operating condition at the sole expense of the user. 
B.  There shall be ample room in or near the control structure to allow accurate monitoring, measuring, sampling and preparation of samples for analysis, as determined necessary by the POTW manager. At a minimum, all sewers shall have an inspection and sampling manhole or structure with an opening of no less than 24 inches in diameter and an internal diameter of no less than 36 inches containing flow measuring, recording and sampling equipment as required by the POTW manager to assure compliance with this article. 
C.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction for safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the verbal or written request of the POTW. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
D.  The location and complexity of the required control structure or devices may vary with sampling requirements determined necessary by the POTW manager to protect the POTW and to comply with applicable laws and regulations. 
E.  The required sampling structures and devices shall be constructed and installed at the user's sole expense in accordance with plans submitted to the POTW, and in compliance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification by the POTW, or within such other shorter or longer time period specified by the POTW manager as required by the particular circumstances to meet the requirements of this article. The structures and devices shall be operated and maintained by the user at the user's sole expense so as to be safe and accessible to POTW personnel during all reasonable times and so as to provide accurate and representative monitoring data. If user fails to install or maintain a required structure or device, the POTW may do so and charge the costs to the user. 
F.  The sampling structures and devices must be provided on the user's premises as approved by the POTW, but the POTW may, if it determines that such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship to the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
G.  Samples shall be taken at a control structure approved by the POTW. However, in the absence of a suitable control structure as required by this section, samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if pretreatment facilities exist, or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment facilities exist. If other wastewaters are mixed with a regulated process wastestream prior to pretreatment, the user must measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula under MAC R § 323.2311(7) or other methods required by the POTW to evaluate compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
H.  No user shall change monitoring points without first notifying and receiving the approval of the POTW manager. The POTW manager shall not approve any change in a user's monitoring point or points that would allow the user to substitute dilution for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with applicable standards. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 10. - ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES 

Sec. 19-110.1. - General. 
    This division sets forth minimum requirements for nondomestic users (and any other users as required by the POTW manager) to prepare for, respond to, and report, accidental discharges to the POTW. Additional or more restrictive requirements may be required for particular users under a user permit, a slug control plan, or by other applicable laws and regulations. 
A.  Each nondomestic user shall provide and continuously maintain protection from accidental discharge of materials or other substances regulated by this article as provided by this division. 
B.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protections required by this division shall be submitted to the POTW for review. All existing users shall submit the required plans and information with their permit applications or upon request of the POTW. For new sources, facilities and operating procedures to provide the protections required by this division shall be approved by the POTW prior to commencing discharge. No user who commences discharging to the POTW after the effective date of this article shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge facilities and procedures as provided by this section are in place and have been approved by the POTW. 
C.  Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of regulated materials or substances shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. Review and approval by the POTW of plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. Compliance with the requirements of this division shall not relieve a user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability that may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, or for any other damage to persons or property, or for any other liability that may be imposed under this article or under other applicable laws and regulations. 
D.  No change shall be made in any plan or procedure approved by the POTW as provided by this section without the prior review and approval of the POTW. 
E.  All users shall notify the POTW in writing within five days of any change in the information required to be provided to the POTW as set forth below in this section (including, without limitation, information regarding the person in charge of discharge operations, the description of chemicals stored, used or manufactured by the user, the description of user discharges, and the description of user premises). 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.2. - Designation of person in charge of discharge operations. 
    Each nondomestic user shall designate at least one person to be in charge of and responsible for the user's discharges to the POTW, including responsibility for maintaining pretreatment facilities and operations, if any, and prevention of accidental discharges ("person in charge"). The person so designated shall be an individual or a position with knowledge of all toxic wastes or hazardous substances routinely or potentially generated by the user, and of all process alterations that could, in any manner, increase or decrease normal daily flow or waste strength to the POTW. The names of the person (or persons) designated as provided by this section and a phone number where the person can be reached for 24-hour contact shall be submitted by each user to the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.3. - Description of chemicals stored, used or manufactured by user; user discharges; user premises. 
    Unless the following information has already been appropriately provided to the POTW pursuant to other requirements of this article, each nondomestic user shall: 
A.  Catalog all chemicals stored, used, or manufactured by the user at the user's premises. The list of chemicals shall include specific chemical names (not just manufacturer's codes) and shall be provided to the POTW. 
B.  Provide the POTW with a written description of the user's discharge practices, including an estimate of daily average flows, waste strengths, and flow types, separated according to appropriate categories including process, cooling, sanitary, etc. 
C.  Provide to the POTW a sketch of the user's plant building(s), including the location of pretreatment equipment, process and chemical storage areas, floor drains located near process and storage areas, manhole or other control structures, and sewer locations at the user's point of discharge into the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.4. - Segregation of wastewaters requiring pretreatment. 
    Nondomestic users shall segregate wastewaters requiring pretreatment (including, without limitation, spent concentrates, toxics, and high strength organic wastes) as necessary to prevent pollutants from interfering with or passing through the POTW. All sludges generated by pretreatment shall be used and disposed of only as permitted by applicable local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.5. - Secondary containment requirements. 
A.  Each nondomestic user must provide and maintain at the user's sole expense secondary spill containment structures (including diking, curbing or other appropriate structures) adequate to protect all floor drains from accidental spills and discharges to the POTW of any pollutants or discharges regulated by this article. 
B.  The containment or curbing shall be sufficient to hold not less than 150 percent of the total process area tank volume and not less than 150 percent of liquid polluting material stored or used, unless a lesser containment area or alternate control measures are approved in advance by the POTW manager. 
C.  The containment area shall be constructed so that no liquid polluting material can escape from the area by gravity through the building sewers, drains, or otherwise directly or indirectly into the POTW. All floor drains found within the containment area must be plugged and sealed. 
D.  Spill troughs and sumps within process areas must discharge to appropriate pretreatment tanks. 
E.  Emergency containment shall also be provided for storage tanks that may be serviced by commercial haulers and for chemical storage areas. 
F.  Solid pollutants shall be located in security areas designed to prevent the loss of the materials to the POTW. 
G.  Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide the protection required by this section shall be submitted to the POTW manager for review, and shall be approved by the manager before construction. Construction of approved containment for existing sources shall be completed within the time period specified by the POTW manager. 
H.  No new source shall be permitted to discharge to the POTW until emergency containment facilities have been approved and constructed as required by this section. 
I.  The POTW manager may order a user to take interim measures for emergency containment as determined necessary by the manager under the circumstances. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.6. - Submission of pollution incident prevention plan. 
A.  Each user required to develop a pollution incident prevention ("PIP") plan as provided by Part 5 of the Michigan Water Resources Commission Rules, 1979 ACR 323.1151 et seq., as amended (promulgated pursuant to Part 31 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 324.3101 et seq., as amended), shall submit a copy of that plan to the POTW manager. 
B.  The PIP plan shall be submitted to the manager within 60 days of the effective date of this article for an existing source, or 30 days prior to the date of discharge for a new source. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.7. - Posting of accidental discharge information. 
    All nondomestic users shall post a clearly legible set of instructions in the area where the user manages wastewater so that the applicable reporting and notice requirements are made known and are available to the user's employees. In addition, all nondomestic users shall instruct their employees on the applicable reporting and notice requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.8. - Notice of accidental discharge. 
A.  In the case of an accidental discharge, a user shall immediately notify the POTW of the incident by telephone. 
B.  The notification shall include the name of the person placing the call, the name of the user, and all available information regarding the location of the discharge, its volume, duration, constituents, loading and concentrations, corrective actions taken and required, and other available information as necessary to determine what impact the discharge may have on the POTW. 
C.  A detailed written report providing the same and any additional available information (including specifying the measures that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges) shall also be provided by the user to the POTW manager within five days of the incident. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-110.9. - Slug control plan. 
A.  Each significant industrial user shall prepare and implement an individualized slug control plan. Existing significant industrial users shall submit a slug control plan to the POTW for approval within 90 days of the effective date of this article. New sources that are significant industrial users shall submit a slug control plan to the POTW for approval before beginning to discharge. Upon written notice from the POTW, nondomestic users that are not significant industrial users may also be required to prepare and implement a slug control plan, and the plan shall be submitted to the POTW for approval as specified in the notice. All slug control plans shall contain at least the following elements: 
(1)  A description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  A description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  The procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate any discharge prohibition, limitation or requirement under this division, and procedures for follow-up written notification within five days of the discharge; 
(4)  The procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and measures and equipment for emergency response. 
B.  If a user has submitted to the POTW plans or documents pursuant to other requirements of local, State or Federal Laws and Regulations which meet all applicable requirements of subsection 19-110.9.A., the POTW may in its discretion determine that the user has satisfied the slug plan submission requirements of this section. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 11. - UPSET AND ADDITIONAL AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES 

Sec. 19-111.1. - Upset. 
    An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for non-compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if all of the requirements of section 19-111.1A. below, are met. However, in the event of an upset, the user may still be liable for surcharges for exceeding applicable discharge limitations as provided by this article. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
A.  Conditions necessary to demonstrate upset. A user seeking to establish the affirmative defense of upset must demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, all of the following: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the POTW within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission containing the same information must be provided within five days of becoming aware of the upset): 
(a)  A description of the discharge and cause of non-compliance; 
(b)  The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to continue; and 
(c)  The steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the non-compliance. 
B.  User responsibility in case of upset. The user shall control production or all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable limits upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-111.2. - Additional affirmative defenses. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense in any action brought against it alleging a violation of the general prohibitions under section 19-106.1.A and specific prohibitions under subsections 19-106.1.B.(5), (6), (7) or (8) if the user can demonstrate that all of the conditions necessary to establish the defense under MAC R § 323.2303(3)(a) and (b) are met. However, even if the affirmative defense is established, the user may still be liable for surcharges for exceeding applicable discharge limitations as provided by this article. In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the affirmative defenses provided by MAC R § 323.2303(3) shall have the burden of proof. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 12. - BYPASS 

Sec. 19-112.1. - Bypass not violating applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. 
    A nondomestic user may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. A bypass that meets the requirements of the preceding sentence of this section is not subject to the provisions in sections 19-112.2, 19-112.3, and 19-112.4. However, nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize a discharge that exceeds a discharge prohibition or limitation under this article or other applicable laws or regulations; nor to relieve a user for any expense, loss, damage, or liability that may be incurred as a result of the bypass, such as damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor to relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability that may be imposed by applicable laws or regulations as a result of the bypass. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-112.2. - Bypass prohibited. 
    Except as provided by section 19-112.1, the bypass of industrial wastes from any portion of a user's facility is prohibited, and shall be subject to enforcement action, unless all of the following apply: 
A.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage. 
B.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waste, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. (This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass that occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance.) 
C.  The user submitted the notices as required under section 19-112.3. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-112.3. - Required notices. 
A.  Anticipated bypass. If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it must submit prior notice of the bypass to the POTW. Such notice shall be submitted to the POTW as soon as the user becomes aware of the need for the bypass, and if possible, at least ten days before the date of the bypass. 
B.  Unanticipated bypass. A user shall submit oral notice of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards to the POTW within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW manager may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-112.4. - POTW approved bypass. 
    The POTW manager may approve an anticipated bypass after considering its adverse effects, if the manager determines that it meets the conditions set forth in sections 19-112.2.A, 19-112.2.B and 19-112.2.C. It shall be a violation of this article for a user to allow an anticipated bypass to occur without the prior approval of the manager. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 13. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Sec. 19-113.1. - Confidential information. 
    The following provisions shall apply regarding the treatment by the POTW of confidential information submitted to or obtained by the POTW in the administration of this article: 
A.  Information and data regarding a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests at the time of submission and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW manager, and in accordance with applicable State and Federal Laws and Regulations, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
B.  Information submitted by a user for which confidentiality is requested shall be clearly marked on each page as to the portion or portions considered by the user to be confidential and shall be accompanied by a written explanation of why the user considers the information to be confidential or why the release of the information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. 
C.  Information that may disclose trade secrets or trade secret processes, and for which the user has requested, and been granted, confidentiality as provided by this section, shall not be made available for inspection by the general public; however, that information shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related to matters regulated by this article and shall be made available for use by the state, any state agency, or the POTW in judicial review or enforcement proceedings that involve the user that furnished the information. The POTW shall notify the user ten days in advance if it intends to release confidential information to another governmental agency as authorized by this section. 
D.  Information furnished to the POTW on the volume or characteristics of wastewater or pollutants discharged or proposed to be discharged into the POTW shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction. 
E.  If a user has mass-based limits as allowed by certain categorical pretreatment standards on a production basis, the production data necessary to determine compliance must also be provided by the user to the POTW, and shall be available to the public. If application of the combined waste stream formula is necessary to apply categorical pretreatment standards to a user, the flow measurements and other data used in the calculation must be provided by the user to the POTW, and shall be available to the public. 
F.  Observations made by POTW and/or local unit inspectors shall be subject to the confidentiality provisions of this section as if they were in writing if the user specifies to the POTW and the local unit in writing for which particular observations made by the inspector the user seeks confidentiality. 
G.  All confidential information and/or data with respect to a particular user which is on file with the POTW shall be made available upon written request by that user or its authorized representative during regular business hours. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 14. - RECORDS RETENTION 

Sec. 19-114.1. - Maintenance of records. 
    All users shall retain and preserve records, including, without limitation, all books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and similar materials, related to matters regulated by this article as provided by the minimum requirements of this section or as provided by a permit or order issued pursuant to this article. 
A.  Discharge records. A nondomestic user shall retain, preserve, and make available to the POTW for inspection and copying, for the period specified in section 19-114.1.C, all records related to matters regulated by this article, including, without limitation, all documents, memoranda, correspondence and similar materials; copies of all required reports and notifications; all calibration and maintenance records and all original strip chart recordings for continuous monitoring instrumentation; copies of results of all sampling, monitoring, measurements and analyses; and records of all data used to complete the application for a permit. Any nondomestic user subject to the sampling, monitoring, analysis, or reporting requirements of this article shall maintain copies of all records and information pertaining to those requirements or resulting from any monitoring activities (whether or not such monitoring activities are required by this article). For all samples, the records shall include, at a minimum, the information required to be recorded by section 19-109.6 of this article. 
B.  Hazardous or solid waste. A nondomestic user shall retain and preserve all records regarding its generation, treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste or solid waste for the period specified in section 19-114.1.C, and shall make them available to the POTW for inspection and copying, subject to the provisions in this article regarding confidential information. (As used in this section, the terms "hazardous waste" and "solid waste" shall have the same definition as provided in the State Hazardous Waste Management Act, Part 111 of Act 451 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1994, MCL § 114.1B., as amended, and the rules promulgated under that Act.) 
C.  Retention period. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article (or of any permit or order issued pursuant to this article) shall retain the records specified in sections 19-114.1.A and 19-114.1.B for a period of at least three years from (a) the date the record was created or (b) the date the record was first used or relied upon by the user, whichever is later. The three-year retention period shall be extended during any administrative or judicial action, enforcement proceeding or litigation regarding matters regulated by this article (or regarding discharges of the POTW under its NPDES permit), until all such actions, proceedings, or activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. The three-year retention period may also be extended at any time at the request of the POTW, the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, or the U.S. EPA. The POTW shall retain all records, notices and other information regarding discharges to the POTW submitted to it by nondomestic users of the POTW for a period of not less than three years. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 15. - ADMINISTRATION OF THE POTW 

Sec. 19-115.1. - Operation and management of POTW. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by this article, the operation, maintenance, alteration, repair and management of the POTW shall be under the direct supervision and control of the county agency. Further, except as otherwise expressly provided by this article, the county agency has the exclusive right to establish, maintain and collect rates and charges for use of the POTW, and the county agency may employ the persons in the capacities as the county agency deems necessary and advisable to ensure the efficient establishment, operation, maintenance, and management of the POTW, to comply with the POTW's NPDES permit, and to discharge its financial obligations. 
    The county agency may designate a POTW manager for each of the separate districts of the POTW. The POTW manager shall be charged with the duty of investigating, preventing and abating violations and enforcing the provisions of this article. The county agency may establish any rules, regulations and procedures as determined necessary to assure the efficient management and operation of the POTW. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the POTW manager by the county agency may be delegated to other persons in the discretion of the county agency. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-115.2. - Powers of POTW manager. 
    As directed by the county agency, the POTW manager shall, either directly or through authorized representatives, take the following actions: 
A.  Supervise the implementation of this article. 
B.  Review plans submitted by users for pretreatment equipment. 
C.  Make inspections and tests of existing and newly installed, constructed, reconstructed, or altered sampling, metering, or pretreatment equipment to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. 
D.  Verify the completeness, accuracy and representativeness of self-monitoring data submitted and/or maintained by users. 
E.  Investigate complaints of violations of this article, make inspections and observations of discharges, and maintain a record of the investigations, complaints, inspections and observations. 
F.  Issue orders and notices of violation and take other actions as necessary to require compliance with this article. 
G.  Develop and implement a control authority enforcement response (CAER) plan as required by 40 CFR § 403.8(f)(5). The CAER plan shall provide procedures for the POTW to investigate and respond to instances of non-compliance by users. The CAER plan and any associated regulations developed by the POTW manager shall become effective upon approval by the county agency. 
H.  With the approval of the county agency and notice to the local unit, and in conjunction with the county agency's legal counsel (and, as required by law, the local unit's legal counsel), institute necessary civil or criminal judicial legal actions and proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction against all users violating this article to prosecute violations of this article, to compel the abatement or prevention of violations, to compel compliance with this article and any order, determination, permit or agreement issued or entered into under this article, and to pursue other necessary or advisable judicial relief or remedies with respect to violations of this article. 
I.  Commence a municipal civil infraction action against any user violating this article, and issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction violation notices for violations of this article. 
J.  Perform any other actions authorized by this article, or as necessary or advisable for the supervision, management and operation of the POTW and the enforcement of this article and other applicable laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 16. - USER POLLUTION CONTROLS 

Sec. 19-116.1. - Provision by users of necessary pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements within the time limitations specified by applicable law or regulation. All facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's sole expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be acceptable to the POTW before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures does not in any way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the POTW under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be approved by the POTW prior to the user's initiation of the changes. (Users shall notify the POTW regarding the installation of new pretreatment facilities as provided by section 19-108.7 of this article.) 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.2. - Proper operation and maintenance. 
    A user shall at all times properly operate and maintain at the user's sole expense all facilities and systems of treatment and control (and related appurtenances) that are installed or used by the user to comply with the requirements of this article. Proper operation and maintenance includes, without limitation, effective performance, adequate funding, adequate operator staffing, and adequate quality assurance/quality control (QA/QC) procedures for sampling and analysis. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.3. - Removed substances. 
    Solids, sludges, filter backwash, or other pollutants removed in the course of treatment or control of wastewaters shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 405 of the Clean Water Act and Subtitles C and D of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, and other applicable local, State, and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.4. - Duty to halt or reduce activity. 
    Upon reduction of efficiency of operation, or loss, or failure of all or part of a user's pretreatment equipment or facility, the user shall, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards and other applicable standards, requirements, and limits, control its production and all discharges until operation of the equipment or facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in situations, including, without limitation, where the primary source of power for the pretreatment equipment or facility is reduced, lost, or fails. It shall not be a defense for a user in an enforcement action that it would have been necessary to halt or reduce the permitted activity in order to maintain compliance with the conditions of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.5. - Duty to mitigate. 
    A user shall take all reasonable steps to minimize or correct any adverse impact to the POTW or the environment resulting from non-compliance with this article, including such accelerated or additional monitoring as necessary to determine the nature and impact of the non-complying discharge. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.6. - Duty to pretreat prior to discharge to POTW. 
    Except as otherwise expressly required by this article, by a user permit or order issued pursuant to this article, or other applicable law or regulation, the prohibitions and limitations provided by this article or a user permit shall apply at the point where wastewater and pollutants are discharged or caused to be discharged into the POTW and any required pretreatment shall, at a minimum, be completed before that point of discharge is reached. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.7. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
    The POTW may require users to take additional pretreatment measures, as determined necessary by the POTW, including, but not limited to, the following: 
A.  Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
B.  The POTW may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. 
C.  Users with the reasonable potential to discharge explosive or flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved explosion hazard meter, combustible gas detection meter, or similar device, as determined appropriate by the POTW. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-116.8. - Implementation of best management practices or best management practices plan. 
A.  The POTW manager may require any user to develop and implement Best Management Practices to control, contain, treat, prevent, or reduce the discharge of wastewater, pollutants or other substances from the user's premises to the POTW, as determined necessary by the manager. 
B.  In addition, the POTW manager may require a user to develop and submit a Best Management Practices Plan ("BMPP"), including an enforceable implementation schedule, for review and approval by the manager. The BMPP shall be submitted within 30 days after notification by the manager or as otherwise required by a user permit. The BMPP shall be directed at preventing the entrance of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the POTW. The BMPP shall be available for inspection at all times at the user's premises. At a minimum, a user's BMPP shall contain all of the following elements, as determined necessary by the POTW manager, at a level of detail and in units and terms as determined necessary by the manager to adequately evaluate the plan: 
1.  A statement of the purpose and objectives of the plan. 
2.  A description of the strategies, methods, policies and procedures to prevent, minimize or reduce the introduction of pollutants into the user's discharge and to minimize waste generation. 
3.  A description of the options available to the user to control accidental spillage, leaks and drainage. 
4.  A description of best available or practicable control technologies available for the user's specific circumstances. 
5.  A detailed facility layout and site diagram showing points of entry into the POTW. 
6.  A description of the waste handling, treatment and discharge disposal facilities, including flow diagrams and process schematics. 
7.  A description of operating and maintenance processes and procedures. 
8.  Inventory of raw materials and a list of waste sources, including a list of all chemicals used or stored at the facility. 
9.  A description of employee training programs, policies and procedures; continuing education programs; and participation. 
10.  A description of documentation, including record keeping and forms. 
11.  A description of monitoring activities. 
12.  Information log of facility personnel, organization chart, emergency phone numbers, contact persons and maintenance or service representatives. 
13.  Certification by a qualified professional that the plan is adequate to prevent spills, leaks, slug loads, or non-customary discharges of regulated substances, directly or indirectly, to the POTW. 
14.  Such other information, documents or diagrams as required by the POTW manager, including, but not limited to, any of the information required under section 19-107.4 of this article. 
C.  The BMPs or BMPP required of a user or approved for a user shall be incorporated in a user permit issued to the user. If the user already has a user permit, the existing permit may be modified to incorporate the BMP requirements. If the user does not currently have a user permit, a permit shall be issued for that purpose. 
D.  The POTW manager may require revisions to users BMPP if the manager determines that the plan contains elements that are inadequate, or as otherwise determined necessary by the manager to ensure compliance with applicable requirements of this article. Review of a BMPP by the manager shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to comply with local, State and Federal Laws and Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 17. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 19-117.1. - POTW inspection, surveillance and monitoring authority; right of entry. 
A.  In general. The POTW is authorized to carry out all inspection, surveillance, sampling and monitoring activities and procedures, as necessary to determine, independent of information supplied by users or any other persons, compliance or non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, with this article, and with other applicable laws and regulations. This authority includes, without limitation, the authority: 
(1)  To verify the completeness, accuracy and representativeness of self-monitoring data submitted by users; 
(2)  To determine compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of this article or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article; 
(3)  To support enforcement actions taken by the POTW against non-compliant users; 
(4)  To determine if users have corrected problems identified in previous inspections; 
(5)  To identify which (and to what degree) users influence the quality of the POTW's influent, effluent and sludge quality; 
(6)  To evaluate the impacts of the POTW's influent on its treatment processes and receiving stream; 
(7)  To evaluate the need for revised local limits; 
(8)  To maintain current data on each user; 
(9)  To assess the adequacy of each user's self-monitoring program and user permit; 
(10)  To provide a basis for establishing sampling and monitoring requirements for users; 
(11)  To evaluate the adequacy of each user's operation and maintenance activities on its pretreatment system; 
(12)  To assess the potential for spills and/or slug discharge control measures, and evaluate the effectiveness of spill and slug discharge control measures; 
(13)  To gather information for user permit development; 
(14)  To evaluate compliance with existing enforcement actions; 
(15)  To require any user to submit one or more representative samples of the wastewater discharged or that the user proposes to discharge into the POTW; 
(16)  To determine compliance with requirements regarding implementation of best management practices; accidental discharge controls and protections; spill prevention or containment measures; and pollution prevention, minimization or reduction measures. 
B.  Right of entry. The POTW manager and other authorized representatives of the POTW and/or the local unit bearing proper credentials and identification are authorized to enter a nondomestic user's premises (and any other user's premises, as determined necessary by the POTW manager) to conduct inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities as necessary to determine compliance with this article, and in that regard shall have, without limitation, the following minimum authority: 
(1)  To enter into any premises of any user in which a discharge source, treatment system or activity is located or in which records are required to be kept as provided by this article, for the purpose of inspecting, observing, measuring, sampling and testing the wastewater discharge, removing samples of wastewater for analysis, and inspecting and making copies of required records. This shall include the right to take photographs; 
(2)  To set up and maintain on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations, or to require the user to do so, at the user's sole expense; 
(3)  To randomly sample and analyze the effluent from users and conduct surveillance activities to identify occasional and continuing non-compliance with applicable standards and requirements. The POTW shall inspect and sample the effluent from each significant industrial user at least once a year; 
(4)  To inspect any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage area where pollutants, subject to regulation under this article, could originate, be stored, or be discharged to the POTW; 
(5)  To enter all private properties through which the POTW and/or the local unit or other governmental agency holds an easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the POTW or wastewater transmission facilities lying within the easement. 
    POTW representatives entering a user's premises for purposes authorized by this article shall comply with the user's plant safety requirements regarding such matters as entry into confined spaces, use of safety glasses, and hearing protection requirements, as requested by the user. Entry shall be commenced and completed as expeditiously as practicable, consistent with the purposes for which the entry was made. 
C.  Access without delay required. Users shall allow the POTW ready access at all times to all parts of the user's facility or premises where wastewater governed by this article is created, handled, conveyed, treated or discharged, or where any production, manufacturing, fabrication, or storage area where pollutants regulated under this article could originate, be stored, or be discharged to the POTW, or where wastewater records are kept, for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination, or in the performance of any of the POTW's duties. If a user has security measures in force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry into the premises by the POTW, the user shall make necessary arrangements in advance with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, authorized representatives of the POTW (or authorized State or Federal Personnel) will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Upon arrival at a user's premises, POTW representatives shall inform the user or its employees that inspections, sampling, compliance monitoring, metering or other POTW procedures are to be performed and that the user has the right to accompany the POTW employee/representative during the performance of his/her duties. 
D.  Refusal to allow entry. If a user refuses to permit access (or unreasonably delays access) to an authorized POTW representative or to permit the representative to obtain, take, and remove samples or make copies of documents or undertake other authorized inspection, surveillance and monitoring activities as provided by this article, the POTW manager may order the termination of the discharge of wastewater to the POTW; order the user to permit access within a time certain; issue the user a notice of violation of this section; or take other appropriate action as provided by this article and other applicable laws and regulations (including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a search warrant). Further, the refusal to permit access (or causing an unreasonable delay in access) as provided by this section shall constitute a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.2. - Notice of violation. 
A.  Any person found to be violating a provision of this article may be served with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction of the violation. The person shall, within the period of time stated in notice, permanently cease all violations. The notice of violation (NOV) shall be served and shall contain the information as provided by section 19-117.4 of this article. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified by the NOV, the following provisions shall apply: Within 30 days of the date of the NOV, the user shall submit to the POTW a written explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions. Submission of the required plan shall not in any way relieve the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the POTW and/or the local unit to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation, or otherwise require the POTW and/or the local unit to first issue a notice of violation before initiating a civil or criminal action against a person for violating this article. 
D.  Failure to comply with any requirement of a notice of violation shall constitute a separate violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.3. - Orders and supplemental enforcement tools. 
    The POTW manager may issue an order to any user as determined by the manager to be appropriate under the circumstances, as provided by this section. Multiple orders may be issued simultaneously or in combination as a single order with respect to a single user. 
A.  Service. An order shall be served upon a user and shall contain the information as provided by section 19-117.4 of this article. However, orders to immediately cease and desist discharge, or to terminate sewer services, or other emergency orders where delay might endanger human health, the environment or the POTW, may be oral and may be served by telephone (to be followed within five days by written confirmation of the order by the POTW manager). 
B.  Types of orders. The POTW manager may issue the following types of orders: 
(1)  Order to immediately cease and desist discharge. The POTW manager may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this article. The order shall have immediate effect if the actual or threatened discharge to the POTW presents, or may present, imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, or causes, or may cause, interference or pass through. The POTW manager shall implement whatever action is necessary to halt or prevent the discharge, including, but not limited to, emergency suspension of service. The user shall be assessed for any penalties, fines, charges, surcharges, expenses, or losses incurred due to the actual or threatened discharge of pollutants as provided by this article. 
(2)  Order to cease discharge within a time certain. The POTW manager may issue an order to cease and desist from discharging any wastewater, pollutant, or discharge not in compliance with this article by a certain time and date. The proposed time for remedial action shall be specified in the order. In addition to any other circumstances as determined appropriate by the POTW manager, an order may be issued under this section for the failure to pay applicable permit fees or to comply with any term of a user permit. 
(3)  Order to effect pretreatment. The POTW manager may issue an order to a user requiring the user to pretreat its discharge in accordance with this article. Any User subject to an order to pretreat shall prepare a plan to pretreat its discharge so that the discharge complies with the requirements of the order and this article. The plan shall be submitted to the POTW manager within a reasonable period as specified in the order. The plan shall be prepared in accordance with good engineering practice and shall state whether construction is necessary, as well as identify measures that can be completed without construction. The plan shall contain a schedule of compliance for completion of each of the various phases necessary to implement full pretreatment. The schedule of compliance must be approved by the POTW manager. The schedule of compliance shall consist of one or more remedial measures, including enforceable timetables for a sequence of actions or operations leading to compliance with an effluent standard, or other prohibition or standard. The following steps or phases shall be included in the schedule of compliance as determined necessary by the POTW manager: 
(a)  Retain a qualified engineer and/or consultant; 
(b)  Obtain any engineering or scientific investigation or surveys deemed necessary; 
(c)  Prepare and submit a preliminary plan to achieve pretreatment; 
(d)  Prepare plans and specifications, working drawings, or other engineering or architectural documents that may be necessary to effect pretreatment; 
(e)  Establish a time to let any contract necessary for any construction; 
(f)  Establish completion times for any construction necessary; 
(g)  Establish a time limit to complete full pretreatment pursuant to the final order; 
(h)  If a phase or unit of construction or implementation may be effected independently of another phase or unit, establish separate timetables for the phases or unit. 
(4)  Order to affirmatively respond. The POTW manager may issue an order requiring a user to perform any action required under this article, including, without limitation, requiring a user to submit samples; to install sampling, metering and monitoring equipment; to submit reports; to permit access for inspection, sampling, testing, monitoring and investigations; to reduce or eliminate a discharge or pollutants in a discharge; or to pay permit fees or other applicable charges. 
(5)  Order to terminate sewer services. The POTW manager may issue an order to terminate the sewer services of a user, including, but not limited to, physical blockage of the user's sewer connection, for reasons including, without limitation, the following: 
(a)  A discharge that violates any general or specific discharge prohibition, including any pretreatment standard or requirement, and that reasonably appears to present an imminent endangerment to human health, the environment or the POTW; 
(b)  Failure of a user to notify the POTW of any discharge as described in section 19-117.3.B.(5)(a) of which the user was aware or reasonably should have been aware; 
(c)  Failure of a user to sample, monitor, pretreat or report, or failure to install monitoring or pretreatment facilities, as required by an order of the POTW manager; 
(d)  A knowing, willful violation of any term, condition or requirement of an order or user permit, or any provision of this article; 
(e)  A negligent violation of any major term, condition or requirement of an order or user permit. For purposes of this section, a "major" term, condition or requirement is one the violation of which is reasonably likely to endanger human health, the environment or the POTW. 
(6)  Order to show cause. The POTW manager may issue an order requiring a user to appear and explain any non-compliance with the requirements of this article or any permit, order, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made under this article, and to show cause why more severe enforcement actions against the user should not go forward. A show cause hearing shall be held within ten days after the order to show cause is issued, as follows: 
(a)  The hearing shall be conducted and evidence shall be taken by the POTW board of appeals. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
(b)  Any testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and recorded. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall be made available at cost to any person upon payment of applicable charges for the transcript; 
(c)  After reviewing the evidence taken at the hearing, the POTW board of appeals shall decide whether further enforcement action is required and, if so, the nature and extent of that further action, including, without limitation, the issuance of any order or imposition of any fines, fees, surcharges or penalties, as authorized by this article. 
C.  Immediate response to order by user may be required. Any user issued an order as provided by this section to immediately suspend its discharge to the POTW shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge using whatever means are necessary to do so, or take any other action as required by the order. If the user fails to comply voluntarily with the order to immediately suspend its discharge, the POTW shall take any action determined necessary as authorized by this article, including, without limitation, immediate suspension of water service and/or severance of the sewer connection or commencement of judicial proceedings, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to public health, safety or the environment. The POTW may reinstate the wastewater treatment service and terminate any judicial proceedings, as applicable, upon satisfactory proof or other demonstration by the user that the non-complying discharge has been eliminated or will not reoccur. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the non-complying discharge and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence shall be submitted to the POTW manager within 15 days of the occurrence. 
D.  Non-compliance due to factors beyond user's control. If non-compliance with an order is unintentional and temporary and due to factors beyond the reasonable control of a user, and the user can demonstrate the conditions necessary for demonstration of an upset as provided by section 19-111.1.A, the POTW manager may modify the order or take other actions as determined appropriate. However, a user shall not be relieved of liability for non-compliance with an order to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed or inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
E.  Amendment, suspension and revocation of orders. An order shall be subject to amendment, suspension or revocation as determined appropriate by the POTW manager. Notice of the amendment, suspension or revocation shall be served upon the user in the same manner as notice was provided for the original order. An amendment, suspension or revocation of an order shall be subject to the same procedures for review and appeal as the original issuance of the order, as provided by this article. 
F.  Consent orders and agreements. The POTW manager may enter into a consent order or agreement with a user to resolve disputed claims and address identified and potential deficiencies in the user's compliance status. The order or agreement shall be in the form of a written agreement with the user and may contain appropriate provisions, including, without limitation, compliance schedules and stipulated fines and remedial actions. 
G.  POTW authority to require financial assurances. The POTW may require any user to post a performance bond (or other form of surety acceptable to the POTW manager) sufficient to cover expenses (direct and/or indirect) that might reasonably be incurred by the POTW as a result of the user's discharges to the POTW (including, but not limited to, the costs to restore or repair any damage to the POTW) or sufficient to achieve consistent compliance with applicable laws and regulations, as determined necessary by the POTW manager. Further, any user that has in the prior two years been responsible for causing interference or pass through at the POTW may be required to obtain liability insurance sufficient to cover the reasonable costs of responding or restoring the POTW in the event of a second such incident. These financial assurance requirements may also be made conditions of a user permit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.4. - Service of notices of violations, orders and notices of assessments. 
    Except as otherwise expressly provided by this article, all orders, notices of violations and notices of assessments shall be served upon persons and shall contain the information as provided by this section. 
A.  Service. Service shall be by personal delivery or certified mail (return receipt requested), addressed to the user, alleged violator or other person, as applicable, at the person's last know address as shown by POTW's and/or the local unit's records. The person served shall sign and date the order or notice and shall return the signed original copy to the POTW; provided, that the failure to do so shall not affect the person's obligation to comply with the order or notice. Further, a notice or order served by mail may not actually be received by the user, but this shall not nullify any enforcement action subsequently taken by the POTW against the user under authority of this article. 
B.  Contents. All orders and notices shall contain at least the following information, to the extent known by the POTW and as determined by the POTW to be applicable to the situation: 
(1)  The name and address of the violator; 
(2)  The location and time that the violation occurred or was observed, and the duration of the violation; 
(3)  The nature of the violation, including the provisions of this article or of any permit, order, decision, determination or agreement violated; 
(4)  The basis for determining that a violation has occurred (personal observation, pollutant analysis, etc.); 
(5)  The amount of the fine, penalty or charge assessed or due, if any; 
(6)  The manner in which, and time and date by which, any fine, penalty or charge must be paid, including any penalty or charge for late payment; 
(7)  The remedial action ordered, the time within which required actions must be taken, and any consequences for failure to do so; 
(8)  The right to appeal the issuance of the order or notice and a summary of the procedures for appeal, or other applicable administrative procedures; 
(9)  The date and time the order or notice was issued. 
C.  Request for additional information. A person served may request additional information from the POTW manager regarding the contents or requirements of any order or notice. However, a request for additional information shall not extend the time for compliance with an order or notice. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.5. - Publication of users in significant non-compliance. 
    The POTW shall publish once per year in the largest newspaper circulated in the county, a list of nondomestic users that, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significant non-compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. For the purposes of this section, a user shall be considered to be in significant non-compliance if its violations meet one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  Chronic violation of discharge limits, defined as results of analyses in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as results of analyses in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit times the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH); 
C.  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (instantaneous maximum concentration, daily maximum, or longer-term average) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of department personnel or the general public); 
D.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent the discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
F.  Failure to provide any required reports within 30 days after the due date; 
G.  Failure to accurately report non-compliance; or 
H.  Any other violation or group of violations that the POTW manager determines will adversely affect the POTW or the operation or implementation of the POTW's pretreatment program. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.6. - Municipal civil infractions. 
A.  Violation; municipal civil infraction. Except as provided by section 19-117.7, and notwithstanding any other provision of the Genesee County's or the local unit's laws, ordinances and regulations to the contrary, a person who violates any provision of this article (including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this article) is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of not less than $1,000.00 per day for each infraction and not more than $10,000.00 per day for each infraction, plus costs and other sanctions. 
B.  Repeat offenses; increased fines. Increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As used in this section, "repeat offense" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this article (i) committed by a person within any 90-day period and (ii) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  The fine for any offense that is a first repeat offense shall be not less than $2,500.00 per day, plus costs. 
(2)  The fine for any offense that is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be not less than $5,000.00 per day, plus costs. 
C.  Amount of fines. Subject to the minimum fine amounts specified in subsections 19-117.6.A and 19-117.6.B, the following factors shall be considered by the court in determining the amount of a municipal civil infraction fine following the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation for a violation of this article: the type, nature, severity, frequency, duration, preventability, potential and actual effect, and economic benefit to the violator (such as delayed or avoided costs or competitive advantage) of a violation; the violator's recalcitrance or efforts to comply; the economic impacts of the fine on the violator; and such other matters as justice may require. A violator shall bear the burden of demonstrating the presence and degree of any mitigating factors to be considered in determining the amount of a fine. However, mitigating factors shall not be considered unless it is determined that the violator has made all good faith efforts to correct and terminate all violations. 
D.  Authorized local official. Notwithstanding any other provision of Genesee County's and/or the local unit's laws, ordinances and regulations to the contrary, the following persons are designated as the authorized local officials to issue municipal civil infraction citations directing alleged violators to appear in district court for violations of this article (or, if applicable, to issue municipal civil infraction notices directing alleged violators to appear at a municipal ordinance violations bureau): the POTW manager or other person designated by the county agency, and any sworn law enforcement officer, including the county sheriff or the county sheriff's deputies; and any other persons so designated by the local unit. 
E.  Other requirements and procedures. Except as otherwise provided by this section, the requirements and procedures for commencing municipal civil infraction actions; issuance and service of municipal civil infraction citations; determination and collection of court-ordered fines, costs and expenses; appearances and payment of fines and costs; failure to answer, appear or pay fines; disposition of fines, costs and expenses paid; and other matters regarding municipal civil infractions shall be as set forth in Act No. 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.7. - Criminal penalties; imprisonment. 
    Any person who (1) at the time of a violation knew or should have known that a pollutant or substance was discharged contrary to any provision of this article, or contrary to any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this article; or (2) intentionally makes a false statement, representation, or certification in an application for, or form pertaining to a permit, or in a notice, report, or record required by this article, or in any other correspondence or communication, written or oral, with the POTW regarding matters regulated by this article; or (3) intentionally falsifies, tampers with, or renders inaccurate any sampling or monitoring device or record required to be maintained by this article; or (4) commits any other act that is punishable under state law by imprisonment for more than 90 days; shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $500.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for up to 90 days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.8. - Continuing violation. 
    Each act of violation, and each day or portion of a day that a violation of this article (or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article) exists or occurs, constitutes a separate violation subject to the fines, penalties and other sanctions and remedies as provided by this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.9. - Number of violations. 
    The number of violations resulting from a user's non-compliance with applicable discharge prohibitions or effluent limitations shall be determined as follows: 
A.  Applicable concentration limitations and mass (or loading) limitations shall be treated as separate limitations, and a user may be liable and penalized separately for exceeding any of those limitations for a single pollutant or sampling parameter. 
B.  Each violation of a daily maximum limit for a single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a separate violation for each day on which the violation occurs or continues. 
C.  Each violation of an instantaneous maximum limit for a single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a separate violation for each such occurrence, and there may be multiple violations for each day on which such a violation occurs or continues. 
D.  Each violation of a monthly average limit (or of some other average limit period) for a single pollutant or sampling parameter shall constitute a separate violation for each day of the month (or other stated period) during which the violation occurred, regardless of the number of days on which samples were actually taken. (For example, in a month with 31 days, a violation of the monthly average limit for that month constitutes 31 violations for each pollutant parameter for which the monthly average limit was exceeded during the month.) 
E.  If a user permit regulates more than one outfall, each outfall shall be considered separately in computing the number of violations as provided by this section. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.10. - Nuisance. 
    A violation of this article, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article, is deemed to be a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the county agency or the local unit. In addition to any other legal or equitable remedies available under the law, any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of state law, this article, the Genesee County Sewer Use Ordinance, or other ordinance of the local unit governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the county agency and/or the local unit for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance, as applicable. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.11. - Reimbursement. 
A.  Any person who discharges to the POTW, including, but not limited to, any person who causes or creates a discharge that violates any provision of this article, produces a deposit or obstruction, or otherwise damages, injures, or impairs the POTW or local unit, or causes or contributes to a violation of any Federal, State or local law governing the POTW or local unit, whether any such act is intentional or unintentional, shall be liable to and shall fully reimburse the POTW and/or local unit for all expenses, costs, losses or damages (direct or indirect) payable or incurred by the POTW and/or local unit as a result of any such discharge, deposit, obstruction, damage, injury, impairment, violation, exceedence, non-compliance, or act. The costs that must be reimbursed to the POTW and/or local unit shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following: 
(1)  All costs incurred by the POTW and/or local unit in responding to the violation or discharge, including, expenses for any cleaning, repair or replacement work, and the costs of sampling, monitoring, and treatment, as a result of the discharge, violation, or non-compliance. 
(2)  All costs to the POTW and/or local unit of monitoring, surveillance, and enforcement in connection with investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, or non-compliance. 
(3)  The full amount of any fines, assessments, penalties, and claims, including natural resource damages, levied against the POTW or local unit, or any POTW or local unit representative, by any governmental agency or third party as a result of a violation of the POTW's NPDES permit (or other applicable law or regulation) that is caused by or contributed to by any discharge, violation, or non-compliance. 
(4)  The full value of any POTW or local unit staff time (including any administrative and overhead costs and any required overtime), consultant and engineering fees, and actual attorney fees and defense costs (including the POTW or local unit's legal counsel and any special legal counsel), associated with responding to, investigating, verifying, and prosecuting any discharge, violation, or non-compliance or otherwise incurred by the POTW or local unit in administering and enforcing the requirements of this article. 
    Further, the POTW and/or local unit is authorized to correct any violation of this article or damage or impairment to the POTW or local unit caused by a discharge and to bill the person causing the violation or discharge for the amounts to be reimbursed. The costs reimbursable under this section shall be in addition to fees, amounts or other costs and expenses required to be paid by users under other sections of this article. 
B.  In determining the amounts to be reimbursed, the POTW or local unit may consider factors such as, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The volume of the discharge. 
(2)  The length of time the discharge occurred. 
(3)  The composition of the discharge. 
(4)  The nature, extent, and degree of success the POTW may achieve in minimizing or mitigating the effect of the discharge. 
(5)  The toxicity, degradability, treatability and dispersal characteristics of the discharges. 
(6)  The direct and indirect costs incurred by the POTW, or imposed upon the POTW to treat the discharges, including sludge handling and disposal costs. 
(7)  Fines, assessments, levies, charges, expenses and penalties imposed upon and/or incurred by the POTW and/or local unit, including the POTW or local unit's costs of defense of actions, or suits brought or threatened against the POTW or local unit by governmental agencies or third parties. 
(8)  Such other factors, including the amount of any attorney's fees, consultant and expert fees, expenses, costs, sampling and analytical fees, repairs, etc., as the POTW or local unit deems appropriate under the circumstances. 
C.  Costs to be reimbursed to the POTW or local unit as provided by this section may be assessed to the user as provided by section 19-117.4 of this article, or as otherwise determined appropriate by the POTW manager or local unit manager in conjunction with an enforcement action. 
D.  The failure by any person to pay any amounts required to be reimbursed to the POTW or local unit as provided by this section shall constitute an additional violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.12. - Judicial relief. 
    With the approval of the county agency and notice to the local unit, and, as necessary, in conjunction with the county agency's legal counsel and the local unit and the local unit's legal counsel, the POTW manager may institute legal proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek all appropriate relief for violations of this article or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article. The action may seek temporary or permanent injunctive relief, damages, penalties, costs, and any other relief, at law or equity, that a court may order. The POTW manager may also seek collection of surcharges, fines, penalties and any other amounts due to the POTW that a user has not paid. The local unit may also institute legal proceedings and seek all appropriate legal and equitable relief for violations of this article as provided by this section. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.13. - Cumulative remedies. 
    The imposition of a single penalty, fine, order, damage, or surcharge upon any person for a violation of this article, or of any permit, order, notice or agreement issued or entered into under this article, shall not preclude the imposition by the POTW, the local unit, or a court of competent jurisdiction of a combination of any or all of those sanctions and remedies or additional sanctions and remedies with respect to the same violation, consistent with applicable limitations on penalty amounts under State or Federal Laws or Regulations. A criminal citation and prosecution of a criminal action against a person shall not be dependent upon and need not be held in abeyance during any civil, judicial, or administrative proceeding, conference, or hearing regarding the person. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-117.14. - Severance of water supply. 
    If a user violates or continues to violate any provision of this article (including, without limitation, any notice, order, permit, decision or determination promulgated, issued or made by the POTW under this article), water service provided directly or indirectly to the user by the county and/or the local unit may be severed. If severed, the water service shall recommence only after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated the user's ability to comply with all applicable provisions of this article, and only at the user's sole expense. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 18. - ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW AND APPEALS 

Sec. 19-118.1. - Procedures available. 
    Any person aggrieved by a notice of violation (NOV), a cease and desist order C&D), an order to pre-treat (OTP), an order to affirmatively respond (OAR), or an order to terminate service (OTS), or other action taken by the POTW manager under this article may request review and reconsideration by the POTW manager or may appeal to the POTW board of appeals as provided by this division. If review and reconsideration or appeal is not properly and timely requested in connection with an action as provided by this division, the action shall be deemed final. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-118.2. - Review and reconsideration by the POTW manager. 
    A request for review and reconsideration by the POTW manager must be made in writing within seven days from the date of the POTW manager's action in question. The request must state the reasons for the review and shall include all supporting documents and dates. The POTW manager may affirm, reverse, or modify, in whole or in part, the action taken and must notify the aggrieved person of the decision on the request within 14 days of its submission. The POTW manager may request additional information and extend the time for his/her decision by an additional seven days following the submission of the additional information. the decision of the manager may be appealed to the POTW board of appeals as provided by section 19-118.3. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-118.3. - Appeal to POTW board of appeals. 
    A three-member "POTW board of appeals" shall consider appeals from final decisions of the POTW manager and recommend an appropriate disposition of the appeal to the county agency, including, in particular cases, whether any deviation from strict compliance will violate the purposes and intent of this article, or endanger public health, safety or welfare, or the environment, or have an adverse impact on the POTW or on the POTW's ability to comply with applicable laws and regulations. The POTW board of appeals shall consist of three members of the water and waste services advisory board appointed from time to time by the county agency and who are not advisory board members from the same community as the aggrieved person. The following provisions shall govern appeals of final decisions of the POTW manager made to the POTW board of appeals under this article: 
A.  An appeal from any final action of the POTW manager must be made to the POTW board of appeals within seven days from the date of the action appealed. The appeal may be taken by any person aggrieved by the action. The appellant shall file a notice of appeal with the county agency and shall be accompanied by payment of any appeal fee in the amount as may be established by the POTW. The notice of appeal shall specify the grounds for the appeal and shall include all documentation that will be submitted in support of the appeal. All documentation and evidence in support of the appeal shall be provided at the sole cost of the appellant. Failure to file a timely notice of appeal shall be deemed to be a waiver of the right to appeal. 
B.  Prior to a hearing before the POTW board of appeals regarding an appeal, the POTW manager shall transmit to the POTW board of appeals a written summary of all previous action taken in connection with the action being appealed. The POTW board of appeals may, at its discretion, request the POTW manager to provide further information regarding the action that is the subject of the appeal. 
C.  The POTW board of appeals shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal. Notice of the hearing shall be provided to require the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing. Any testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath and recorded. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall be made available at cost to any person upon payment of applicable charges for the transcript. The POTW board of appeals shall hear the appeal and make its recommendation to the county agency within a reasonable time. The POTW board of appeals shall make its recommendation by a majority vote. 
D.  The county agency may accept or reject, in whole or in part, the recommendation of the POTW board of appeals, or may make any order, requirement, decision or determination as, in its opinion, ought to be made in the case under consideration. 
E.  The final disposition of the appeal shall be in the form of a ruling by the county agency reversing, modifying, or affirming, in whole or in part, the action of the POTW manager. The decision of the county agency shall be final. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-118.4. - Payment of charges, penalties, fines, and other costs or fees pending outcome of appeal. 
    All service charges, penalties, fines, fees, surcharges, costs or expenses outstanding during any appeal process shall be due and payable to the POTW and the local unit, as applicable. Upon resolution of any appeal, the amounts due and payable shall be adjusted accordingly, provided that any refunds shall be retroactive to the previous four monthly billings only. The POTW may terminate wastewater treatment services if a corrective course of action is not taken or if service charges, penalties, fines, fees, surcharges, costs or expenses are not paid by a user. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-118.5. - Finality of action. 
    If an appeal is not demanded as provided by this division within the periods specified by this d, the POTW manager's action shall be deemed final. If an appeal is properly demanded, the action appealed shall be suspended until a final determination has been made by the county agency, except for orders to immediately cease and desist discharge; orders to terminate sewer services; other emergency orders or actions where a suspension or delay might endanger human health, the environment, or the POTW; and as otherwise expressly provided by this article (such as for permit appeals, section 19-117.14). 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-118.6. - Appeals from determination of POTW board of appeals. 
    Appeals from the determination of the county agency may be made to circuit court as provided by law. All findings of fact made by the county agency, if supported by the evidence, shall be deemed conclusive. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 19. - PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to maliciously or willfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment that is part of the POTW. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct, and shall be subject to other sanctions and remedies as provided by this article, including, but not limited to, reimbursement of the POTW as provided by section 19-117.11 of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 20. - MUNICIPAL LIABILITY 
Neither the POTW nor the local unit shall be responsible for interruptions of service due to natural calamities, equipment failures, or actions of the system users. It shall be the responsibility of the customer that all connected equipment remain in good working order so as not to cause disruption of service of any sewer or treatment plant equipment. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 21. - INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT PROGRAM FEES 

Sec. 19-121.1. - Purpose. 
    It is a purpose of this article to provide for the recovery from users of the POTW of all costs incurred by the POTW for the administration and implementation by the POTW of the industrial pretreatment program (IPP) established by this article. The IPP fees provided for by this division are separate from, and in addition to, amounts chargeable to users for sewage disposal services by the POTW and/or the local unit and costs required to be reimbursed to the POTW and/or the local unit under any other provisions of this article or other laws and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-121.2. - Rates, charges, and fees for nondomestic users. 
    Sewerage system rates, charges or fees payable by nondomestic users shall be established by the POTW and shall be subject to amendment or revision by the POTW from time to time. Such rates, charges or fees shall be sufficient to meet the costs of the operation, maintenance, improvement or replacement of the sewerage system and the treatment plant, and may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: 
A.  Fees to reimburse the POTW for the costs of development and operation of an industrial pretreatment program, and fees to reimburse the POTW for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, including expenses incurred for analysis of samples. 
B.  Fees for reviewing discharge reports, and for related enforcement procedures. 
C.  Fees for permit applications. 
D.  Fees for filing appeals. 
E.  Fees for removal by the POTW of pollutants subject to Federal or State Pretreatment Standards. 
F.  User fees based on volume of waste and concentration or quantity of specific pollutants in the discharge. 
G.  Other charges or fees for services or procedures performed by the POTW or local unit as are required by law. 
H.  Such other charges or fees as the POTW may deem necessary to perform fully the provisions of applicable Federal and State Laws, this article, rules and regulations issued or adopted pursuant to law or ordinance, and terms and conditions of service. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-121.3. - IPP fee amounts. 
    IPP fees shall be paid by users to the POTW in amounts determined necessary by the POTW from time to time to reimburse the POTW for all expenses incurred by the POTW in administering the IPP. To the extent practical, the fees shall be set in an amount to include at least the POTW's average total costs for that purpose. With regard to IPP activities undertaken by the POTW with regard to particular users, the fees shall be charged to the users on a time and materials basis, plus general administrative expenses, based on the nature and requirements of the IPP activities undertaken. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-121.4. - Surcharges. 
A.  Surcharges are intended to reimburse the POTW for all costs incurred by the POTW in handling or treating a discharge which contains pollutants in excess of specified surcharge concentrations, loadings or other applicable limits. 
B.  Any user exceeding applicable surcharge limitations or other applicable limits shall be subject to the imposition of one or more surcharges as provided by this section to reimburse the POTW for any costs or expenses, direct or indirect, the POTW may incur in handling or treating the discharge, or which may be imposed upon the POTW, where the exceedence of applicable limits causes or contributes to those costs or expenses. 
C.  The amount of a surcharge assessed shall be as specified in the surcharge rate schedule and associated surcharge provisions prepared by the POTW and approved from time-to-time by the POTW. 
D.  All violations of applicable discharge prohibitions and limitations and all instances of non-compliance with applicable discharge requirements shall constitute a violation of this article, subject to applicable fines, penalties and other enforcement actions provided by this article. In no event shall the imposition of a surcharge for a discharge which does not meet the applicable prohibitions, limitations or requirements be construed as authorizing the illegal discharge or otherwise excuse a violation of this article. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 22. - BILLING AND COLLECTION OF RATES, CHARGES, AND FEES PAYABLE TO THE POTW 

Sec. 19-122.1. - General. 
    Rates, charges and fees that are payable by any person to the POTW as provided for by this article shall be billed, collected, and enforced pursuant to the procedures as provided by this division and/or as otherwise established by the POTW. The local unit shall prescribe the rates and charges to be paid by the individual user located within the local unit. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-122.2. - User permit application fees; other IPP fees. 
    User permit application fees shall be due upon submission of permit applications. All other IPP fees shall be due within 30 days of the date of the activity or service for which the fee is required. For fees not paid at the time of service, the amount of the fee shall be added to the user's waste service charge or billed separately. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-122.3. - Collection action. 
    The POTW and/or the local unit may in any court having jurisdiction in the premises initiate an action for the collection of unpaid rates, charges, or fees, and to recover court costs and reasonable attorney fees. With respect to the collection of rates, charges, or fees, the POTW and the local unit shall have all powers granted to them by applicable State and Federal Laws, Rules and Regulations. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-122.4. - Service terms and conditions. 
    The terms and conditions of sewerage system use and/or service shall be as prescribed by the POTW; provided, however, that such terms and conditions shall not be less stringent than Federal or State Laws or Regulations issued pursuant thereto by governmental agencies having jurisdiction in the premises. The terms and conditions of sewerage system services shall include a provision for the discontinuance of service in the event of non-payment or delinquency in payment of sewer service rates or charges. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Sec. 19-122.5. - Lien. 
    The local unit and POTW shall have as security for the collection of rates, charges, and fees a lien upon the real property to which service is provided. Such lien shall become effective immediately upon the supplying of the sewerage system service, and shall be enforceable as provided by law. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
DIVISION 23. - COUNTY AGENCY REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION REGARDING DISCHARGES FROM LOCAL UNIT 

Sec. 19-123.1. - User inventory and other information. 
    The local unit shall provide information (or access thereto) as requested by the county agency regarding discharges from users located within the local unit, including by not limited to, the following: 
A.  An inventory of all users located within the local unit that are discharging to the POTW. The local unit shall revise the inventory at least annually. 
B.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the local unit. 
C.  Such other information as the county agency may deem necessary. 
( Ord. No. 408, § 2, 7-11-11 ) 
Chapter 20 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Power to provide for planting and general care and protection of trees and shrubbery, § 3.1(b)(3)(m). 
Cross reference- Protection of flowers, trees, shrubs, etc., in cemeteries, § 5-62. 
State Law reference- Care of trees and shrubs, MCL 247.241 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 20-1-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - GRASS, BRUSH AND WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 364, § 1, adopted March 11, 2002, amended Art. II, in its entirety, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. II pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
State Law reference- Control and eradication of noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 

Sec. 20-21. - Weed growth prohibited. 
    No person owning any premises shall permit or maintain on any such premises any growth of noxious weeds; nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the average; nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush on any lot less than one acre in size. On lots in excess of one acre in size, no person owning any premises shall permit or maintain within 50 feet from the edge of the street or property line, any growth of noxious weeds; nor any growth of grass or other rank vegetation to a greater height than six inches on the average; nor any accumulation of dead weeds, grass or brush. Noxious weeds shall include Canada thistle (Circium arvense), dodders (any species of Custcuta), mustards (charlock, black mustard and Indian mustard, species of Brassica or Sinapis), wild carrot, (Daucus carota), bindweed (Convolvulus arvensis), perennial sowthistle (Sonchus arvensis), hoary alyssum (Berteroa incana), ragweed (ambrosia elatior 1.) and poison ivy (rhus toxicodendron), poison sumac (toxicondendron vernix) or other weeds, plants, brush or grasses which the council may, from time to time, specifically designate as coming within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 20-22. - Duty of owner. 
    It shall be the duty of the owner of any premises within the city to cut and remove or destroy by lawful means all such noxious weeds and grass as often as may be necessary to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 20-23. - Cutting by city upon failure of owner to comply. 
    If any person shall fail to comply with the provisions of this ordinance by the specified time, the city manager shall, through the department of public works, cause all such grass and noxious weeds to be cut or destroyed upon lands of the person not complying with the provisions of this article. The director of the department shall keep an accurate account of all expense incurred with respect to each parcel of land entered upon in carrying out the provisions of this article and shall make a sworn statement of the account and present it to the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 20-24. - Collection of costs from owner. 
    A copy of the sworn statement, including an account of the costs incurred on each of the several descriptions or parcels of property, shall be transmitted to the city treasurer. The city treasurer shall add to all such accounts $300.00 to cover the costs of publication, overhead and other expense, and assess and collect the total amount in the same manner provided in the City Charter for the collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 20-25. - Notice of requirements. 
    The city clerk shall on or before March 31 of each year give notice of requirements and provisions of this article by publishing a notice once a week for two successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall be substantially as follows: 
The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any occupied or unoccupied lot, land or any part thereof in the city on which noxious weeds are found growing shall destroy the weeds before they reach a seed bearing stage and prevent their regrowth, or shall prevent them from becoming a detriment to public health. If the owner, agent, or occupant refuses to destroy the noxious weeds, the city manager shall enter upon the land and destroy the noxious weeds. Expenses incurred in the destruction shall be paid by the owner of the land, and the city shall have a lien against the land for the amount of the expense. The lien shall be enforced in the manner provided by law for the enforcement of construction liens. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Sec. 20-26. - Exemptions. 
    Exempted from the provisions of this article are flower gardens, plots of shrubbery, vegetable gardens and small grain plots. An exemption under the terms of this section cannot be claimed unless the land has been cultivated and cared for in a manner appropriated to such exempt categories. 
(Ord. No. 364, § 1, 3-11-02) 
Secs. 20-27-20-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEAVES 

Sec. 20-31. - Raking of leaves into city streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to rake, place, or deposit in any fashion, fallen leaves in or on any city street or other public place, except such place as may be specially designated therefor by the city. Any leaves falling or accumulating on any property in the city shall be disposed of only in that manner as shall be prescribed from time to time by the city. 
(Ord. No. 296, § 1, 7-26-93) 
Sec. 20-32. - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any section of this article shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  Prior to the first day of September 1994, any person violating any provision of this article shall be given a written warning advising them of the provisions of section 20-31 and the penalties provided for in this section. 
(2)  Prior to September 1, 1994, any person continuing to violate any provision of this article after having first been given a written warning as provided in subsection (1), above, shall be subject to a fine of up to $500.00. 
(3)  Any person violating any provision of this ordinance prior to September 1, 1994, after having been so convicted and penalized pursuant to subsection (2), above, shall be subject to a penalty not to exceed $500.00 or 90 days in jail or both. 
(4)  Any person violating any provision of this article from and after September 1, 1994, shall be penalized in a sum not to exceed $500.00 for the first offense and a fine not to exceed $500.00 or 90 days in jail, or both, for any second or subsequent offense. 
(Ord. No. 296, § 1, 7-26-93) 
Chapter 21 - STORM WATER CONTROL REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 415, § 1, adopted November 10, 2014, amended Ch. 21, Arts. I-IX, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

ARTICLE I. - STORM WATER 

Sec. 21-101. - Findings. 
    The City of Swartz Creek finds that: 
(a)  Water bodies, roadways, structures, and other property within, and downstream of the City of Swartz Creek are at times subjected to flooding; 
(b)  Flooding is a danger to the lives and property of the public and is also a danger to the natural resources of the City of Swartz Creek and the region; 
(c)  Land development alters the hydrologic response of watersheds, resulting in increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, increased flooding, increased stream channel erosion, and increased sediment transport and deposition; 
(d)  Storm water runoff produced by land development contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; 
(e)  Increases of storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution have occurred as a result of land development, and cause deterioration of the water resources of the City of Swartz Creek and downstream municipalities; 
(f)  Storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution, due to land development within the City of Swartz Creek, have resulted in a deterioration of the water resources of the City of Swartz Creek and downstream municipalities; 
(g)  Increased storm water runoff rates and volumes, and the sediments and pollutants associated with storm water runoff from future development projects within the City of Swartz Creek will, absent reasonable regulation and control, adversely affect the City of Swartz Creek's water bodies and water resources, and those of downstream municipalities; 
(h)  Storm water runoff, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution can be controlled and minimized by the regulation of storm water runoff from development; 
(i)  Adopting the standards, criteria and procedures contained in this chapter and implementing the same will address many of the deleterious effects of storm water runoff; 
(j)  Adopting these standards is necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-102. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish minimum storm water management requirements and controls to accomplish, among others, the following objectives: 
(a)  To reduce artificially induced flood damage; 
(b)  To minimize increased storm water runoff rates and volumes from identified new land development; 
(c)  To minimize the deterioration of existing watercourses, culverts and bridges, and other structures; 
(d)  To encourage water recharge into the ground where geologically favorable conditions exist; 
(e)  To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution; 
(f)  To maintain the integrity of stream channels for their biological functions, as well as for drainage and other purposes; 
(g)  To minimize the impact of development upon stream bank and streambed stability; 
(h)  To reduce erosion from development or construction projects; 
(i)  To preserve and protect water supply facilities and water resources by means of controlling increased flood discharges, stream erosion, and runoff pollution; 
(j)  To reduce storm water runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, and non-point source pollution, wherever practicable, from lands that were developed without storm water management controls meeting the purposes and standards of this chapter; and 
(k)  To reduce the adverse impact of changing land use on water bodies and, to that end, this chapter establishes minimum standards to protect water bodies from degradation resulting from changing land use where there are insufficient storm water management controls. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-103. - Applicability, exemptions and general provisions. 
    To prevent an increase in non-point source pollution; this chapter shall apply to any earth-disturbing activities greater than or equal to one acre (= one ac.) for new development or redevelopment projects or earth disturbing activities less than one acre on parcels with greater than or equal to 50 percent (= 50 percent) impervious surface which will alter storm water drainage characteristics of the development site. Typically these developments require approval of a plat, a site development plan, building permit, and other permits to be obtained. However, this chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  Development on one single-family lot, parcel, or condominium unit where the City of Swartz Creek determines that due to the size of the development site or other circumstances, the quantity, quality, and/or rate of storm water flow does not materially alter storm water flow from the property in terms of rate and/or volume; 
(b)  The installation or removal of individual mobile homes within a mobile home park. This exemption shall not be construed to apply to the construction, expansion, or modification of a mobile home park; 
(c)  Ongoing farm operations such as tilling or plowing. Earth disturbances that are not directly related to farming are not exempt from this chapter; 
(d)  Plats with preliminary plat approval and other developments with final land use approval prior to the effective date of this chapter, where such approvals remain in effect; 
(e)  Additions or modifications to any single-family or duplex structure disturbing less than 20,000 square feet of land; 
(f)  Landscaping or gardening involving less than 5,000 square feet of land; 
(g)  Construction of a dwelling on a legal lot within a development that itself previously received approval under this article, provided that less than 5,000 square feet of land is cleared or graded for such construction. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-104. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section unless the context in which they are used specifically indicates otherwise: 
(a)  Best Management Practices (BMPs). A practice, or combination of practices and design criteria that comply with the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment's Guidebook of BMPs for Michigan Watersheds, the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan, or equivalent practices and design criteria that accomplish the purposes of this chapter (including, but not limited to minimizing storm water runoff and preventing the discharge of pollutants into storm water) as determined by the city engineer, and, where appropriate, the standards of the Genesee County Drain Commissioner. 
(b)  Building opening. Any opening of a solid wall such as a window or door, through which floodwaters could penetrate. 
(c)  Construction site storm water runoff. Storm water runoff from a development site following an earth change. 
(d)  Detention. A system which is designed to capture storm water and release it over a given period of time through an outlet structure at a controlled rate. 
(e)  Developed or development. The installation or construction of impervious surfaces on a development site that require, pursuant to state law or local ordinance, the City's approval of a site plan, plat, site condominium, special land use, planned unit development, rezoning of land, land division approval, private road approval or other approvals required for the development of land or the erection of buildings or structures; provided, however, that for purposes of Article II only, developed or development shall not include the actual construction of, or an addition, extension or modification to, an individual single-family or a two-family detached dwelling or appurtenances to the same, if the city manager finds that such construction, addition, extension or modification will not result in adverse storm water runoff. In making his written finding, the city manager may consult with the zoning administrator, planning committee, the code enforcement official and/or the city engineer. 
(f)  Developer. Any person proposing or implementing the development of land. Developer can also be interpreted to include their designated design representative (e.g. architects and engineers). 
(g)  Development site. Any land that is being or has been developed, or that a developer proposes for development. 
(h)  Discharger. Any person or entity who directly or indirectly discharges storm water from any property. Discharger also means any employee, officer, director, partner, contractor, or other person who participates in, or is legally or factually responsible for, any act or omission which is or results in a violation of this chapter. 
(i)  Drain. Any drain as defined in the Drain Code of 1956, as amended, being MCL 280.1 et seq., other than an established county or intercounty drain. 
(j)  Drainage. The collection, conveyance, or discharge of ground water and/or surface water. 
(k)  Drainageway. The area within which surface water or ground water is carried from one part of a lot or parcel to another part of the lot or parcel or to adjacent land. 
(l)  Earth change. Any human activity which removes ground cover, changes the slope or contours of the land, or exposes the soil surface to the actions of wind and rain. Earth change includes, but is not limited to, any excavating, surface grading, filling, landscaping, or removal of vegetative roots. 
(m)  EPA. The United States Environmental Protection Agency. 
(n)  Erosion. The process by which the ground surface is worn away by action of wind, water, gravity or a combination thereof. 
(o)  Exempted discharges. Discharges other than storm water as specified in section 21-104 and section 21-402 this chapter. 
(p)  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas resulting from the overflow of water bodies or the unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source. 
(q)  Floodplain. Any land area subject to periodic flooding (= two square miles). 
(r)  Flood Protection Elevation (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one foot at any given location. 
(s)  Grading. Any stripping, excavating, filling, and stockpiling of soil or any combination thereof and the land in its excavated or filled condition. 
(t)  Hazardous or toxic material. OSHA defines hazardous and toxic substances as those chemicals which are capable of causing harm. In this definition, the term chemical includes dusts, mixtures, and common materials such as paints, fuels, and solvents. OSHA currently regulates exposure to approximately 400 substances and the OSHA Chemical Sampling Information file contains listings for approximately 1,500 substances. Some industrial libraries maintain files of material safety data sheets (MSDS) for more than 100,000 substances. 
(u)  Illicit connection. Any method or means for conveying an illicit discharge into water bodies or the city's storm water system. 
(v)  Illicit discharge. Any discharge to water bodies that does not consist entirely of storm water, discharges pursuant to the terms of an NPDES permit, or exempted discharges as defined in this chapter. 
(w)  Impervious surface. Surface that does not allow storm water runoff to slowly percolate into the ground. 
(x)  Improvements. Means those features and actions associated with a project that are considered necessary by the body or official granting zoning approval to protect natural resources or the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of a local unit of government and future users or inhabitants of the proposed project or project area, including roadways, lighting, utilities, sidewalks, screening, and drainage. Improvements do not include the entire project that is the subject of zoning approval. 
(y)  MS4. Municipal Separate Storm Water Sewer System. 
(z)  MDNRE. Michigan Department of Natural Resources and Environment. 
(aa)  Municipality. County, city, village, or township or their designated representative. 
(bb)  NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
(cc)  Person. An individual, firm, partnership, association, public or private corporation, public agency, instrumentality, or any other legal entity. 
(dd)  Planning board/commission. Means a county planning commission created under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, 2006 PA 110, MCL 125.3101 et seq. 
(ee)  Pollutant. A substance discharged which includes, but is not limited to the following: any dredged spoil, solid waste, vehicle fluids, yard wastes, animal wastes, agricultural waste products, sediment, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological wastes, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or any other contaminant or other substance defined as a pollutant under the Clean Water Act. 
(ff)  Property owner. Any person having legal or equitable title to property or any person having or exercising care, custody, or control over any property. 
(gg)  Retention. A system which is designed to capture storm water and contain it until it infiltrates the soil or evaporates. 
(hh)  Runoff. Means the water flow that occurs when soil is infiltrated to full capacity and excess water from rain, snowmelt, or other sources flows over the land. 
(ii)  Sensitive areas. Inland lakes, watercourses and wetlands (= five ac as specified by MDNRE unless a stricter local requirement is specified). 
(jj)  Site plan. Means a plat, a site development plan, construction drawings, a building permit, and any other permits that need to be obtained before development can occur. These documents and drawings, required by the zoning ordinance, are to insure that a proposed land use or activity is in compliance with local ordinances and state and federal statutes. 
(kk)  Soil erosion. The stripping of soil and weathered rock from land creating sediment for transportation by water, wind or ice, and enabling formation of new sedimentary deposits. 
(ll)  State of Michigan Water Quality Standards. All applicable state rules, regulations, and laws pertaining to water quality, including the provisions of Section 3106 of Part 31 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
(mm)  Storm drain. A system of open or enclosed conduits and appurtenant structures intended to convey or manage storm water runoff, ground water and drainage. 
(nn)  Storm water permit. A permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(oo)  Storm water plan. Written narratives, specifications, drawings, sketches, written standards, operating procedures, or any combination of these which contain information pursuant to this chapter. 
(pp)  Storm water runoff facility. The method, structure, area, system, or other equipment or measures which are designed to receive, control, store, or convey storm water as well as treat it for pollutants. 
(qq)  Stream. A river, stream or creek which may or may not be serving as a drain, or any other water body that has definite banks, a bed, and visible evidence of a continued flow or continued occurrence of water. 
(rr)  Surface waters of the state. Are defined consistent with the Part 4 Rules (Rules 323.1041 through 323.1117 of the Michigan Administrative Code) to mean all of the following, but not including drainage ways and ponds (detention and retention ponds or lagoons) used solely for wastewater conveyance, treatment, or control: 
 The Great Lakes and their connecting waters. 
 All inland lakes. 
 Rivers. 
 Streams. 
 Impoundments. 
 Open drains. 
 Other surface bodies of water within the confines of the state. 
(ss)  Waterbody. A river, lake, stream, creek or other watercourse or wetlands. 
(tt)  Watercourse. One that has not been altered artificially. 
(uu)  Wetlands (regulated). Land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support wetland vegetation or aquatic life. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-105-21-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - STORM WATER PERMITS 

Sec. 21-201. - Storm water standards. 
    Developments subject to this chapter shall require a storm water permit and a storm water plan, and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained to prevent flooding, minimize stream channel impacts, protect water quality, and achieve the purposes of this chapter, as stated above. The City of Swartz Creek has adopted the Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements to meet the objectives of managing the quantity and quality of storm water runoff from a site as its city engineering standards. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-202. - Storm water permit review procedures. 
    The City of Swartz Creek shall grant a storm water permit, which may impose terms and conditions in accordance with section 21-208, and which shall be granted only upon compliance with each of the following requirements: 
(1)  The developer will engage in the following sequence of events: 
(a)  Pre-development information gathering: For all applicable projects, developers will contact representatives from each of the following: the county road commission, health department, municipal officials (zoning, planner, engineer, DPW, building official), and drain commissioner's office (water and waste services and surface Water). The purpose will be to gather information on design standards, development guidelines, and to identify the type of information developers and their representatives must furnish to comply with this chapter. In some instances it may be expedient to hold one conference with all the involved parties. 
(b)  Development and review of conceptual site plan: Review of the conceptual site plan for approval at the county level by the appropriate personnel in water and waste services, soil erosion, surface water, the road commission and the health department. Comments are returned to the owner/client and designer. At this time the design engineer will submit a statement that this site has been reviewed and determined sufficient to accommodate soil erosion and soil conservation measures. 
(c)  Coordinated review and approval: Review of the storm water plan and the proposed BMPs will occur at the same time as the review of the site plan by representatives from the appropriate agencies. 
(d)  Municipal review and approval: Developers shall provide a storm water plan for post-construction management of storm water to the city for review and approval. Guidance will be provided to zoning administrators and local planning commission members on the ordinance and design standards and they will be provided with a checklist for reference during site plan review. At this stage all necessary permits should have been obtained from federal, state, and county agencies. Once all of the above documents have been obtained a building permit will be issued by the city. 
(2)  The developer has submitted a storm water plan complying with section 21-203. 
(3)  The storm water plans contain adequate storm water BMPs to address the requirements laid out in the Genesee County Storm Water Standards and Requirements (GCSWS&R). At a minimum the developer will have to satisfy one of the following conditions: 
(a)  A permanent on-site storm water system that includes on-site detention of storm water runoff (see Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements for requirements); and 
(b)  A direct connection for all storm water runoff that will be discharged from and through the development site (see GCSWS&R/BMP Requirement Manual for requirements); or 
(c)  The developer provides a permanent on-site storm water system with a restricted outlet designed to result in no net increase in storm water runoff volume or rate onto any adjacent property. (see GCSWS&R/BMP Requirement Manual for requirements) 
(4)  The developer has paid or deposited the storm water permit review fee pursuant to section 21-204. 
(5)  The developer has paid or posted the applicable financial guarantee pursuant to section 21-205. 
(6)  The developer provides all easements necessary to implement the approved storm water plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter including, but not limited to, section 21-702. All easements shall be acceptable to the city in form and substance and shall be recorded with the Genesee County Register of Deeds. 
(7)  The storm water plan is designed in conformity with the city's design and performance standards for drains and storm water management systems, as set forth in Article VIII. 
(8)  All storm water runoff facilities shall be designed in accordance with the then-current BMPs. 
(9)  The developer provides the required maintenance agreement for routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of all storm water runoff facilities and in compliance with the approved storm water plan and this chapter. The maintenance agreement shall be acceptable to the City of Swartz Creek in form and substance and at minimum contain the requirements outlined in Article VII. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-203. - Storm water plan. 
    The Storm Water Management Plan must be designed to meet the Genesee County Storm Water Standards as set out in the companion document to the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan. The county is authorized to establish minimum design standards for storm water discharge release rates and to require dischargers to implement on-site retention, detention or other methods necessary to control the quality, rate and volume of surface water runoff discharged into the storm water drainage system and surface waters of the state. The county water quality and quantity standards are to be achieved through the techniques and methodologies outlined in the Low Impact Development Manual for Michigan (Chapters 6, 7 and 9). The storm water plan shall identify and contain all of the following: 
(1)  The location of the development site and water bodies that will receive storm water runoff (National Wetland database). Information to consider and include where appropriate should be the drainage district ID, zoning, aerial imagery, soils and floodplain maps, traffic and utility information; 
(2)  The existing and proposed natural feature of the development site, including the vegetation, topography, and alignment and boundary of the natural drainage courses, with contours having a maximum interval of two-foot (using USGS datum). The information shall be superimposed on the pertinent Genesee County soil map; 
(3)  The development drainage area to each point of discharge from the development; 
(4)  Calculations for the existing and final peak discharge rates (based on design criteria); 
(5)  Calculations for any facility or structure size and configuration; 
(6)  A drawing showing all proposed storm water runoff facilities with existing and final grades, as well as storm water easements; 
(7)  The sizes and locations of upstream and downstream culverts serving the major drainage routes flowing into and out of the development site. Any significant off-site and on-site drainage outlet restrictions other than culverts should be noted on the drainage map; 
(8)  An implementation plan for construction and inspection of all storm water runoff facilities necessary to the overall storm water plan, including a schedule of the estimated dates of completing construction of the storm water runoff facilities shown on the plan and an identification of the proposed inspection procedures to ensure that the storm water runoff facilities are constructed in accordance with the approved storm water plan; 
(9)  Drawings, profiles, and specifications for the construction of the storm water runoff facilities (BMP) reasonably necessary to ensure that storm water runoff will be drained, stored, or otherwise controlled in accordance with this chapter; 
(10)  A maintenance agreement, in form and substance acceptable to the city, for ensuring maintenance of any privately-owned storm water runoff facilities. The maintenance agreement shall include the developer's written commitment to provide routine, emergency, and long-term maintenance of the facilities and, in the event that the facilities are not maintained in accordance with the approved storm water plan, the agreement shall authorize the city to maintain any on-site storm water runoff facility as reasonably necessary, at the developer's expense (see Article VII); 
(11)  The name of the engineering firm and the registered professional engineer that designed the storm water plan and that will inspect final construction of the storm water runoff facilities; 
(12)  All design information must be compatible for conversion to standard GIS shape files; 
(13)  Any other information necessary for the city to verify that the storm water plan complies with the city's design and performance standards for drains and storm water management systems. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-204. - Storm water permit review fees. 
(1)  All expenses and costs incurred by the city directly associated with processing, reviewing and approving or denying a storm water permit application shall be paid (or reimbursed) to the city from the funds in a separate escrow account established by the developer, as provided in subsection (b). The city may draw funds from a developer's escrow account to reimburse the city for out-of-pocket expenses incurred by the city relating to the application. Such reimbursable expenses include, but are not limited to, expenses related to the following: 
(a)  Services of the city attorney directly related to the application. 
(b)  Services of the city engineer directly related to the application including inspections fees. 
(c)  Services of other independent contractors working for the city which are directly related to the application. 
(d)  Any additional public hearings, required mailings and legal notice requirements necessitated by the application. 
(2)  At the time a developer applies for a storm water permit, the developer shall deposit with the city clerk, as an escrow deposit, an initial amount as determined by resolution of the city council for such matters and shall provide additional amounts as requested by the city in such increments as are specified in said resolution. Any excess funds remaining in the escrow account after the application has been fully processed, reviewed, and the final city denial or approval and acceptance of the development has occurred will be refunded to the developer with no interest to be paid on those funds. At no time prior to the city's final decision on an application shall the balance e in the escrow account fall below the required initial amount. If the funds in the account are reduced to less than the required initial amount, the developer shall deposit into the account the additional amount needed to restore the account to the required amount before the application review process will be continued. Additional amounts may be required to be placed in the escrow account by the developer, at the discretion of the city. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-205. - Financial guarantee. 
(1)  The city engineer shall not approve a storm water permit until the developer submits to the city, in a form and amount satisfactory to the city, a letter of credit or other financial guarantee for the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm water runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved storm water plan. Upon certification by a registered professional engineer that the storm water runoff facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved storm water plan including, but not limited to, the provisions contained in section 21-203(8), the city may release the letter of credit, or other financial guarantee subject to final city acceptance and approval. 
(2)  The letter of credit or other financial guarantee may be accessed when: 
(a)  Violation of this chapter has occurred as determined by the city; 
(b)  Three notifications to the developer detailing the infraction have been issued; 
(c)  No corrective action has being taken by the developer within 30 days of final notification. 
(3)  Except as provided in subsection (5), the amount of the financial guarantee shall be as determined by the city council in a resolution of fees for city services, unless the city determines that a greater amount is appropriate, in which case the basis for such determination shall be provided to the developer in writing. In determining whether an amount greater than the amount established by resolution of city council is appropriate, the city shall consider the size and type of the development, the size and type of the on-site storm water system, and the nature of the off-site storm water runoff facilities the development will utilize. 
(4)  The letter of credit or other financial guarantee will not be permitted to expire until any necessary maintenance agreements for storm water facilities established by the developer has been signed. 
(5)  A maintenance bond shall be provided to the appropriate agency. The maintenance bond shall be provided for a period of two years commencing from the date of the final approval of the storm water plan. 
(6)  The city manager may reduce or waive the amount of the financial guarantee for a development that will not increase the percentage of impervious surface of the development site by more than ten percent. 
(7)  This chapter shall not be construed or interpreted as relieving a developer of its obligation to pay all costs associated with on-site private storm water runoff facilities as well as those costs arising from the need to make other storm water improvements in order to reduce a development's impact on a drain consistent with adopted design standards. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-206. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until storm water runoff facilities have been completed in accordance with the approved storm water plan; provided, however, the city may issue a certificate of occupancy if an acceptable letter of credit or other financial guarantee has been submitted to the city, for the timely and satisfactory construction of all storm water runoff facilities and site grading in accordance with the approved storm water plan. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-207. - No change in approved facilities. 
(1)  Storm water runoff facilities, after construction and approval, shall be maintained in good condition, in accordance with the approved storm water plan, and shall not be subsequently altered, revised or replaced except in accordance with the approved storm water plan, or in accordance with approved amendments or revisions in the plan. 
(2)  The city has the right to take corrective action if alterations to approve storm water facilities occur and to seek compensation from the responsible party for all costs associated with the corrective action. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-208. - Terms and conditions of permits. 
    In granting a storm water permit, the city may impose such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. A developer shall comply with such terms and conditions. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-209-21-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STORM WATER SYSTEM, FLOODPLAIN AND OTHER STANDARDS, SOIL EROSION CONTROL 

Sec. 21-301. - Management of and responsibility for storm water system. 
    The city is not responsible for providing drainage facilities on private property for the management of storm water on said property. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to provide for, and maintain, private storm water runoff facilities serving the property and to prevent or correct the accumulation of debris that interferes with the drainage function of a water body. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-302. - Storm water system. 
    All storm water runoff facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-303. - Floodplain and sensitive areas standards. 
(1)  All new buildings and substantial improvements to existing buildings shall be protected from flood damage up to the Flood Protection Elevation (FPE) and shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local ordinances, and rules and regulations. Floodway alteration shall be permitted only upon review and approval by the city, in accordance with an approved storm water plan. 
(2)  A storm water plan providing for the filling or alteration of a floodway may include provisions for maintaining stability of the banks of streams or other water bodies, by means of the establishing of buffer zones and other means of providing protection of the slopes and banks of water bodies. 
(3)  Within any required buffer zone, no earth change shall take place except in accordance with the approved storm water plan. Such a plan may also include provisions for the replacement of floodplain storage volume, where such storage volume is lost or diminished as a result of approved development. 
(4)  Where appropriate, permanent setbacks based on site slopes and soils will be established in accordance with the specifications outlined in the Genesee County Requirement Manual. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-304. - Building openings. 
(1)  No building openings, including basement walkouts, shall be constructed below the following elevations: 
(a)  One foot above the 100-year floodplain; 
(b)  The building opening established at the time of plat or development approval and on file in the city engineering department; 
(c)  Three feet above the top of any downstream culvert; 
(d)  Four feet above the bottom of any permanent and defined drain; 
(e)  One foot above an adjacent detention basin design high water. 
(2)  A waiver from elevations stated in section 21-306(1a) may be granted by the city engineer following receipt of a certification from a registered professional engineer demonstrating that the proposed elevation does not pose a risk of flooding. 
(3)  Upon completion of construction of the structure's foundation and or slab on grade, a registered land surveyor shall certify any minimum building opening elevation specified by this chapter. This certificate shall attest that the building opening elevation complies with the standards of this chapter. The permittee for the building permit shall submit the certificate to the city building inspections official prior to the commencement of framing and/or structural steel placement. If the surveyor should find that the minimum building opening elevation is below the elevation specified in Section 79.276(a)(2) or (3), that opening must be raised using a method that meets with the approval of the city. After reconstruction, a registered land surveyor or engineer shall re-certify that the minimum building opening elevation complies with the standards of this chapter prior to the commencement of framing and or structural steel placement. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-305. - Sump pump discharge. 
(1)  When a sump pump is employed to discharge a buildings footing drains a check valve will be installed between the pump and the storm system. A gravity discharge to an enclosed system is not permitted unless it can be shown that the discharge point is above the overflow elevation for the storm water system. 
(2)  A storm water lateral shall be provided for each parcel at the time of storm sewer construction. Laterals shall have a check valve. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-306. - Public health, safety or welfare. 
Protection  of the public health, safety or welfare shall be a primary consideration in the design of all storm water runoff facilities. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-307-21-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PROHIBITIONS AND EXEMPTIONS 

Sec. 21-401. - Illicit discharges. 
(1)  No person shall discharge to a water body or storm collection system, directly or indirectly (i.e. via an illicit connection), any substance other than storm water or an exempted discharge. Any person discharging storm water shall effectively prevent pollutants from being discharged with the storm water, except in accordance with best management practices. 
(2)  The city is authorized to require dischargers to implement pollution prevention measures, utilizing BMPs, necessary to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants into the city's storm water drainage system or surface waters of the state. Discharges to storm drains and waters of the state other than storm water and the exempted discharges listed in section 21-402 is strictly prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-402. - Exempted discharges. 
    The following non-storm water discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter, provided that they are not identified as significant contributors to violations of State of Michigan Water Quality Standards: 
(a)  Water supply line flushing; 
(b)  Landscape irrigation; 
(c)  Diverted stream flows; 
(d)  Rising ground water; 
(e)  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration to storm drains; 
(f)  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
(g)  Discharges from potable water sources; 
(h)  Foundation drains; 
(i)  Air conditioning condensate; 
(j)  Individual residential car washing 
(k)  Dechlorinated swimming pool waters from single-, two-, or three-family residences; 
(l)  Residual street wash water; 
(m)  Discharges or flows from emergency firefighting activities; 
(n)  Discharges for which a specific federal or state permit has been issued. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-403. - Interference with natural or artificial drainageway. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, fill, dam, confine, pave, alter the course of, or otherwise interfere with any natural or constructed drain, or drainage way without first submitting a storm water plan to the local city and all appropriate agencies (City, State, Genesee County Drain Commissioner's office) and receiving approval of that plan. Any deviation from the approved plan is a violation of this chapter. This section shall not prohibit, however, necessary emergency action so as to prevent or mitigate drainage that would be injurious to the environment, the public health, safety, or welfare. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-404. - Storage of hazardous or toxic materials in drainageway. 
    Except as permitted by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to store or stockpile within a drainageway any hazardous or toxic materials unless adequate protection and/or containment has been provided so as to prevent any such materials from entering a waterway. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-405-21-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - INSPECTION, MONITORING, REPORTING, AND RECORDKEEPING 

Sec. 21-501. - Investigate, inspect, and monitor suspected illicit discharges. 
    To investigate potential illicit discharges or connections and to assure compliance with the standards set forth in this chapter, the city may investigate, inspect and/or obtain monitor any discharge. Upon request, the discharger shall allow the city's properly identified representative to enter upon the premises of the discharger at all hours necessary for the purposes of such inspection or sampling. The city shall provide the discharger reasonable advance notice of such inspection and/or sampling. The city or its properly identified representative may place on the discharger's property the equipment or devices used for such sampling, monitoring or inspection. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-502. - Storm water monitoring facilities. 
    The city may require, in writing, that a discharger of storm water runoff provide and operate equipment or devices for the monitoring of storm water runoff, so as to provide for inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of each discharge to a water body or a storm water runoff facility. The city may require a discharger to provide and operate such equipment and devices if it is necessary or appropriate for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges in order to determine whether adverse effects from or as a result of such discharges may occur. All such equipment and devices for the inspection, sampling and flow measurement of discharges shall be installed and maintained in accordance with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations. All monitoring results will be made available and reported to the city at an agreed upon time. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-503. - Accidental discharges. 
(1)  Any discharger who accidentally discharges into a MS4 or water of the state any substance other than storm water or an exempted discharge shall inform the city within 24 hours of knowledge of the incident. If such information is given orally, a written report concerning the discharge shall be filed with the city within five (5) days. The written report shall specify: 
(a)  The composition of the discharge and the cause thereof; 
(b)  The exact date, time, and estimated volume of the discharge; 
(c)  All measures taken to clean up the accidental discharge, and all measures proposed to be taken to reduce and prevent any recurrence; 
(d)  The name and telephone number of the person making the report, and the name of a person who may be contacted for additional information on the matter. 
(2)  A properly-reported accidental discharge shall be an affirmative defense to a civil infraction proceeding brought under this chapter against a discharger for such discharge. It shall not, however, be a defense to a legal action brought to obtain an injunction, to obtain recovery of costs or to obtain other relief as a result of or arising out of the discharge. A discharge shall be considered properly reported only if the discharger complies with all the requirements of section 21-503(a). 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-504. - Record keeping requirement. 
    Any person subject to this chapter shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any and all books, drawings, plans, prints, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and records, including records on magnetic or electronic media and any and all summaries of such records, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analysis of any discharge or storm water runoff from any property. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-505-21-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 21-601. - Sanctions for violation. 
(1)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a fine to cover costs, damages, expenses, and other sanctions as authorized under Chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 and other applicable laws, including, without limitation, equitable relief; provided, however, that the violation stated in section 21-601(2) shall be a misdemeanor. Each day such violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense and shall make the violator liable for the imposition of a fine for each day. The rights and remedies provided for in this section are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. An admission or determination of responsibility shall not exempt the offender from compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    For purposes of this section, "subsequent offense" means a violation of the provisions of this chapter committed by the same person within 12 months of a previous violation of the same provision of this chapter for which said person admitted responsibility or was adjudicated to be responsible. 
    The zoning administrator, code enforcement official, building inspector and police officers of the city are authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations to any person alleged to be violating any provision of this chapter. 
(2)  Any person who neglects or fails to comply with a stop work order issued under section 21-602 shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day or imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 93 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, and such person shall also pay such costs as may be imposed in the discretion of the court. 
(3)  Any person who aids or abets a person in a violation of this chapter shall be subject to the sanctions provided in this section. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-602. - Stop work order. 
    Where there is work in progress that causes or constitutes in whole or in part, a violation of any provision of this chapter, the city is authorized to issue a stop work order so as to prevent further or continuing violations or adverse effects. All persons to whom the stop work order is directed, or who are involved in any way with the work or matter described in the stop work order shall fully and promptly comply therewith. The city may also undertake or cause to be undertaken, any necessary or advisable protective measures so as to prevent violations of this chapter or to avoid or reduce the effects of non-compliance herewith. The cost of any such protective measures shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which the work is being done and the responsibility of any person carrying out or participating in the work, and such cost shall be a lien upon the property. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-603. - Failure to comply; completion. 
    In addition to any other remedies, should any owner fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city may, after the giving of reasonable notice and opportunity for compliance, have the necessary work done, and the owner shall be obligated to promptly reimburse the city for all costs of such work. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-604. - Emergency measures. 
    When emergency measures are necessary to moderate a nuisance, to protect public safety, health and welfare, and/or to prevent loss of life, injury or damage to property, the city is authorized to carry out or arrange for all such emergency measures. Property owners shall be responsible for the cost of such measures made necessary as a result of a violation of this chapter, and shall promptly reimburse the city for all of such costs. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-605. - Cost recovery for damage to storm drain system. 
    A discharger shall be liable for all costs incurred by the city as the result of causing a discharge that produces a deposit or obstruction, or causes damage to, or impairs a storm drain, or violates any of the provisions of this chapter. Costs include, but are not limited to, those penalties levied by the Environmental Protection Agency or MDNRE for violation of an National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, attorney fees, and other costs and expenses. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-606. - Collection of costs; lien. 
    Costs incurred by the city pursuant to sections 21-602, 21-603, 21-604 and 21-605 shall be a lien on the premises which shall be enforceable in accordance with Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended from time to time. Any such charges which are delinquent for six months or more may be certified annually to the city treasurer who shall enter the lien on the next tax roll against the premises and the costs shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided for in the collection of taxes assessed upon the roll and the enforcement of a lien for taxes. In addition to any other lawful enforcement methods, the city shall have all remedies authorized by Act No. 94 of the Public Acts of 1933, as amended, and any other remedies available under applicable law. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-607. - Appeals. 
    Any person as to whom any provision of this chapter has been applied may appeal in writing, not later than 30 days after the action or decision being appealed from, to the city council the action or decision whereby any such provision was so applied. Such appeal shall identify the matter being appealed, and the basis for the appeal. The city council shall consider the appeal and make a decision whereby it affirms, rejects or modifies the action being appealed. In considering any such appeal, the city council may consider the recommendations of the city engineer and the comments of other persons having knowledge of the matter. In considering any such appeal, the council may grant a variance from the terms of this chapter so as to provide relief, in whole or in part, from the action being appealed, but only upon finding that the following requirements are satisfied: 
(1)  The application of the ordinance provisions being appealed will present or cause practical difficulties for a development or development site; provided, however, that practical difficulties shall not include the need for the developer to incur additional reasonable expenses in order to comply with the ordinance; and 
(2)  The granting of the relief requested will not substantially prevent the goals and purposes sought to be accomplished by this chapter, nor result in less effective management of storm water runoff. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-608-21-700. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - STORM WATER EASEMENTS AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS 

Sec. 21-701. - Applicability of requirements. 
    The requirements of this article concerning storm water easements and maintenance agreements shall apply to all persons required to submit a storm water and/or storm water plan to the city for review and approval. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-702. - Storm water management easements. 
    The developer shall provide all storm water management easements necessary to implement the approved storm water plan and to otherwise comply with this chapter in form and substance required by the city and shall record such easements as directed by the city. The easements shall assure access for proper inspection and maintenance of storm water runoff facilities and shall provide adequate emergency overland flowways. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-703. - Maintenance agreements. 
A.  Purpose of maintenance agreement. The purpose of the maintenance agreement is to provide the means and assurance that maintenance of storm water BMPs shall be undertaken. 
B.  Maintenance agreement required. 
(1)  A maintenance agreement shall be submitted to the City of Swartz Creek, for review by the city manager and his/her designee and the city attorney, for all development, and shall be subject to approval in accordance with storm water plan. A formal maintenance plan shall be included in the maintenance agreement. 
(2)  Maintenance agreements shall be approved by the city council prior to final subdivision plat or condominium approval, as applicable, and prior to construction approval in other cases. 
(3)  A maintenance agreement is not required to be submitted to City of Swartz Creek for Chapter 18 Drains that will be maintained by the Genesee County Drain Commission. 
C.  Maintenance agreement provisions. 
(1)  The maintenance agreement shall include a plan for routine, emergency, and long- term maintenance of all storm water BMPs, with a detailed annual estimated budget for the initial three years, and a clear statement that only future maintenance activities in accordance with the maintenance agreement plan shall be permitted without the necessity of securing new permits. Written notice of the intent to proceed with maintenance shall be provided by the party responsible for maintenance to the City of Swartz Creek at least 14 days in advance of commencing work. 
(2)  The maintenance agreement shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the storm water BMPs and shall be recorded in the office of the Genesee County Register of Deeds prior to the effectiveness of the approval of the city council. 
(3)  If it has been found by the Swartz Creek City Council, following notice and an opportunity to be heard by the property owner, that there has been a material failure or refusal to undertake maintenance as required under this chapter and/or as required in the approved maintenance agreement as required hereunder, the City of Swartz Creek shall then be authorized, but not required, to hire an entity with qualifications and experience in the subject matter to undertake the monitoring and maintenance as so required, in which event the property owner shall be obligated to advance or reimburse payment (as determined by the City of Swartz Creek) for all costs and expenses associated with such monitoring and maintenance, together with a reasonable administrative fee. The maintenance agreement required under this chapter shall contain a provision spelling out this requirement and, if the applicant objects in any respect to such provision or the underlying rights and obligations, such objection shall be resolved prior to the commencement of construction of the proposed development on the property. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-704. - Establishment of county drains. 
    Prior to final approval, all storm water management facilities for platted subdivisions shall be established as county drains, as authorized in Section 433, Chapter 18 of the Michigan Drain Code (P.A. 40 of 1956, as amended) for long-term maintenance. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-705-21-800. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 21-801. - Reference to requirement manual. 
    The city or its designate shall use the policy, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the Genesee County Requirement Manual as the basis for decisions about storm water permits and about the design, implementation and performance of structural and non-structural storm water BMPs. 
    The state LID manual includes a list of storm water treatment practices, including the specific design criteria for each them. Storm water treatment practices that are designed and constructed in accordance with these design and sizing criteria should meet the minimum water quality and channel protection performance standards outlined in the Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements and the Federal Phase II Storm Water Rules. Calculations to demonstrate that BMP designs will perform to meet required water quality, channel protection and flood control standards are to be submitted to the appropriate reviewing agency. Failure to construct storm water treatment practices in accordance with these standards may subject the violator to a civil penalty as described in section 21-600 of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-802. - Relationship of Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements (Requirements Manual) to Other Laws and Regulations. 
    If the specifications or guidelines of the Genesee County Storm Water and Flood Control Design Standard Requirements are more restrictive or apply a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent application of the specifications or guidelines in the requirement manual. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-803. - Changes to standards and specifications. 
    Standards, specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the requirement manual in affect at the time of acceptance of a complete application shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application and in implementing this chapter with regard to the application. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-804. - Amendments to requirement manual. 
    The requirement manual may be updated and expanded from time to time, based on advancements in technology and engineering, improved knowledge of local conditions, or local monitoring or maintenance experience. Prior to amending or updating the requirement manual, proposed changes shall be generally publicized and made available for review, and an opportunity for comment by interested persons shall be provided. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-805. - Conflict of laws. 
    This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human or environmental health, safety, and welfare, shall control. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-806. - Private agreements. 
    This chapter is not intended to revoke or repeal any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall modify or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this chapter. In no case shall the county or city be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements, covenants, or agreements between private parties. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-807. - Violations continue. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter existing as of the effective date of this chapter shall continue to be a violation under this chapter and be subject to penalties and enforcement unless the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the provisions of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Secs. 21-808-21-900. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OTHER MATTERS 

Sec. 21-901. - Interpretation. 
    Words and phrases in this chapter shall be construed according to their common and accepted meanings, except that words and phrases defined in section 21-104 shall be construed according to the respective definitions given in that section. Technical words and technical phrases that are not defined in this chapter but which have acquired particular meanings in law or in technical usage shall be construed according to such meanings. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-902. - Catchline headings. 
    The catch line headings of the articles and sections of this chapter are intended for convenience only, and shall not be construed as affecting the meaning or interpretation of the text of the articles or sections to which they may refer. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-903. - Severability. 
    The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable, and if any part or provision of this chapter should be declared invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any other part or provision of the ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-904. - Other ordinances. 
    This chapter shall be in addition to other ordinances of the city and shall not be deemed to repeal or replace other ordinances or parts thereof except to the extent that such repeal is specifically provided for in this article. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
Sec. 21-905. - Repeal. 
    Ordinance No. 376, titled Maintenance of Drains, is hereby repealed, as of the effective date of this chapter. 
( Ord. No. 415, § 1, 11-10-14 ) 
APPENDIX A - ZONING ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 330, adopted Jan. 12, 1998, replaced former App. A of the Code in its entirety. The city's zoning ordinance as set forth in Ordinance No. 330 and amended from time to time is on file in the city clerk's office where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. Former App. A pertained to zoning regulations. For a detailed history of the provisions of former App. A, see the Code Comparative Table. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 395, adopted August 15, 2006, effective September 27, 2007, adopted provisions designated as a new Appendix A to read as herein set out. 

ARTICLE 1. - INTENT 

Section 1.00. - Short title. 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "City of Swartz Creek Zoning Ordinance" and may hereinafter be referred to as "this ordinance." 
Section 1.01. - Intent. 
    This ordinance is based on the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan adopted by the city in 2004, design standards, amendments to those plans and similar plans adopted by the planning commission addressing future development patterns and development goals. This ordinance is intended to implement the master plan through regulations on use of land, buildings and structures to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to accomplish the objectives listed below. 
A.  Establish zoning districts and uniform regulations applicable to each district governing the use of the land, and dimensions for building and site development with such minimum regulations as are deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Accommodate and promote land uses which are compatible with the city's character and conserve the property values and long-term stability of residential neighborhoods, commercial districts, industrial areas and special districts. 
C.  Encourage use of the land and natural resources in accordance with their character and capability, thus preserving the sensitive and important environmental features in the city, such as wetlands, lakes, prime farmland, Centennial Farms, topography, open space, mature vegetation and wildlife habitat. This ordinance acknowledges the importance of these features on the long-term economic climate of all uses in the city and the overall quality of life for city residents. 
D.  Limit or prohibit improper use of land. 
E.  Reduce hazards to life and property, particularly for development in the 100-year floodplain. 
F.  Promote safe conditions for motorists, pedestrians and bicyclists through maintenance of an acceptable level of service along streets and at driveways within the city. This includes assurance that property owners have reasonable, though not always direct, access to property. 
G.  Facilitate adequate and cost effective infrastructure systems, and protect the substantial public investment in those systems, including: transportation, sewage disposal, safe and adequate water supply, education and recreational facilities. 
H.  Establish controls over potential land use conflicts and uses which may need special regulation as special land uses to be compatible with surrounding development patterns and zoning. 
I.  Promote the gradual elimination of uses, buildings and structures which do not conform with the regulations and standards of this ordinance. 
J.  Provide for administration of this ordinance, including resolution of any conflicts with other ordinances, collection of fees, procedures for petitions, hearings and appeals; and to provide for any other matters authorized under the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
K.  Balance the city's right to compatible and quality development with the property owners' right to a reasonable rate of return on investment. 
Section 1.02. - Vested rights. 
A.  Site plans submitted prior to effective date. 
1.  Construction begun: Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building upon which actual construction was begun prior to the enactment of this ordinance, provided construction has lawfully begun, is being diligently carried on, and shall be completed within one year of the effective date of this ordinance. The zoning board of appeals may permit an extension of up to one year for completion. 
2.  Application submitted: An application shall meet the requirements of this ordinance effective on the date of submission. An application submitted before the effective date of this ordinance must be approved by the planning commission by the date that the ordinance takes effect or the requirements of this ordinance shall be followed. 
3.  Application approved: If an application has been approved within 12 months of the effective date of this ordinance, it shall remain valid if construction is begun within one year and completed within two years of the effective date of this ordinance. 
B.  For projects not subject to site plan approval, a building permit must be issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance; otherwise the requirements of this ordinance take effect. 
C.  If the conditions of this section are not met, the standards and provisions of this ordinance shall govern. 
D.  Nothing in this ordinance should be interpreted or construed to give rise to any permanent vested rights in the continuation of any particular use, district, zoning classification or any permissible activities therein; and, they are hereby declared to be subject to subsequent amendment, change or modification as may be necessary to the preservation or protection of public health, safety, and welfare. 
Section 1.03. - Conflicting regulations. 
A.  Where any provision of this ordinance imposes either greater or lesser restrictions, limitations, conditions, standards, or requirements upon: (1) the use of buildings, structures, or land; (2) the height of buildings or structures; (3) lot coverage; (4) lot areas; (5) yards or other open spaces; or (6) any other use or utilization of land than are imposed or required by such existing laws, ordinances, regulations, private restrictions, or restrictive covenants, the provision or standard which is more restrictive or limiting shall govern. 
B.  If there is a conflict between any provision of this ordinance and a provision of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006, as amended), the provision of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act shall take precedence over the conflicting provision in this ordinance. 
C.  Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, every building and structure erected; every use of any lot, building or structure established; every structural alteration or relocation of an existing building or structure and every enlargement of, or addition to, an existing use, building or structure occurring after the effective date of this ordinance shall be subject to all regulations of this ordinance which are applicable in the Zoning District in which the use, building, or structure is located. 
D.  No setback area or lot existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance shall be reduced in dimensions or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein in this ordinance. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established herein in this ordinance. 
E.  This ordinance shall not abrogate or annul any easement, bylaw, master deed, deed restriction, covenant, or private agreement, except that the regulations or provisions of this ordinance shall govern if it imposes a more restrictive or higher standard. 
F.  The regulations herein established shall be the minimum regulations for promoting and protecting the public health, safety, and general welfare. Any conflicting laws of a more restrictive nature shall supersede the appropriate provisions of this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 1, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 1.04. - Validity and severability clause. 
    This ordinance and the various components, articles, sections, subsections, sentences, and phrases thereof are hereby declared to be severable. If any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare any part of this ordinance to be unconstitutional or invalid, such ruling shall not affect any other provisions of this ordinance not specifically included in said ruling. Further, if any court of competent jurisdiction shall declare unconstitutional or invalid the application of any provision of this ordinance to a particular parcel, lot, use, building, or structure, such ruling shall not affect the application of said provision to any other parcel, lot, use, building, or structure not specifically included in said ruling. 
Section 1.05. - Scope and interpretation. 
    This ordinance shall not repeal, abrogate, annul, or in any way impair or interfere with existing provisions of other laws, ordinances or regulations, except those repealed herein by specific reference, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed or other private agreement, or with restrictive covenants running with the land to which the city is a party. 
Section 1.06. - Repeal of prior ordinance. 
    The Zoning Ordinance adopted by the City Council of the City of Swartz Creek on the 12th day of January, 1998, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict with this ordinance. The repeal of the above ordinance and their amendments does not affect or impair any act done, offense committed or right accruing, accrued or acquired or liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred prior to the time enforced, prosecuted or inflicted. 
Section 1.07. - Effective date. 
    Public hearing having been held hereon, the provisions of this ordinance are hereby effective, pursuant to the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). Made and passed by the City Council of the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan, on this 14th day of August, A.D., 2006. 
A.  Date of public hearings: 
a)  Planning commission: Tuesday, July 25, 2006. 
b)  City council: Monday, August 14, 2006. 
B.  Date of publications: 
a)  Planning commission: Sunday, July 7, 2006 Swartz Creek News. 
b)  City council: Sunday, July 30, 2006 Swartz Creek News. 
c)  General adoption publication: Sunday, August 27, 2006. 
C.  Date of adoption by city council: Monday, August 14, 2006. 
D.  Date ordinance shall take effect: Wednesday, September 27, 2006. 
ARTICLE 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Section 2.00. - Construction of language. 
    The following rules of construction apply to the text of this ordinance: 
A.  The particular shall control the general. 
B.  In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text shall control. 
C.  The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word "may" is permissive, with the decision made by the planning commission, city council, or zoning board of appeals, as indicated. 
D.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. 
E.  Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words used in the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
F.  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. The word "dwelling" includes "residence." The word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel". 
G.  The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
H.  The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a co-partnership, a limited liability company, an incorporated or unincorporated association, or any other entity recognizable as a "person" under the laws of Michigan. 
I.  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two or more items, conditions, provisions, or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or," "either..." "or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
1.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply. 
2.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination (i.e., "or" also means "and/or"). 
3.  "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination. 
J.  The terms "abutting" or "adjacent to" include property "across from", such as across a street, alley, or an easement. This term shall also apply to adjacent zoning districts in an adjacent community. 
K.  Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned to them. 
Section 2.01. - Definitions A-B. 
    Abandonment: The relinquishment of land or cessation of the use of the land by the owner or lessee without any intention of transferring rights to the land to another owner or of resuming use of the land or building (i.e. a discontinuance and an indication of an intent to abandon). 
    Accessory buildings or structures: A building or structure on the same lot with the main building or use, but the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or use. 
    Accessory use: A use which is clearly incidental to, customarily found in connection with, and (except in the case of accessory off-street parking spaces or loading) located on the same zoning lot as, the principal use to which it is related. An accessory use includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
A.  Accessory apartment in a one-family dwelling. 
B.  Swimming pools for the use of the occupants of a residence or their guests. 
C.  Domestic or agricultural storage in a barn, shed, tool room, or similar accessory building or other structure. 
D.  Storage of merchandise normally carried in stock in connection with a business or industrial use, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
E.  Storage of goods used in or produced by industrial uses or related activities, unless such storage is excluded in the applicable district regulations. 
F.  Accessory off-street parking spaces, open or enclosed, subject to the accessory off-street parking regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
G.  Uses clearly incidental to a main use such as, but not limited to, offices of an industrial or commercial complex located on the site of the commercial or industrial complex. 
H.  Accessory off-street loading, subject to the off-street loading regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
I.  Accessory signs, subject to the sign regulations for the district in which the zoning lot is located. 
J.  Boat houses used for the accessory storage of boats of any principal use on a zoning lot or parcel. 
K.  A use or structure shall only be considered an accessory use where it is built, located, or otherwise placed on a zoning lot with a principal use to which it is accessory thereto and which is permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
    Activity: Any use, operation, development, or action involving a change in, on or to uplands or bottomlands caused by any person, including, but not limited to, constructing, operating, or maintaining any use or development; erecting buildings or other structures; depositing or removing material; dredging; ditching; land balancing; draining or diverting water; pumping or discharge of surface water; grading; paving; vegetative clearing or excavation, mining or drilling operations. 
    Adult care facility: A facility for the care of adults, over 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Michigan Public Act 218 of 1979, and rules promulgated by the State Department of Consumer and Industry Services. Such organizations shall be defined as follows: 
A.  Adult foster care facility: A governmental or nongovernmental establishment subject to state licensing procedures as may be required having as its principal function the receiving of adults for foster care. It includes facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are aged, emotionally disturbed, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an on-going basis but who do not require continuous nursing care. An adult foster care facility does not include a nursing home, a home for the aged, an alcohol or substance abuse rehabilitation center, a hospital for the mentally ill, or similar facilities. 
Adult foster care large group home: Facility with the approved capacity to receive at least 13, but not more than 20 adults who shall be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
Adult foster care small group home: Facility with the approved capacity of not more than 12 adults who shall be provided supervision, personal care, and protection in addition to room and board, for 24 hours a day, five or more days a week, and for two or more consecutive weeks for compensation. 
Adult foster care family home: A private residence with the approved capacity to receive not more than six adults who shall be provided foster care for five or more days a week and for two or more consecutive weeks. The adult foster care family home licensee shall be a member of the household and an occupant of the residence. 
Adult foster care congregate facility: A foster care facility with the approved capacity to receive more than 20 adults to be provided with foster care. 
B.  Adult day care facility: An unlicensed facility which provides care for elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for a portion of a 24-hour day. 
    Adult regulated uses or sexually-oriented businesses: Any business which primarily features sexually stimulating material and/or performances, including the following uses: 
A.  Adult personal service establishment: Any establishment, club, or business by whatever name designated, which offers or advertises, or is equipped or arranged to provide as part of its services, massages, body rubs, body painting, alcohol rubs, physical stimulation, baths, or other similar treatment by any person. An adult personal service establishment may include, but is not limited to, establishments commonly known as massage parlors, health spas, sauna baths, Turkish bathhouses, and steam baths. The following uses shall not be included within the definition of an adult personal service establishment: 
1.  Establishments which routinely provide such services by a licensed physician, a licensed chiropractor, a licensed physical therapist, a licensed practical nurse practitioner, or any other similarly licensed medical professional. 
2.  Fitness center, as defined herein. 
3.  Electrolysis treatment by a licensed operator of electrolysis equipment. 
4.  Continuing instruction in martial or performing arts, or in organized athletic activities. 
5.  Hospitals, nursing homes, medical clinics, or medical offices. 
6.  Barber shops or beauty parlors and salons which offer massages to the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulders only. 
7.  Adult photography studios whose principal business does not include the taking of photographs of "specified anatomical areas" as defined herein. 
B.  Adult book store: An establishment having a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade devoted to the distribution, display, or storage of books, magazines, and other periodicals, photographs, drawings, and other print material which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein). 
C.  Adult cabaret: An establishment where live entertainment is provided, presented, permitted or performed, where a substantial portion of performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on or relationship to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation by or participation of patrons therein. Also, an establishment which features any of the following: topless dancers and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers, male and/or female impersonators or similar entertainers, topless and/or bottomless waiters, waitresses and/or employees. 
D.  Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing theater: An enclosed building wherein still or motion pictures, video tapes or similar material is presented or viewed where a substantial portion is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation by patrons therein. Such an establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age. 
E.  Adult model studio: Any place where models who display "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) are present to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons who pay some form of compensation or gratuity. This definition shall not apply to any accredited art school or similar educational institution. 
F.  Adult motion picture arcade or mini-motion picture theater: Any place where motion picture machines, projectors, or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images displayed depict, describe, or relate to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein). 
G.  Adult video store: An establishment having a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade devoted to the distribution, display, storage, or on-premises viewing of films, movies, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matters depicting, describing, or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
H.  Adult outdoor motion picture theater: A drive-in theater where a substantial portion of the material presented is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein) for observation by patrons of the theater. Such establishment is customarily not open to the public generally, but only to one or more classes of the public, excluding any minor by reason of age. 
I.  Sexual paraphernalia store: An establishment having a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade devoted to the distribution, display, or storage, of instruments, devices, or paraphernalia designed for use related to "specified anatomical areas" or as part of, in connection with, or related to "specified sexual activities" (as defined herein), or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such material. 
    Special definitions: With respect to adult regulated uses or sexually oriented businesses, the following terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
A.  Substantial portion: A use of activity accounting for more than 20 percent of any one or more of the following: stock-in-trade, sales revenue, display space, floor space, viewing time, movie display time, or entertainment time measured per month. 
B.  Specified anatomical areas: Portions of the human body defined as follows: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast below the point immediately above the top of the areola. 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
C.  Specified sexual activities: The explicit display of one or more of the following: 
1.  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal. 
2.  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast. 
3.  Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated including, but not limited to human masturbation, oral copulation, sexual intercourse, or sodomy. 
4.  Human excretory functions as part of, or as related to, any of the activities described above. 
5.  Physical violence, bondage, mutilation, or rape, actual or simulated, as part of or related to, any of the activities described above. 
    Alley: Any dedicated public way or private road affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
    Alterations: Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy, or in the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed." 
    Apartment: A suite of rooms or a room in a multiple-family building arranged and intended for a place of residence of a single-family or a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit. 
    Apartment, accessory: (i.e. "mother-in-law" apartment) A single apartment unit contained within a single-family home meeting the regulations of this ordinance. 
    Automobile service (gasoline) station: An establishment which includes buildings and premises for the primary purpose of retail sales of gasoline. An automobile gasoline service station may also include an area devoted to sales of automotive items and convenience goods (mini-mart) primarily sold to patrons purchasing gasoline. An establishment which provides vehicle maintenance or repair is not included within this definition. 
    Automobile service center, major repairs: A place where the following services may be carried out: General repair, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service, such as body, frame, or fender straightening and repair, overall painting and undercoating of automobiles. 
    Automobile service center, minor repairs: A place for the sale of minor accessories for motor vehicles and minor automobile repairs, but not including the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale of motor fuels directly to users of motor vehicles or major automobile repairs such as, but not limited to, vehicle body repair, painting, engine rebuilding, auto dismantling, upholstering, glass work, undercoating, steam cleaning, and other such activities. 
    Automobile wash: Any building or structure or portion thereof containing facilities for washing motor vehicles using production line methods with a conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device or other mechanical washing devices; and shall also include coin- and attendant-operated drive-through, automatic self-serve, track mounted units and similar high volume washing establishments, but shall not include hand washing operations. 
    Basement: That portion of a building which is partly or wholly below grade but so located that the vertical distance from the average grade to the floor is greater than the vertical distance from the average grade to the ceiling. A basement shall not be counted as a story. Should the vertical distance between the floor and midpoint, and ceiling and midpoint, be equal the area shall be counted as a basement. 
    Bed and breakfast inn: Any dwelling in which overnight accommodations are provided or offered for transient guests for compensation, including provision for a morning meal only for the overnight guest. A bed and breakfast is distinguished from a motel in that a bed and breakfast establishment shall have only one set of kitchen facilities and employ only those living in the house or up to one additional employee. 
    Berm: A mound of soil graded, shaped and improved with landscaping in such a fashion so as to be utilized for screening purposes or as a transition between uses or along major roadways. 
    Block: The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets, (crossing or terminating) or between the nearest such street and railroad right-of-way, unsubdivided acreage, lake, river, or live stream; or between any of the foregoing and any other barrier to the continuity of development, or corporate boundary lines of the municipality. 
    Boarding house: A dwelling where meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for compensation for three or more persons by pre-arrangement for definite periods. A boarding house shall be distinguished from a hotel. 
    Building: Any structure, either temporary of permanent having a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building, accessory: A building on the same lot with the main building or use, but the use of which is clearly incidental to that of the main building or use. 


Building Height
    Building height: The vertical distance measured from the established grade to the highest point of the roof surface for flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the average height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. Where a building is located on sloping terrain, the height may be measured from the average ground level of the grade at the building wall. 
    Building line: A line formed by the face of the building, and for the purpose of this ordinance, a minimum building line is the same as a front setback line. 
    Building official: The building official (or similar title) designated by the Swartz Creek City Council responsible for duties as established herein. 
Section 2.02. - Definitions C-D. 
    Canopy: Any overhead protective structure which is constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under. 
    Cemetery: Land used for the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries. 
    Child care facilities: A facility for the care of children under 18 years of age, as licensed and regulated by the state under Act No. 116 of the Public Acts of 1973 and the associated rules promulgated by the State Department of Social Services. Such care facilities are classified below: 
A.  Child day care center: A facility other than a private residence, receiving more than six preschool or school age children for group day care for periods of less than 24 hours a day, and where the parents or guardians are not immediately available to the child. It includes a facility which provides care for not less than two consecutive weeks, regardless of the number of hours of care per day. 
B.  Foster family home: A private home in which at least one but not more than four minor children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are given care and supervision for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
C.  Foster family group home: A private home in which more than four but less than seven children, who are not related to an adult member of the household by blood, marriage, or adoption, are provided care for 24 hours a day, for four or more days a week, for two or more consecutive weeks, unattended by a parent or legal guardian. 
D.  Family day care home: A private home in which one but less than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
E.  Group day care home: A private home in which more than six but not more than 12 children are given care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. It includes a home that gives care to an unrelated child for more than four weeks during a calendar year. 
    City council: The duly elected or appointed City Council of the City of Swartz Creek. 
    Club: An organization of persons for special purposes or for the promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics, or the like, but not operated for profit. 
    Cluster housing: A group of buildings and especially houses built close together to form relatively compact units on a sizable tract in order to preserve open spaces and environmentally sensitive areas larger than the individual yards for common recreation. 
    Commercial vehicle: Any vehicle bearing or required to bear commercial license plates and which falls into one or more of the categories listed below: 
A.  Truck tractor. 
B.  Semi-trailer, which shall include flat beds, stake beds, roll-off containers, tanker bodies, dump bodies, and full or partial box-type enclosures. 
C.  Vehicles of a type that are commonly used for the delivery of ice cream, milk, bread, fruit, or similar vending supply or delivery trucks. This category shall include vehicles of a similar nature which are also of a type commonly used by electrical, plumbing, heating and cooling, and other construction oriented contractors. 
D.  Commercial hauling, vehicle repair service, snow plowing, or tow trucks. 
E.  Any other vehicle with a commercial license plate having a gross vehicle weight in excess of 10,000 pounds or a total length in excess of 22 feet. 
    Commercial use: "Commercial use" relates to the use of property in connection with the purchase, sale, barter, display or exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or personal services and the maintenance or operation thereof of offices, or recreational or amusement enterprises. 
    Condominium: A condominium is a system of separate ownership of individual units and/or multi-unit projects according to Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. In addition to the interest acquired in a particular unit, each unit owner is also a tenant in common in the underlying fee and in the spaces and building parts used in common by all the unit owners. 
    Condominium Act: Michigan Act 59 of 1978, as amended. 
    Condominium, contractible: A condominium project from which any portion of the submitted land or building may be withdrawn in pursuant to express provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with the Swartz Creek Code of Ordinances and the Condominium Act. 
    Condominium, conversion: A condominium project containing condominium units some or all of which were occupied before the establishment of the condominium project. 
    Condominium-Convertible area: A unit or a portion of the common elements of the condominium project referred to in the condominium documents within which additional condominium units or general or limited common elements may be created pursuant to provisions in the condominium documents and in accordance with these zoning regulations and the Condominium Act. 
    Condominium, expandable: A condominium project to which additional land may be added pursuant to express provision in the condominium documents and in accordance with these zoning regulations and the Condominium Act. 
    Condominium-General common element: The common elements other than the limited common elements intended for the common use of all co-owners. 
    Condominium-Limited common element: A portion of the common elements reserved in the master deed for the exclusive use of less than all of the co-owners. 
    Condominium master deed: The condominium document recording the condominium project as approved by the city including attached exhibits and incorporated by reference the approved bylaws for the project and the approved condominium subdivision plan for the project. 
    Condominium-Site condominium project: A condominium project designed to function in a similar manner, or as an alternative to a platted subdivision. A residential site condominium project shall be considered as equivalent to a platted subdivision for purposes of regulation in these zoning regulations. 
    Condominium subdivision plan: Drawings and information which show the size, location, area, and boundaries of each condominium unit, building locations, the nature, location, and approximate size of common elements, and other information required by Section 66 of Michigan Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. 
    Condominium unit site (i.e., site condominium lot): The area designating the perimeter within which the condominium unit must be built. After construction of the condominium unit, the balance of the condominium unit site shall become a limited common element. A site condominium lot is considered the same as a zoning lot for purposes of determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance pertaining to minimum lot size, minimum lot width, minimum lot coverage and maximum floor area ratio. 
    Condominium unit: The portion of the condominium project designed and intended for separate ownership as described in the master deed, regardless of whether it is intended for residential, office, industrial, business, recreational, use as a time-share unit, or any other type of use. 
    Convenience store: A small-scale retail establishment offering for sale a limited line of groceries and household items intended for the convenience of the neighborhood. Density: The number of dwelling units situated on or to be developed per net acre of land. The following calculation shall be utilized in determining maximum density: 
A.  The acreage exclusive of paragraphs (B) and (C) below shall be calculated at 100 percent toward the total site acreage. 
B.  The acreage comprised of land within the 100-year floodplain elevation, or wetlands protected by the Goemaere-Anderson Wetland Protection Act, PA 203 of 1979, shall be calculated at 25 percent toward the total site acreage. 
C.  All open bodies of water and public rights-of-way are excluded from the density calculation. 
    Development: The construction of a new building or other structures on a zoning lot, the relocation of an existing building on another zoning lot, or the use of open land for a new use. 
    Discontinuance: Vacating of a lot, building or structure; or a ceasing of the activities related to the non-conforming situation. 
    District: A portion of the incorporated area of the city within which certain regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Drive-through establishment: A business establishment whose method of operation involves the delivery of a product or service directly to customer inside a vehicle, typically through a window or other appurtenance to a building, where vehicles are queued within a stacking area or approach to the service window or facility. 
    Drive-through stacking lane: A paved surface designed to accommodate a motor vehicle waiting for entry to any drive-in facility or auto-oriented use, which is located in such a way that a parking space or access to a parking space is not obstructed. 
    Dwelling, two-family (duplex): A building designed exclusively for occupancy by two families living independently of each other. 
    Dwelling, single-family: A building designed exclusively for and occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, multiple-family: A residential building or a portion thereof, designed exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other, with separate housekeeping, cooking, and bathroom facilities for each. Examples of multiple-family dwellings include dwellings commonly known as apartments and townhouses, which are defined as follows: 
A.  Townhouse: An attached dwelling unit with common walls, its own front door which opens to the outdoors, and typically, with its own utility connections and front and rear yards. Townhouses are also commonly known as terrace dwellings or row houses. 
B.  Apartment: An apartment is an attached dwelling unit with common walls, contained in a building with other apartment units which are commonly reached off of a common stair landing or walkway. 
    Dwelling unit: A building, or portion thereof, designed exclusively and occupied exclusively by one family for residential purposes and having single cooking and bath facilities. In no case shall a travel trailer, motor home, automobile, tent or other portable building defined as a recreational vehicle be considered a dwelling. In the case of mixed occupancy, where a building is occupied in part as a dwelling unit, the part so occupied shall be deemed a dwelling unit for the purposes of these zoning regulations: 
A.  Efficiency apartment: A dwelling unit containing not over 500 square feet of floor area, and consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
B.  One-bedroom unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 600 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than two rooms in addition to kitchen, dining, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
C.  Two-bedroom unit: A dwelling unit containing a minimum floor area of at least 750 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to kitchen, dinning, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
D.  Three or more bedroom unit: A dwelling unit wherein for each room in addition to the three rooms permitted in a two-bedroom unit, there shall be provided an additional area of 150 square feet to the minimum floor area of 750 square feet. 
    Dwelling unit, attached: A dwelling unit attached to one or more dwelling units by common major structural elements. 
    Dwelling unit, detached: A dwelling unit which is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means. 
    Dwelling unit, manufactured: A building or portion of a building designed for long-term residential use and characterized by all of the following: 
A.  The structure is produced in a factory in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended. 
B.  The structure is designed to be transported to the site in a nearly complete form, where it is placed on a foundation and connected to utilities. 
C.  The structure is designed to be used as either an independent building or as a module to be combined with other elements to form a complete building on the site. 
    Dwelling unit, mobile home: A mobile home dwelling is a type of manufactured housing that is a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built upon a chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained in the structure. Recreational vehicles as described and regulated herein shall not be considered "mobile homes" for the purposes of this ordinance. 
Section 2.03. - Definitions E-F. 
    Easement: A right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for the limited use of private land for private, public or quasi-public purposes, such as for franchised utilities 
    Erected: Built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on the premises which are required for construction, excavation, fill, drainage, and the like, shall be considered a part of erection. 
    Essential public services: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, steam, fuel, or water transmission or distribution system, collection, communication, supply or disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, and similar equipment in connection herewith, but not including buildings, which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare. This definition includes sewer sub-stations and water towers but does not include wireless communication towers or antennas. 
    Essential public service/utility buildings: The erection, construction, alteration, or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments of buildings or structures which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such utilities or municipal departments for the general health, safety, or welfare including water supply and sewage plants, electrical transformer stations, and telephone exchange buildings. 
    Excavation: Any breaking of ground, except common household gardening and ground care. 
    Family: Either of the following: 
A.  A domestic family which is one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. 
B.  The functional equivalent of the domestic family which is persons living together in a dwelling unit whose relationship is of a permanent and distinct domestic character, and is the functional equivalent of a domestic family with a demonstrable and recognizable bond which constitutes the functional equivalent of the bonds which render the domestic family a cohesive unit. All persons of the functional equivalent of the domestic family must be operating as a single housekeeping unit. This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, or group, coterie, or organization, which is not a recognized religious order, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary in character. 
    Farm operation: A condition or activity which occurs on a farm in connection with the commercial production of farm products, and includes, but is not limited to, marketed produce at roadside stands or farm markets; noise; odors; dust; fumes; operation of machinery and irrigation pumps; ground and aerial seeding and spraying; the application of chemical fertilizers, conditioners, insecticides, pesticides, and herbicides, and the employment and use of labor. 
    Farm product: Those plants and animals useful to human beings and includes, but is not limited to, forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, dairy and dairy products, poultry and poultry products, livestock, including breeding and grazing, fruits, vegetables, flowers, seeds, grasses, trees, fish, apiaries, equine and other similar products, or any other product which incorporates the use of food, feed, fiber, or fur. 
    Fence: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an enclosure in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Fence, obscuring: A structure of definite height and location to serve as an obscuring screen in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Filling: Filling shall mean the depositing or dumping of any matter onto, or into the ground, except common household gardening and general farm care. 
    Firearm: An instrument which is capable of hurling a missile by means of exploding or burning powder. 
    Floodplain: That area which would be inundated by storm runoff or flood water equivalent to that which would occur with a rainfall or flood of 100-year recurrence frequency after total development of the watershed. 
    Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 


Floor Area, Gross and Usable
    Floor area, gross: The sum of all gross horizontal areas of all floors of a building or buildings, measured from the outside dimensions of the outside face of the outside wall. Unenclosed courtyards or patios shall not be considered as part of the gross floor area except where they are utilized for commercial purposes, such as the outdoor sale of merchandise. 
    Floor area, residential: For the purpose of computing the minimum allowable floor area in a residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The floor area measurement is exclusive of areas of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed and unenclosed porches. 
    Floor area, usable (for the purpose of computing parking): That area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or services, or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area which is used or intended to be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, hallways, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "usable floor area." Measurement of usable floor area shall be the sum of horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls. 
    Floor area ratio: The floor area ratio shall be calculated as the ratio of the building floor area as a percentage of the lot area. Principal building floor area shall not include uninhabited attic space, basement, garage, accessory buildings or enclosed/unenclosed porches. 
    Frontage: The linear dimension of a lot measured along the public road right-of-way line, private road access easement, or shared driveway. 
Section 2.04. - Definitions G-H. 
    Garbage: The word "garbage" shall be made to include every refuse, accumulation of all waste, animal, fish, fowl, fruit or vegetable matter incidental to the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruit and vegetables, including spoiled food, dead animals, animal manure and fowl manure. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building or portion of a main building designed or used solely for the storage of motor driven vehicles, boats, and similar vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory. 


Grade
    Grade: The ground elevation established for the purpose of regulating the number of stories and the height of buildings. The building grade shall be the level of the ground adjacent to the walls of the building if the finished grade is level. If the ground is not entirely level, the grade shall be determined by averaging the elevation of the ground for each face of the building. 
    Greenbelt: A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of shrubs and/or trees to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer strip in carrying out the requirements of this ordinance. 
    Gun club: Any club, organization, individual, group of individuals, or use (indoor or outdoor) whether operated for profit or not, which caters or allows the use of firearms. 
    Home occupation: An accessory use conducted within a permitted dwelling unit and customarily carried on by the inhabitants thereof, for gainful employment involving the manufacture, provision, or sale of goods and/or services. 
    Hospital: A building, structure, or institution in which sick or injured persons are given medical or surgical treatment and operating under license by the health department and the State of Michigan. 
    Hotel: A building or part of a building, with a common entrance or entrances, in which the dwelling units or rooming units are used primarily for transient occupancy. A hotel may include a restaurant or cocktail lounge, public banquet halls, ballrooms, or meeting rooms. One or more of the following services are offered: 
A.  Maid service; 
B.  Furnishing of linen; 
C.  Telephone, secretarial, or desk service; 
D.  Bellboy service. 
    Housing for the elderly: An institution other than a hospital or hotel, which provides room and board to non-transient persons primarily 60 years of age or older. Housing for the elderly may include: 
A.  Senior apartments: Multiple-family dwelling units occupied by persons 55 years of age or older. 
B.  Elderly housing complex: A building or group of buildings containing dwellings where the occupancy is restricted to persons 60 years of age or older or couples where either the husband or wife is 60 years of age or older. 
C.  Congregate or interim care housing: A semi-independent housing facility containing congregate kitchen, dining, and living areas, but with separate sleeping rooms. Such facilities typically provide special support services, such as transportation and limited medical care. 
D.  Convalescent home, nursing home, or rest home: A home for the care of the aged, infirm, or those suffering from bodily disorders, wherein two or more persons are housed or lodged and furnished with nursing care. Such facilities are licensed in accordance with Michigan Public Act 139 of 1956, as amended. 
Section 2.05. - Definitions I-J. 
    Industrial use: Any land or building occupied or used for manufacturing or processing purposes. 
    Junk yard: An open area where waste, used or secondhand material are bought and sold, exchanged or secondhand material are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to scrap iron and other metals, paper rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "junk yard" includes automobile wrecking yards and includes any area of more than 200 square feet for storage, keeping or abandonment of junk but does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
Section 2.06. - Definitions K-L. 
    Kennel, commercial: Any lot or premises on which three or more dogs, cats or other household pets, six months old or older, are either permanently or temporarily boarded for sale, breeding, boarding, or training purposes. Kennel shall also include any lot or premises where household pets are bred or sold. 
    Laboratory: A place devoted to experimental study such as testing and analyzing, but not devoted to the manufacturing of a product or products. 
    Loading space: An off-street space on the same lot with a building, or group of buildings for the temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials. 
    Lot: A parcel of land, including a site condominium lot, occupied or intended to be occupied by a main building or a group of such buildings and accessory buildings, or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto, together with such yards and open spaces as are required under the provisions of this ordinance. A lot may or may not be specifically designated as such on public records. 
    Lot, corner: A lot where the interior angle of two adjacent sides at the intersection of two streets is less than 135 degrees. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be considered a corner lot for the purposes of this ordinance if the arc is of less radius than 150 feet and the tangents to the curve, at the two points, where the lot lines meet the curve or the straight street line extended, form an interior angle of less than 135 degrees. 
    Lot, interior: Any lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot of record: A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by city or county officials, and which actually exists as so shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
    Lot, through: Any interior lot having frontage on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, all sides of said lots adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required. 
    Lot, zoning: A single tract of land, located within a single block, which, at the time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer as a tract to be used, developed, or built upon as a unit, under single ownership or control. 
    A zoning lot shall satisfy this ordinance with respect to area, size, dimensions, and frontage as required in the district in which the zoning lot is located. A zoning lot therefore, may not coincide with a lot of record as filed with the County Register of Deeds, but may include one or more lots of record. 
    Lot area: The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
    Lot coverage: The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings and other impervious areas such as paved areas. 
    Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured along the median between the side lot lines. 
    Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined herein: 


Lot Lines
A.  Front lot line: In the case of an interior lot, it is that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a corner lot, or through lot, it is that line separating said lot from any street. 
B.  Rear lot line: That lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten feet long lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line if the lot line furthest from one of the front lot lines. In the case of a through lot, there shall be three front lot lines and one side lot line and no rear lot line. 
C.  Side lot line: Any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. 
    Lot width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the two points where the building line, or setback line intersects the side lot lines. 
Section 2.07. - Definitions M-N. 
    Main building: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. 
    Manufactured home: A factory-built, single-family structure, which is manufactured or constructed under authority of 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403, Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards, and is to be used as a place for human habitation, but which is not constructed with a permanent hitch or other device allowing it to be moved other than for the purpose of moving to a permanent site and which does not have permanently attached to its body or frame any wheels or axles. A modular home is a manufactured home but a mobile home is not. For the purpose of this ordinance, a manufactured home shall be considered the same as any site-built, single-family detached dwelling. 
    Manufactured home community: A parcel or tract of land under the control of a person upon which three or more manufactured homes are located on a continual non-recreational basis and which is offered to the public for that purpose regardless of whether a charge is made therefore, together with any building, structure, enclosure, street, equipment, or facility used or intended for use incident to the occupancy of a manufactured home, subject to conditions set forth in the Mobile Home Commission Rules and Michigan Public Act 419 of 1976, as amended. 
    Manufactured home lot: An area within a manufactured home community which is designated for the exclusive use of a specific manufactured home. 
    Manufactured housing development, planned: A planned unit development which includes manufactured dwelling units in which a concept plan is included with a rezoning to achieve integration with the characteristics of the project area. 
    Master plan: The adopted comprehensive plan including graphic and written proposals indicating the general location for streets, parks, schools, public buildings, and all physical development of the municipality, and includes any unit or part of such plan, and any amendment to such plan or parts thereof. 
    Medical clinic: An establishment where human patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, or similar professions working in cooperation. 
    Mezzanine: An intermediate floor in any story occupying not to exceed one-third of the floor area of such story. 
    Migratory labor camp: Temporary facilities provided for the housing of workers who for seasonal purposes are employed in the planting, harvesting, or processing of crops, or for other essential, but temporary employment. 
    Modular home: A factory-built home which meets all of the following requirements: is designed only for erection or installation on a site-built permanent foundation; is not designed to be moved once so erected or installed; is designed and manufactured to comply with a nationally recognized model building code or an equivalent local code, and recognized as generally equivalent to site-built housing and is not intended to be used other than on a site built permanent foundation. 
    Motel: A series of attached, semi-detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom and closet space. Units shall provide for overnight lodging and are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Municipality: The City of Swartz Creek. 
    Natural features: Any one or more of the following: soils, topography, geology, vegetation, woodlands, hedgerow, historic/landmark tree, animal-life, endangered species habitat, floodplain, watercourse, lakes, rivers, streams, creeks, ponds, wetland, groundwater, watersheds, aesthetic resources, such as views, and microclimate, which is influenced by site topography and vegetation. 
    Non-conforming buildings or structures: A building or structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto and that do not conform to the provisions of the ordinance in the district in which it is located. 
    Non-conforming lot: A lot that was lawfully in existence at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto, which lot does not meet the minimum area or lot dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. 
    Non-conforming use: A use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this ordinance, or amendments thereto and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nursery: A space, building or structure, or combination thereof, for the storage of live trees, shrubs or plants offered for retail sale on the premises including products used for gardening or landscaping. The definition of nursery within the meaning of this ordinance does not include any space, building or structure used for the sale of fruits, vegetables or Christmas trees. 
    Nuisance factors: An offensive, annoying, unpleasant, or obnoxious thing or practice, a cause or source of annoyance, especially a continuing or repeating invasion of any physical characteristics of an activity or use across a property line which can be perceived by or affect a human being, or the generation of an excessive or concentrated movement of people or things such as: (a) noise, (b) dust, (c) smoke, (d) odor, (e) glare, (f) fumes, (g) flashes, (h) vibration, (i) shock waves, (j) heat, (k) electronic or atomic radiation, (l) objectionable effluent, (m) noise of congregation of people, particularly at night, (n) passenger traffic, (o) invasion of non-abutting street frontage by traffic. 
( Ord. No. 407, § 1, 5-24-11 ; Ord. No. 431 , § 1, 12-12-16) 
Section 2.08. - Definitions O-P. 
    Occupied: Includes the meaning of intent, design or arranged for occupancy. 
    Occupancy load: The number of individuals normally occupying a building or part thereof, or for which the existing facilities have been designed. 
    Off-street parking lot: A facility providing vehicular parking spaces along with adequate drives and aisles, for maneuvering, so as to provide access for entrance and exit for the parking of more than three vehicles. 
    Open front store: A business establishment so developed that service to the patron may be extended beyond the walls of the structure not requiring the patron to enter the structure. The term "open front store" shall not include automobile repair stations or automobile service stations. 
    Open space: For the purposes of this ordinance, open space shall apply to the improved dedicated or reserved area to be used for leisure or active recreation purposes. That part of a lot, which is open and unobstructed by any built features from its lowest level to the sky, and is accessible to all residents upon the lot. This area is intended to provide light and air, and is designed for environmentally, scenic, or recreational purposes. Open space may include, but is not limited to lawns, decorative plantings, walkways, active and passive recreation areas, playgrounds, fountains, swimming pools, living plant materials, wetlands and water courses. Open space shall not be deemed to include driveways, parking lots or other surfaces designed or intended for vehicular travel. Areas qualifying as open space within a PUD shall be more narrowly defined and shall exclude submerged lands and golf courses. 
    Outdoor dining: Outdoor dining is permitted in Swartz Creek only as accessory uses to the main use of a property as a restaurant. As such, the outdoor dining area must be adjacent to the main use, either on private property or on a public sidewalk. Outdoor cafes consist of tables and chairs, placed for the consumption of food by customers. Service may be self-service or by a waiter. 
    Parking space: An area of definite length and width. Said area shall be exclusive of drives, aisles or entrances giving access thereto, and shall be fully accessible for the storage or parking of permitted vehicles. 
    Pond, detention: A designed (although may be a natural area) facility which stores and detains runoff and releases water at a controlled rate. Size will depend on the design storm event (ten-, 25-, 100-year storm). These basins may be dry between runoff events or may be "wet bottom," where a base water level occurs below the elevation of the outlet structure. 
    Pond, retention: A storm water management facility, either natural or manmade, which does not have an outlet, which captures and holds runoff directed into it. 
    Principal use: The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exist. 
    Public service: Public service facilities within the context of this ordinance shall include such uses and services as voting booths, pumping stations, fire halls, police stations, temporary quarters for welfare agencies, public health activities and similar uses including essential services. 
    Public utility: A person, firm, or corporation, municipal department, board or commission duly authorized to furnish and furnishing under federal, state or municipal regulations to the public: gas, steam, electricity, sewage disposal, communication, telegraph, transportation, or water. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 1, 10-8-18) 
Section 2.09. - Definitions Q-R. 
    Recreational vehicle: "Recreational vehicles" shall include the following: 
A.  Travel trailer: A portable vehicle on a chassis, which is designed to be used as a temporary dwelling during travel, recreational, and vacation uses, and which may be identified as a "travel trailer" by the manufacturer. Travel trailers generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. 
B.  Pickup camper: A structure designed to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling during the process of travel, recreational, and vacation uses. 
C.  Motor home: A recreational vehicle intended for temporary human habitation, sleeping, and/or eating, mounted upon a chassis with wheels and capable of being moved from place to place under its own power. Motor homes generally contain sanitary, water, and electrical facilities. 
D.  Folding tent trailer: A folding structure mounted on wheels and designed for travel and vacation use. 
E.  Boats and boat trailers: "Boats" and "boat trailers" shall include boats, floats, rafts, canoes, plus the normal equipment to transport them on the highway. 
F.  Other recreational equipment: Other recreational equipment includes snowmobiles, all terrain or special terrain vehicles, utility trailers, plus normal equipment to transport them on the highway. 
    Restaurant: Any establishment whose principal business is the sale of food and beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume state, and whose method of operation is characteristic of a carry-out, drive-in, drive-through, fast food, standard restaurant, or bar/lounge, or combination thereof, as defined below: 
A.  Restaurant, carry out: A business establishment whose method of operation involves sale of food, beverages, and/or frozen desserts in disposable or edible containers or wrappers in a ready-to-consume state for consumption primarily off the premises. 
B.  Delicatessen: A restaurant typically offering sandwiches and other foods and beverages for both carry-out and consumption on the premises. A delicatessen also typically offers meats, cheese and prepared foods on a retail basis. 
C.  Restaurant, drive-in: A business establishment whose method of operation involves delivery of prepared food so as to allow its consumption in a motor vehicle or elsewhere on the premises, but outside of an enclosed building. A drive-in restaurant may also have interior seating. 
D.  Restaurant, drive-through: A business establishment whose method of operation involves the delivery of the prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle, typically through a drive-through window, for consumption off the premises. 
E.  Restaurant, fast-food: A business establishment whose method of operation involves minimum waiting for delivery of ready-to-consume food to the customer at a counter or cafeteria line for consumption at the counter where it is served, or at tables, booths, or stands inside the structure or out, or for consumption off the premises, but not in a motor vehicle at the site. 
F.  Restaurant, open front window: See "open front store or restaurant." 
G.  Restaurant, standard: A business establishment whose method of operation involves either the delivery of prepared food by waiters and waitresses to customers seated at tables within a completely enclosed building or the prepared food is acquired by customers at a cafeteria line and is subsequently consumed by the customers at tables within a completely enclosed building. 
H.  Bar/lounge/tavern: A type of restaurant which is operated primarily for the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, although the sale of prepared food or snacks may also be permitted. If a bar or lounge is part of a larger dining facility, it shall be defined as that part of the structure so designated or operated. The hours of operation may extend beyond 11:00 p.m.; thereby differentiating it from a standard restaurant. A brewpub or microbrewery that operates beyond 11:00 p.m. is considered a bar, tavern or lounge. 
    Restaurant, pick-up window: A standard restaurant with an additional method of operation involving the delivery of prepared food to the customer in a motor vehicle, through a pick-up window, for consumption off premises. Outdoor menu boards, ordering capabilities, speakers, and/or electronic or remote communication with restaurant staff from outside the building are not permitted. All orders shall be placed by phone or ordered on-line in advance of window pick-up. 
    Roadside stands or markets: A roadside stand or market is the temporary use of property or facilities for the selling of produce. 
    Room: For the purpose of determining lot area requirements and density in a Multiple-Family District, a living room, dining room and bedroom, equal to at least 80 square feet in area. A room shall not include the area in kitchen, sanitary facilities, utility provisions, corridors, hallways, and storage. Plans showing one-, two-, or three-bedroom units and including a "den," "library" or other extra room shall count such extra room as a bedroom for the purpose of computing density. 
    Row house: A row of houses having at least one sidewall in common with a neighboring dwelling, and usually uniform or nearly uniform plans, fenestration, and architectural treatment. 
    Rubbish: Rubbish means the miscellaneous waste materials resulting from housekeeping, mercantile enterprises, trades, manufacturing and offices, including other waste matter such as slag, stone, broken concrete, fly ash, ashes, tin cans, glass, etc. 
    Recyclable items: Recyclable items are items such as newspapers, magazines, books, and other paper products; glass, metals cans; and other products, that can be recycled, reprocessed, and treated to return such products to a condition in which they may again be used in new products. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 2, 10-8-18) 
Section 2.10. - Definitions S-T. 
    School, charter (public school academy): A charter school or public school academy is a public school and a school district, and is subject to the leadership and general supervision of the state board over all public education. A public school academy is authorized by the executive action of an authorizing body which may be the board of a school district, an intermediate school board, or the board of a community college or a state public university. A charter school shall not be organized by a church or other religious organization. 
    School, home: Home school enables a child to be educated at the child's home by his or her parent or legal guardian in an organized educational program in the subject areas of reading, spelling, mathematics, science history, civics, literature, writing and English grammar. The home school family may choose whether to operate as a nonpublic school. If a home school family chooses to operate as a nonpublic school, it must register with the Michigan Department of Education. 
    School, non-public: A non-public school is any school other than a public school giving instruction to children below the age of 16 years and not under the exclusive supervision and control of the officials having charge of the public schools of the state. Non-public schools include private, denominational, and parochial schools. 
    School, public: A public school is a public elementary or secondary educational entity or agency that has as its primary mission the teaching and learning of academic and vocational-technical skills and knowledge, and is operated by a school district, local act school district, special act school district, intermediate school district, public school academy corporation, public state university, or by the department or state board. 
    Setback: The distance between a front, side, or rear lot line and the nearest supporting member of a structure on the lot. Setbacks shall be measured from the public or private road right-of-way line or shared driveway easement. 
    Setback, required: The minimum distance established by this ordinance to conform to the required setback provisions of the district in which the lot is located. 
    Storm water management plan: A plan that includes calculations on the increased storm water run-off to be created by the development or redevelopment of a property and the facilities that will be used to contain the pre- and post-development or redevelopment run-off. 
    Storm water detention basin/storm water control structure: A structure designed and constructed for the detention and/or treatment of storm water. 


Illustration of Stories
    Story: That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next as above. A story thus defined shall not be counted as a story when more than 50 percent, by cubic content, is below the height level of the adjoining ground. 
    Story, half: An uppermost story lying under a sloping roof having an area of at least 200 square feet with a clear height of seven feet six inches. For the purpose of the ordinance the usable floor area is only that area having at least four feet clear height between floor and ceiling. 
    Street: A public dedicated right-of-way, other than alley, which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. Various types of streets are defined as follows: 
A.  Alley. Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property, and not intended for general traffic circulations. 
B.  Arterial street. A street which carries high volumes of traffic at relatively high speeds, and serves as an avenue for circulation of traffic onto, off of, or around the city. An arterial street may also be defined as a major thoroughfare, major arterial, minor arterial or county primary road. Since the primary function of the arterial is to provide mobility, access to adjacent land uses may be controlled to optimize capacity along the roadway. 
C.  Collector road. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic between minor and local roads and arterial roads but may also provide direct access to abutting properties. 
D.  Cul-de-sac. A street that terminates in a vehicular turnaround. 
E.  Local or minor street. A street whose principal function is to provide access to abutting properties and is designed to be used or is used to connect minor and local streets with collector or arterial streets. Local streets are designed for low volumes and speeds of 25 mph or less, with numerous curb cuts and on-street parking permitted. 
F.  Public street. Any street or portion of a street which has been dedicated to and accepted for maintenance by Swartz Creek, Genesee County, State of Michigan or the federal government. 
G.  Service drive. An access street which parallels the public right-of-way in front of or behind a building or buildings or may be aligned perpendicular to the street between buildings, which provides shared access between two or more lots or uses. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
    Structurally attached: A structural member or support integrally connecting two separate detached buildings or structures exists, which may be a breezeway, roof, or partition wall, other than an abutting fence or wall not exceeding six feet in height. A motor vehicle or a semi-trailer or other type of truck conveyance may not be so attached to a building or structure. 
    Swimming pool: For the purposes of this ordinance a swimming pool shall be any receptacle utilized for holding water which has a water depth greater than two feet. 
    Temporary use or building: A use or building to exist during an established and limited period of time. 
    Tents: Tents as used in this ordinance shall not include those used solely for children's recreational purposes. 
    Terrace home: One of a row of houses situated on or near the top of a slope. 
    Trailer coach (motor home): Any vehicle designed, used, or so constructed as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways and duly licensable as such, and constructed in such a manner as will permit occupancy thereof as a dwelling or sleeping place for one or more persons. 
    Trailer court (motor home park): Any plot of ground upon which two or more trailer coaches, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes are located. 
    Travel trailer: A vehicle designed as a travel unit for occupancy as a temporary or seasonal living unit and not exceeding 200 square feet in area. 
    Thoroughfares, major: A street identified as a "principal arterial" or "minor arterial" in the city's master plan. These streets are intended to serve as large volume traffic ways for both the immediate city area and the region beyond. 
    Thoroughfares, secondary: A street identified as a "collector" in the city's master plan. These streets are intended as traffic ways serving primarily the immediate city area and serving to connect with major thoroughfares. 
    Tourist home: Any dwelling used or designed in such a manner that certain rooms other than those used by the family, and occupied as a dwelling unit are related to the public for compensation and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor vehicle. 
    Townhouses: A residential structure, or group of structures, each of which contains three or more attached single-family dwelling units with individual rear yards and or front yards designed as an integral part of each single-family dwelling unit. 
Section 2.11. - Definitions U-W. 
    Use: The principal purpose for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied. 
    Use, accessory: A use subordinate to the main use of a lot and used for purposes clearly incidental to those of the main use. 
    Utility room: A utility room is a room used primarily for storage, for housing a heating unit, or for laundry purposes. 
    Variance, dimensional: Permission to depart from the literal requirements relating to setbacks, building height, lot width, and/or lot area as regulated by this ordinance. 
    Variance, use: Permission to establish a use of land that is otherwise not provided for in the zoning district as regulated by this ordinance. 
Section 2.12. - Definitions W-X. 
    Wading pool: For the purposes of the ordinance a wading pool shall be any receptacle utilized for holding water which has a water depth not exceeding two feet. 
    Walls, obscuring: An obscuring structure of definite height and location constructed of wood, masonry, concrete or similar material. 
    Waterway: Any natural or open artificial watercourse, diversion, lake, pond, stream, river, creek, ditch, channel, canal conduit, culvert, drain, gully, ravine or wash in which waters may flow in a definite direction or course, either continuously or intermittently, and which has a definite channel, bed and banks and shall include the floodplain. 
    Wetland: Any land characterized by the presence of water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support (and that under normal circumstances does support) wetland vegetation or aquatic life and is commonly referred to as a bog, swamp, or marsh. 
    Wireless communication facilities: All structures and accessory facilities relating to the use of the radio frequency spectrum for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio signals. This may include, but shall not be limited to, radio towers, television towers, telephone devices, personal communication transmission equipment and exchanges, microwave relay towers, telephone transmission equipment building and commercial mobile radio service facilities. This definition does not include "reception antenna" for an individual lot as otherwise defined and regulated in this ordinance. 
A.  Attached wireless communication facilities: Wireless communication facilities affixed to existing structures, including but not limited to existing buildings, towers, water tanks, or utility poles. 
B.  Wireless communication support structures: Structures erected or modified to support wireless communication antennas. Support structures within this definition include, but shall not be limited to, monopoles, lattice towers, light poles, wood poles and guyed towers, or other structures which appear to be something other than a mere support structure. 
C.  Co-location: Location by two or more wireless communication providers of wireless communication facilities on a common structure, tower, or building, to reduce the overall number of structures required to support wireless communication antennas in the city. 
Section 2.13. - Definitions Y-Z. 
    Yards: The open spaces on the same lot with a main building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, and as defined herein: 


Yards
A.  Front yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building. Unless otherwise stipulated in this ordinance, in the case of a corner lot, there shall be two front yards. 
B.  Rear yard: An open space extending the full width of the lot the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building. In the case of a corner lot, the rear yard is the yard opposite the shorter of the street frontages. 
C.  Side yard: An open space between a main building and the side lot line, extending from the front yard to the rear yard the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point on the side lot line to the nearest point of the main building. 
    Zoning Act: The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
    Zoning administrator: The zoning administrator (or similar title) designated by the Swartz Creek City Council responsible for duties as established herein. 
    Zoning board of appeals (ZBA): The Swartz Creek Board of Appeals, created pursuant to the provisions of The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
ARTICLE 3. - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 

Section 3.00. - Zoning map. 
A.  Established. The boundaries of zoning districts are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning Map, City of Swartz Creek Zoning Ordinance, with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein. 
B.  Adoption of map. All zoning districts are hereby described by the boundaries established by the Official Zoning Map of the City of Swartz Creek as adopted _______, 2006 by the City Council, published and effective _______, 2006, this map being a compilation of the geographic designation of all zoning districts, including changes or amendments formally approved by action of the city council since the _______, 2006 zoning map which was adopted _______, 2006. 
C.  Signature. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the city clerk, under the following words: 
"This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Section _______ of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Swartz Creek _______, 2006. If, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the Official Zoning Map, those changes shall be made on the Official Zoning Map after the amendment has been approved by the City Council together with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: On (date), by official action of the City Council, the following change(s) were made: (brief description with reference number to Council proceedings)." 
D.  Official copy. One copy of the official zoning map is to be maintained and kept up-to-date by the city clerk's office, accessible to the public, and shall be final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings, and other structures in the city. 
Section 3.01. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown on the Official Zoning Map, City of Swartz Creek Zoning Ordinance, which accompanies this ordinance, and which map with all notations, references, and other information shown thereon shall be as much a part of this ordinance as if fully described herein. The "official zoning map" may hereinafter be referred to as "the zoning map." 
A.  Unless shown otherwise, the boundaries of the districts are lot lines, section lines, the centerlines of streets alleys, roads, or such lines extended, and the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
B.  Where, due to the scale, lack of detail, or illegibility of the zoning map accompanying this ordinance, if there is any uncertainty, contradiction or conflict as to the intended location of any district boundaries, shown thereon, interpretation concerning the exact location of district boundary lines shall be determined, upon written application, by the zoning board of appeals. 
Section 3.02. - Districts. 
    For the purpose of this ordinance, the City of Swartz Creek is hereby divided into the following districts: 
Zoning Districts Residential Districts R-1 Single-Family Residential District (min. lot size - 11,200 sq. ft.) R-2 Single-Family Residential District (min. lot size - 7,250 sq. ft.) R-3 Downtown Residential District (min. lot size - 6,000 sq. ft.) R4 Two-Family Residential District RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District PUD Planned Unit Development District PMSHDD Planned Manufactured Seniors Housing Development District Non-Residential Districts NBD Neighborhood Business District GBD General Business District CBD Central Business District O-1 Office District I-1 Light Industrial District I-2 Heavy Industrial District  
Section 3.03. - Zoning of vacated areas. 
    Whenever any street, alley or other public way within the City of Swartz Creek has been vacated by official governmental action, and when the lands within the boundaries thereof attach to and become a part of the land adjoining such street, alley or other public way, such lands formerly within such vacated street, alley or public way shall automatically, and without further governmental action, thenceforth acquire and be subject to the same zoning regulations as are applicable to the lands to which same shall attach, and the same shall be used for that same use as is permitted under this ordinance for such adjoining lands. 
Section 3.04. - Zoning of annexed areas. 
    Any areas annexed to the City of Swartz Creek shall immediately upon such annexation be automatically classified as R-1, Single-Family Residential District until an amendment to the zoning map for said area has been adopted by the city council. The planning commission shall recommend appropriate zoning for such area within three months after the matter is referred to it by the city council. 
ARTICLE 4. - R-1, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 4.00. - Intent. 
    This district is designed to be composed of low density residential home development. Density of development within this district is less intense than in the R-2 District to recognize existing lot sizes found in areas affected by the district. The regulations are intended to stabilize, protect and encourage the residential character of the district and prohibit activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood. Development is limited to single-family dwelling plus such other uses as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities which serve residents of the district. 
Section 4.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the R-1 District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Single-family dwellings. 
B.  Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities, and municipal buildings. 
C.  Home occupations, in accordance with section 20.07. 
D.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
E.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
Section 4.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the standards for special land uses listed in Article 30: 
A.  Accessory apartments in a single-family home. 
B.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
C.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship with less than 500 seats. 
D.  Schools: public and non-public elementary or secondary schools. 
E.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
F.  Cemeteries. 
G.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
H.  Recreation: private community recreation center, swimming pool clubs. 
I.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
Section 4.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
R-1 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 11,200 square feet Minimum lot width 80 feet Minimum front yard setback (a) 30 feet Minimum side yard setback (b) 1. 10 feet (each side) 
2. 20 feet (total both sides) Minimum rear yard setback 35 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings 35% Maximum building height 1. 25 feet or 
2. 2 stories Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (c) 1,050 square feet  
Footnotes to Table: 
(a)  Front yards only. An unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard a distance not to exceed six feet. The porch may be covered with an awning or other type of roof provided the awning or roof does not extend beyond the footprint of the porch. In no case shall the porch be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. An uncovered stair, necessary landing and/or ramp may project a distance not to exceed 44 inches beyond the covered porch, but in no case may be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. 
(b)  Side yards only. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than the 25 feet. When there is a common rear yard abutting a side yard on an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(c)  Floor area of dwelling unit: Where a single-family dwelling is constructed without a basement, an additional 100 square feet shall be added to the minimum required first floor area requirement to provide space for utilities such as, but not limited to: furnace, hot water tank, laundry tubs, incinerators, and the like. 
Section 4.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the R-1, Single-Family Residential District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Signs are permitted in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
E.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
G.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 5. - R-2, SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 5.00. - Intent. 
    This district is designed to be composed of low density residential home development. Density of development within this district is more intense than the R-1 District but less than in the R-3 District. The regulations are intended to stabilize, protect and encourage the residential character of the district and prohibit activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood. Development is limited to one-family dwellings plus such other uses as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities which serve residents of the district. 
Section 5.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the R-2 District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Single-family dwellings. 
B.  Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities, and municipal buildings. 
C.  Home occupations, in accordance with section 20.07. 
D.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
E.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
Section 5.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the standards for special laud Uses listed in Article 30: 
A.  Accessory apartments in a single-family home. 
B.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
C.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship, with less than 500 seats. 
D.  Schools: public and non-public elementary or secondary schools. 
E.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
F.  Cemeteries. 
G.  Manufactured homes on individual sites and not part of a manufactured community or development subject to the conditions in section 20.02. 
H.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
I.  Recreation: private recreation center, swimming pool clubs. 
J.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
Section 5.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
R-2 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 7,250 square feet Minimum lot width 65 feet Minimum front yard setback (a) 25 feet Minimum side yard setback (b) 1. 5 feet each side 
2. 10 feet combined Minimum rear yard setback 30 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings, including accessory buildings and structures 30% Maximum building height 1. 25 feet or 
2. 2 stories Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (c) 950 square feet  
Footnotes to table: 
(a)  Front yards only. An unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard a distance not to exceed six feet. The porch may be covered with an awning or other type of roof provided the awning or roof does not extend beyond the footprint of the porch. In no case shall the porch be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. An uncovered stair, necessary landing and/or ramp may project a distance not to exceed 44 inches beyond the covered porch, but in no case may be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. 
(b)  Side yards only. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than 25 feet. When there is a common rear yard abutting a side yard on an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(c)  Floor area of dwelling unit: Where a single-family dwelling is constructed without a basement, an additional 100 square feet shall be added to the minimum required first floor area requirement to provide space for utilities such as, but not limited to: furnace, hot water tank, laundry tubs, incinerators, and the like. 
Section 5.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the R-2, Single-Family Residential District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Signs are permitted in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
E.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
G.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 6. - R-3, DOWNTOWN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 6.00. - Intent. 
    This district is designed to be primarily composed of the smallest residential lots. The regulations are intended to stabilize, protect and encourage the residential character of the existing neighborhood immediately surrounding downtown Swartz Creek. The retention and conservation of the residential neighborhood is vital to the long-term preservation, vitality and economic health of downtown. The residential lots and dwellings in the district are smaller than found elsewhere in the city. The district prohibits activities not compatible with a residential neighborhood. Development is limited to single-family dwellings plus such other uses as schools, parks, churches and certain public facilities which serve residents of the district. 
Section 6.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the R-3 District no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Single-family dwellings. 
B.  Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities, and municipal buildings. 
C.  Home occupations, in accordance with section 20.07. 
D.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
E.  Accessory buildings, structures and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
Section 6.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the standards for special land uses listed in Article 30: 
A.  Accessory apartments in a single-family dwelling. 
B.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
C.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship, with less than 500 seats. 
D.  Schools: Public and non-public elementary or secondary schools. 
E.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
F.  Cemeteries. 
G.  Manufactured homes on individual sites and not part of a manufactured community or development subject to the following conditions in section 20.02. 
H.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
Section 6.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions: 
R-3 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 6,000 square feet Minimum lot width 60 feet Minimum front yard setback (a) 25 feet Minimum side yard setback (b) 1. 5 feet each side 
2. 10 feet combined Minimum rear yard setback 35 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings, including accessory buildings and structures 35% Maximum building height 1. 25 feet or 
2. 2 stories Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (c) 800 square feet  
Footnotes to Table: 
(a)  Front yards only. An unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard a distance not to exceed six feet. The porch may be covered with an awning or other type of roof provided the awning or roof does not extend beyond the footprint of the porch. In no case shall the porch be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. An uncovered stair, necessary landing and/or ramp may project a distance not to exceed 44 inches beyond the covered porch, but in no case may be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. 
(b)  Side yards only. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than 25 feet. When there is a common rear yard abutting a side yard on an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(c)  Floor area of dwelling unit. Where a single-family dwelling is constructed without a basement, an additional 100 square feet shall be added to the minimum required first floor area requirement to provide space for utilities such as, but not limited to: furnace, hot water tank, laundry tubs, incinerators, and the like. 
Section 6.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the R-3, Downtown Residential District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Signs are permitted in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
E.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
G.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 7. - R-4, TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 7.00. - Intent. 
    The district is designed to provide sites for two-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the Non-Residential Districts and the lower density Single-Family Residential Districts. 
Section 7.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
A.  Single-family dwellings. 
B.  Two-family dwellings. 
C.  Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities, and municipal buildings. 
D.  Home occupations, in accordance with section 20.07. 
E.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
F.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any of the above permitted uses. 
Section 7.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the standards for special land uses listed in section [Article] 30: 
A.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
B.  Public and non-public elementary or secondary schools. 
C.  Churches, temples, and similar places of worship. 
D.  Cemeteries. 
E.  Bed and breakfast inns. 
F.  Manufactured two-family dwellings on individual sites and not part of a manufactured community or development subject to the conditions in section 20.02. 
G.  Essential public service buildings and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
H.  Recreation facilities: Private recreation center and swimming pool clubs. 
I.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
J.  Use of the same nature or class as the majority of the uses listed in this district as either a principal use permitted or a special land use, but not listed elsewhere in this zoning ordinance, as determined by the zoning board of appeals following a public hearing. Any use not listed and not found to be a similar use is prohibited in this zoning district. 
K.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use permit. 
Section 7.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions: 
R-4 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 8,000 square feet per unit Minimum lot width 100 feet Minimum front yard setback (a) 30 feet Minimum side yard setback (b) 10 feet Minimum rear yard setback 35 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings 35% Maximum building height 1. 25 feet or 
2. 2 stories Minimum floor area per dwelling unit (c) 800 square feet  
Footnotes to Table: 
(a)  Front yards only. An unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard a distance not to exceed six feet. The porch may be covered with an awning or other type of roof provided the awning or roof does not extend beyond the footprint of the porch. In no case shall the porch be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. An uncovered stair, necessary landing and/or ramp may project a distance not to exceed 44 inches beyond the covered porch, but in no case may be nearer than ten feet to the front lot line. 
(b)  Side yards only. The side yard abutting upon a street shall not be less than 25 feet. When there is a common rear yard abutting a side yard on an adjacent lot, the side yard abutting a street shall not be less than 25 feet. 
(c)  Floor area of dwelling unit. Where a single-family dwelling is constructed without a basement, an additional 100 square feet shall be added to the minimum required first floor area requirement to provide space for utilities such as, but not limited to: furnace, hot water tank, laundry tubs, incinerators, and the like. 
Section 7.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the R-4, Two-Family Residential District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Signs are permitted in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
E.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
G.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 8. - RM-1, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Section 8.00. - Intent. 
    The RM-1 Multiple-Family Residential District is designed to provide sites for low-rise multiple-family dwelling structures, and related uses, which will generally serve as zones of transition between the non-residential districts and the Single-Family Residential Districts, and whose height limitations are generally conducive to single-family residential areas. 
Section 8.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the RM-1, Multiple-Family District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Single-family dwellings. 
B.  Two-family dwellings. 
C.  Publicly-owned and operated libraries, parks, parkways, recreational facilities, and municipal buildings. 
D.  Home occupations, in accordance with section 20.07. 
E.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
F.  Attached or clustered single-family dwelling units, including condominiums, provided no more than 50 percent of any wall may be a common part wall for adjacent units and at least 25 percent of the units have a recessed garage (i.e. the garage is setback farther than the dwelling portion of the unit) or side entry garage. 
G.  Townhouses not to exceed six attached dwelling units per building. 
H.  Other types of multiple-family dwellings such as, but not limited to, apartments, senior apartments, elderly housing complexes, row houses, terrace homes, and similar types of multiple-family. 
I.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above permitted uses. 
Section 8.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the standards listed in section [Article] 31. 
A.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
B.  Public and non-public elementary and secondary schools. 
C.  Churches, temples, and similar places of worship including accessory schools or day care. 
D.  Nursing homes. 
E.  Cemeteries. 
F.  Golf courses without driving ranges. 
G.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
H.  Recreation: Private non-commercial institutional or community recreation center, or swimming pool clubs. 
I.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
J.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use permit. 
Section 8.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions: 
RM-1 District Regulations Requirements  
Footnotes to Table: 
a)  In order to determine density, the following minimum lot area per dwelling unit type shall be met: 
Dwelling Unit Type Minimum Lot
Area Per Unit Efficiency 3,200 sq. ft. One-Bedroom 3,800 sq. ft. Two-Bedroom 4,200 sq. ft. Three-Bedroom 4,600 sq. ft. Four-Bedroom 5,000 sq. ft.  
b)  Plans presented which include a den, library, or extra room shall have such extra room counted as a bedroom for purposes of this ordinance. 
c)  Minimum floor areas for apartments shall be as follows: 
Efficiency apartment: 500 square feet of floor area or less, and consisting of not more than one room in addition to kitchen, dining, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
One-bedroom unit: 600 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than two rooms in addition to kitchen, dining, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
Two-bedroom unit: 750 square feet per unit, consisting of not more than three rooms in addition to kitchen, dinning, and necessary sanitary facilities. 
Three or more bedroom unit: For each room in addition to the three rooms permitted in a two-bedroom unit, there shall be provided an additional area of 150 square feet to the minimum floor area of 750 square feet. 
d)  Yards abutting major thoroughfares shall have a minimum depth of 50 feet. A minimum building setback of 35 feet is required from interior roads. 
e)  For the purpose of yard regulations, all multiple-family dwellings shall be considered as one building occupying one lot. 
f)  Front, side and rear yards relating to the spacing between buildings shall have the following minimum overall dimensions: 
Building Relationship Minimum Overall
Distance Between
Buildings (Exclusive
of Parking Area)Front to Side 50 feet Front to Front 60 feet Front to Rear 60 feet Rear to Rear 60 feet Rear to Side 45 feet Side to Side 25 feet Corner to Corner 25 feet  
g)  Parking may be permitted in 50 percent of the required rear yard provided that there shall be at least 15 feet of yard space between said parking area and the multiple-family building. 
h)  The front and rear of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the faces along the longest dimension of said structure. The front of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the direction faced by the living rooms of the dwelling units in said building; the rear of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the direction faced by the service entrance of the dwelling units in said building; and the side of the multiple-family building shall be considered to be the face along the narrowest dimension of said building. 
i)  No multiple-family structure shall exceed 180 feet in length along any one face of the building. 
j)  Any court shall have a width equal to not less than 50 feet for the front yard and 60 feet for the rear yard. The depth of any court shall not be greater than three times the width. 
k)  Service drives shall have a width of at least 33 feet and shall not be located in any front yard. 
l)  Not more than ten percent of the total number of units shall be of the efficiency type and in no instance shall the maximum density exceed 12 units per acre. 
m)  The zoning board of appeals may modify the height requirements where unusual architectural features exist. 
Section 8.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the RM-1, Multiple-Family Residential District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Signs are permitted in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
E.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
G.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 10. - PMSHDD PLANNED MANUFACTURED SENIORS HOUSING DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 10.00. - Intent. 
    This Planned Manufactured Seniors Housing Development District (PMSHDD) is intended to encourage innovative design of manufactured housing projects through use of performance standards. This district provides an option for planned manufactured housing projects designed to complement the character of surrounding development and the goals of the city described in the master plan. This district specifically encourages affordable housing opportunities for senior citizens in a more aesthetic environment and at somewhat lower densities than commonly associated with mobile home parks. 
    Where these techniques are deemed appropriate, a site shall be rezoned in conjunction with review and approval of a site development concept plan. A more detailed site plan shall be approved for the entire PMSHDD or phases prior to construction. The procedure is similar to the city's Planned Unit Development District. 
    Planned Manufactured Seniors Housing Development Districts shall achieve the following objectives: 
1.  Provide a quality living environment of affordable homes for residents over the age of 55 years. At least one person residing in the dwelling must be aged 55 years or older. 
2.  Encourage creative use of land which complements surrounding development. 
3.  Achieve a development pattern in harmony with the goals and long range land use plan envisioned in the city's master plan. 
4.  Preserve important natural features such as wetlands, woodland, topography, drainage patterns and geological features. 
5.  Prevent environmental hazards and soil erosion. 
6.  Attain more efficient use of land by minimizing utility and road construction costs. 
7.  Promote efficient use of community facilities by locating affordable housing accessible to parks and the senior center. 
8.  Create a more desirable environment than would be possible through the application of strict zoning requirements applied in other sections of the ordinance. 
Section 10.01. - General requirements. 
    Any proposed PMSHDD development shall meet the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum area -20 acres. 
B.  Permitted uses -The following uses are permitted in the PMSHDD Districts: 
1.  Single-family dwellings including manufactured homes, and modular homes with a minimum floor area of 960 square feet. 
2.  Single-family dwellings with a minimum floor area of 700 square feet may be located on interior residential lots (i.e., those not abutting the development's property lines) when comprising not more than 25 percent of the total number of units overall or within any single phase. 
3.  Approved customary accessory buildings, structures and uses meeting the standards of this article, such as sales/maintenance office, private garages, carports, enclosed and screened storage areas, community center, parks and recreation facilities. 
Each of the above uses is permitted, provided one of the residents of the dwelling is aged 55 years or older. 
C.  Maximum density -The maximum density shall be six units per acre. Calculation of density shall be the number of living units divided by the overall acreage. The overall acreage for this calculation shall include any common area or private roads, and 25 percent of any wetland areas regulated by the federal or state government. Public rights-of-way and public lands shall be excluded from overall allowable density. 
D.  Access -The project shall have direct access onto an arterial street as defined in the city's master plan. This access shall have a right-of-way or easement at least 86 feet wide; 100 feet if the entrance includes a boulevard. The city may require outbound lanes, deceleration lanes and bypass lanes to be provided and constructed to city standards upon analysis of the expected traffic impacts. 
E.  Common open space -At least 400 square feet of common open space shall be provided for each residential lot or unit in the planned manufactured seniors housing development. This common open space may be reduced to 250 square feet per lot or unit if the project is within one-half mile of a city park and that city park provides the additional common area required. The open space must meet the standards listed in section 10.02 G. 
Section 10.02. - Design standards. 
A.  General. All uses, structures and properties shall comply with all regulations and requirements of this zoning ordinance, the city's subdivision standards, and other city specifications and standards, except as provided in this article. 
B.  Overall project setbacks: 
a)  A minimum 50-foot wide setback shall be provided along any public street frontage. This setback shall be entirely living plant material except for approved signs, utilities, lighting and necessary roads providing access to the project. This setback may be reduced by the council to 35 feet where significant landscaping (trees and/or berms) are provided. 
b)  A minimum 35-foot wide setback shall be provided along any property line adjacent to a Single-Family Residential District and a 50-foot wide setback where adjacent to an Industrial District. This setback shall include a minimum 20-foot wide greenbelt which includes the equivalent of at least one tree and four shrubs for each 30 feet measured along the property line. Trees shall include both deciduous trees and evergreens. Plant materials shall meet the minimum standards listed in Article 28. Where the adjacent use is industrial, the city council may require more extensive landscaping, berms and/or walls. 
c)  A minimum 20-foot wide setback along all other perimeter property lines with the equivalent of at least one tree for each 40 feet measured along the property line. 
d)  The city council may reduce the greenbelt standards of items b) and c) above based on a determination that existing topographic conditions, existing plant materials or proposed land grading shall perform the same functions as the required greenbelts or setbacks. Such reductions shall be clearly illustrated on the approved area plan. 
C.  Internal dimensional standards. 
a)  Minimum lot width and area. Each lot shall have a minimum width of 60 feet and a minimum area of 6,000 square feet. The council may reduce the requirements for non-corner lots abutting open space to a 55-foot minimum width and minimum lot area of 5,500 square feet or where clustering of units at the same overall density which would otherwise be permitted results in more viable open space, recreation areas or preserves natural features. 
b)  Spacing. Any residential dwelling structure shall be located at least 20 feet from any other residential dwelling structure, measured from the nearest edge of each unit. 
1.  A manufactured/modular home shall be in compliance with all the following minimum distances: 
(1)  20 feet from any part of an attached or detached structure of an adjacent manufactured home which is used for living purposes. 
(2)  Ten feet from either of the following: 
(a)  An on-site parking space of an adjacent manufactured home site. 
(b)  An attached or detached structure or accessory of an adjacent manufactured home which is not used for living purposes. 
(3)  50 feet from permanent park-owned structures, such as any of the following: 
(a)  Community buildings. 
(b)  Offices. 
(c)  Maintenance and storage facilities. 
(d)  Similar structures. 
(4)  100 feet from a baseball or softball field. 
(5)  25 feet from the fence of a swimming pool. 
(6)  Three feet from on-site detached storage sheds, unless the wall adjacent to the manufactured home is lined with Class A fire resistant material. 
(7)  Attached or detached structures or accessories of a manufactured home that are not used for living space shall be a minimum distance of ten feet from an adjacent manufactured home or its adjacent attached or detached structures. 
2.  Any part or structure, such as steps, porches, supported or unsupported awning, decks, carport or garages, or similar structures, that is part of a manufactured home shall be set back the following minimum distances: 
(1)  20 feet from the edge of an internal road. 
(2)  Seven feet from an off-site parking bay. 
(3)  Seven feet from a common sidewalk. 
(4)  25 feet from a natural or manmade lake or waterway. 
(5)  Steps shall not encroach into parking areas. 
The length of a manufactured home site may vary depending on park design and layout and the manufactured home installed; however, a minimum rear yard setback of 15 feet shall be provided, except no additional setback is required where units back up to the required buffer along public streets. 
3.  Height. The maximum height of a residential unit or community building shall be 25 feet. Height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 14 feet. 
4.  Parking. Each residential unit shall have a minimum of three off-street parking spaces. Spaces which conflict with circulation along sidewalks shall not be included in this calculation. In addition, parking in an amount determined by the planning commission shall be provided adjacent to any accessory buildings for residents using recreation facilities, maintenance vehicles, employees and visitors. 
5.  Carports, garages, accessory buildings. Any garages, accessory buildings or carports shall not be permitted in the front yard of any lot (i.e., they must be placed behind the front building line). All detached accessory buildings shall be setback at least ten feet from the lot line and residential unit. Carports shall be set back at least ten feet from adjacent lot lines. 
D.  Special standards for residential units. 
a)  Certification. All manufactured homes must either be: 
1.  New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as amended, or any similar successor or replacement standards which may be promulgated; or 
2.  Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in subsection 1. above. In addition, the building administrator or his designee shall inspect each residential unit and determine it to be in (excellent) condition, compatible with new residential units located in this zoning district and safe and fit for residential occupancy. 
b)  Code compliance. Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. In the case of a mobile home, all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus and insulation within and connected to said mobile home shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, as amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. 
c)  A building permit issued by the city shall be required before construction is started. 
d)  All dwelling units and additions thereto must be either: 
(1)  Fastened to minimum six inches wide masonry/concrete foundation which continues around the perimeter of the unit to a depth of at least 42 inches, with anchors placed at a minimum of every six feet; or 
(2)  Fastened to piers pursuant to manufacturer's specifications. Piers shall be installed to a minimum depth of 42 inches. 
e)  If attached to foundations, all residential units are hereby required to be fastened directly to their foundations in a manner that eliminates the need for skirting. If attached to piers skirting shall be installed with ten days from the date that said manufactured home is placed upon a site. 
f)  All residential units shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width of 24 feet. 
(2)  A shingled pitched roof with a minimum slope of 3:1. 
(3)  Exterior materials and overhangs to eaves relationship similar to other homes in the vicinity. 
g)  In all instances, wheels, towing apparatus, and exposed chassis shall be removed before occupancy of any housing is permitted. 
h)  Storage area. Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage area equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever is less. This storage area may consist of a separate accessory building, garage, fenced; "community" outdoor storage areas with fencing and screening; or mini-storage buildings. Community storage areas shall not be located adjacent to a public roadway or residential district. Carports are not included in calculating this standard; only licensed vehicles may be stored in a carport. 
E.  Circulation and access. 
a)  Access. Individual dwelling units shall not have direct access to a collector or arterial street, as identified in the city's master plan. Such access shall directly align or be offset at least 250 feet from intersections or commercial driveways on the opposite side of the street. This requirement may be increased by the city to provide greater sight distance. 
b)  Public streets. Public streets shall be designed and constructed according to city standards. If, in the future, private streets in a PMSHDD are to be dedicated to a public agency, the owners shall first fully agree to bear the full expense of construction or any other action required to make street suitable for public acceptance. 
c)  Private roads. Any private roads shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet wide, measured from back of curb to back of curb, with no parking allowed on any street. All other geometric standards, construction standards and curbing shall conform to the city's public street standards. 
d)  Road design. All streets shall be hard surface and curvilinear in layout. Intersections shall be aligned or offset at least 150 feet, measured centerline to centerline. 
e)  Minimum size of culs-de-sac. The maximum length of any cul-de-sac shall be 1,000 feet. No more than 35 units shall be served by a single means of access. The cul-de-sac shall be required to end in a 50-foot turning radius. Parking is not allowed within the turning area and a "No Parking" sign shall be posted. 
f)  Development entrances. Entrances along a public street shall be directly across from, or at least 250 feet from, another street, private road or non-commercial driveway (spacing measured from centerline to centerline). The council may require two entrances where warranted by volumes from the development or conditions along the public street. Sight distance shall meet the standards of the Association and State and Highway Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 
g)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be provided on at least one side of all public streets or private roads. The sidewalks shall be connected to existing or future sidewalks along public streets. The minimum sidewalk width shall be five feet. All sections and phases of the PMSHDD shall be interconnected by a sidewalk, bicycle or common area path system which promotes safe and convenient movement of pedestrians throughout the development. Council may also require sidewalk, bicycle or common area path system connections with parks or community facilities in the immediate area. 
F.  Utilities and services. 
a)  Each lot, site and principal building in a PMSHDD shall be connected to public water and sanitary sewer. 
b)  The PMSHDD shall provide adequate storm drainage. The city council may require open drainage courses or storm water detention ponds. 
c)  Electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be underground. Any meters shall be at uniform locations. 
d)  Mail delivery facilities shall be pursuant to local postmaster requirements. Mail box clusters shall be at convenient locations which do not interfere with through traffic. 
G.  Open space regulations. 
a)  Community buildings and outdoor recreation facilities may be allowed in the required open space. 
b)  Private roads and parking areas shall not be included in calculations of required open space. 
c)  Detention ponds shall not comprise more than 25 percent of the required open space. 
d)  Open space areas shall be conveniently and equitably located through the PMSHDD in relation to the location of dwelling units and natural features. Common open space should include trails or recreational facilities to encourage their use. 
e)  Open space areas shall be at least two acres in size and length of any such area shall be no longer than one and one-half times its width. The minimum dimensions shall be usable for the functions intended, as determined by the planning commission. 
f)  The city council may require that natural amenities such as ravines, rock outcrops, wooded area, tree or shrub specimens, unique wildlife habitats, ponds, streams and marshes be preserved as part of the open space system of the PMSHDD. However, no more than 50 percent of the required common area shall be wetlands regulated by the state and federal government. 
g)  The common areas shall be owned and maintained by either the developer or a homeowners association. 
H.  Financial agreements. The applicant shall provide satisfactory financial agreements addressing maintenance of entrances, lighting, signs, private roads, public parking, setback areas, dumpster areas, mail box clusters, landscaping, sidewalks, recreational facilities, community centers, open space and other common elements. 
Section 10.03. - Information required for area (concept) plan. 
    An area plan for the PMSHDD shall contain all of the information required for a site plan as set forth in section 29.07 herein, and the following information. If the PMSHDD is to be constructed in phases, the information for the area plan listed below shall be provided with site plans provided for each phase. 
A.  Name and address of the property owner, developer and preparer of the plan. 
B.  Location map illustrating surrounding features, zoning classifications and land use. 
C.  Description of existing conditions: 
1.  Site size and legal description; 
2.  Topography at one-foot contour intervals; 
3.  Existing buildings and structures on the site and within 100 feet of all property lines; 
4.  Public streets, driveways and intersections within 250 feet of the site frontage along public streets; 
5.  Location of any wetlands, woodlands, floodplains, drainageways and other significant natural features. 
D.  Written report describing the following characteristics of the proposed development: 
1.  General character and substance; 
2.  Objectives and purpose to be served; 
3.  Compliance with regulations and standards; 
4.  Scale and scope of development proposed; 
5.  Need for, and economic feasibility of, the proposed development; 
6.  Community impact statement discussing the relationship to surrounding uses and the potential impact on the: Environment, traffic operations, school enrollment, recreation facilities, and utility systems; 
7.  Proposed phasing; and 
8.  Compliance with the adopted City of Swartz Creek Master Plan Future Land Use Map, Goals and Objectives. 
E.  Area plan. 
1.  Overall density proposed; 
2.  Location and dimensions of lots; 
3.  Typical building dimensions and setbacks; 
4.  Location of any community buildings and other non-residential buildings; 
5.  Layout of streets, private roads and sidewalks; 
6.  Locations, size and uses of common open spaces; 
7.  General description of the organization to be used to own and maintain common open space; 
8.  General description of covenants, master deed, bylaws, easements or other restrictions to be imposed upon land or building, including cooperation for any homeowner's association, cooperative association, or minimum association; 
9.  Detail of easements for access to streets, water lines, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and franchised utilities (such as gas, electric, telephone and cable television) as well as provisions for police and fire vehicles; 
10.  General landscape concept showing plant materials to be preserved or added, including a plant materials list with the number, type and size of materials shown. Techniques to preserve existing vegetation shall be described; 
11.  Delineation of any areas to be subdivided under the Subdivision Control Act or included as part of a condominium. 
F.  Additional information to be included with final site plan. 
1.  Detailed landscape plan with a plant list and illustrating location of plantings. 
2.  Roadway cross sections with dimensions. 
3.  Illustration of all setback and spacing requirements. 
4.  Details of entrances including any lighting, signs, sight distance, drive widths and landscaping. 
5.  Street names. 
6.  Details of lighting fixtures. 
7.  Utility plans and calculations for sewage and storm water flows. 
8.  Floor plans and elevations for any community buildings. 
9.  Dimensional plans and elevations for typical residential units. 
Section 10.04. - Application procedure and zoning approval process. 
A.  Procedure for petition and area plan approvals. 
1.  Petition for a PMSHDD classification shall be for an amendment to the official zoning map and approval of an area (concept) plan. A petition for a PMSHDD classification for a parcel of land may be made by the owner(s) of record or by any person(s) acting on behalf of the owner(s) of record of the subject parcel. 
2.  The petition shall be filed with the city clerk who shall transmit the petition and the area plan to the city council. The city council shall forward the petition to the planning commission. 
3.  The planning commission shall, at the meeting at which it receives the petition and area plan from the clerk, establish a public hearing on the petition, impact report and area plan, said hearing to be held within 45 days of the receipt by the planning commission of the information required in section 10.03. The planning commission shall give notice of the public hearing as required the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
4.  Following the public hearing and recommendation of the planning commission, the planning commission shall transmit a copy of the petition and area plan to the city council. 
5.  The city council shall review the petition and area plan application and the city planning commission report thereon, and after holding a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) shall approve, approve with conditions, deny or table for further consideration the ordinance of adoption of the petition and area plan. Any conditions of approval shall be addressed in a resubmittal of the area plan clearly illustrating the changes. The resubmittal shall be reviewed and approved by the code officer within 60 days of council action. 
6.  Development agreement. If the petition and area plan are approved by the city council, the applicant and all owner(s) of record or the legal representative of the owner(s) of record of all property included within the PMSHDD shall draft and sign an agreement that the approved petition and area plan shall be binding upon the applicant and owner(s) of record and upon their heirs; successor and assigns. The petition and area plan shall not be officially approved until said agreement has been reviewed by the city attorney, signed by representatives of both parties and received by the city clerk. 
7.  Following official adoption of the ordinance by the city council, the mayor shall accurately note; and the city clerk shall attest, the PMSHDD District designation for the property on the official zoning map. 
Section 10.05. - Standards for petition and area plan review and approval. 
A.  Generally. The planning commission shall determine that the petition and area plan meet the following standards: 
1.  The proposed development shall conform to the adopted master plan or any part thereof, or represents land use policy which, in the planning commission's opinion, is a logical and acceptable change from the adopted master plan. 
2.  The proposed development shall conform to the intent and to all regulations and standards of the PMSHDD District and the zoning ordinance. 
3.  The proposed PMSHDD shall be compatible with surrounding uses. 
4.  The proposed development shall be adequately served by public facilities and services such as streets, police and fire protection, parks, community buildings, drainage courses, water and sanitary sewer facilities, and refuse disposal. 
5.  The common open space, any other common properties, individual properties and all other elements of the PMSHDD are planned to achieve a unified open and recreation area system with open space and all other elements in appropriate locations, suitably related to each other, the site and the surrounding land. 
6.  The applicant shall have made provisions, satisfactory to the planning commission to assure that those areas shown on the plan for use by residents of the development will be irrevocably committed for that purpose and shall be adequately maintained. 
7.  The location of the proposed uses, layout of the project and its relation to streets shall promote safe and efficient traffic operations. 
8.  Where applicable the commission shall determine that noise, odor, light or other external effects from any source whatsoever, which is connected with the proposed use, will not adversely affect adjacent and neighboring land uses and meet the requirements of section 20.04 (performance standards) of this ordinance. 
9.  The proposed development shall create a minimum disturbance to natural features and land forms. 
10.  Streets shall follow topography, be properly spaced and be located and aligned in accordance with the intended function of each street. The property shall have adequate access to public streets. The plans shall provide for logical extensions of public streets and shall provide suitable street connections to adjacent parcels, where applicable. All public street construction shall conform to city specifications. 
11.  Pedestrian circulation shall be provided for within the site, interconnecting all residential and community areas. The pedestrian system shall provide a logical extension of pedestrian ways from outside the site and shall provide pedestrian connections to the edges of the site, and to Swartz Creek municipal facilities and parks, where appropriate. Sidewalks shall be at least five feet wide and conform to city construction specifications. 
12.  Phased developments shall be designed so that each phase will be complete without depending on completion of a future phase. 
B.  Approval of petition and area plan. Approval of petition and area plan approval by the city council shall have the following effects: 
1.  Approval shall confer a right to the applicant, for a period of three years from the date of approval, that existing zoning regulations as they apply to the land included in the petition and the area plan, shall remain unchanged, provided that required subsequent planning and/or construction are diligently pursued in accordance with the approved area plan within this time period. 
2.  Approval by city council and planning commission of an area plan constitutes acceptance of uses, building location layout of streets, dwelling unit count and types, floor areas, densities, construction schedule and all other elements of the area plan. 
3.  If construction of any portion of the area plan is not completed within three years from the date of the area plan's approval by the city council, such area plan shall be null and void as to such portion for which construction is not complete; provided, however, the city council, upon written request of the applicant and upon finding that the area plan has been substantially completed and the applicant is diligently proceeding toward final completion of the plan, may extend the terminations. Upon an area plan becoming void pursuant to the provisions hereof, no construction may commence or continue upon said site unless and until the area plan approval process has been reinstituted and completed. In such event, all applicable fees shall be paid. 
C.  Amendment and revision. 
1.  A developer may request an amendment to an approved area plan. Any proposed modification to an approved area plan which results in a major change in the plan, as defined in this section, shall require an amendment. All amendments shall follow the procedures and conditions herein required for original submittal and review in full. 
2.  A request for amendment shall be in writing to the city council and shall clearly state, and illustrate the changes requested. The applicant should provide documentation to support the changes such as data on changing social or economic conditions, a market study, description of statutory revisions, new state or federal regulations and/or unanticipated site conditions. The applicant should also demonstrate the modifications will mutually benefit the interest of the city, residents and the developer. 
3.  The city council shall review the request for amendment. If the changes are determined to be major, as outlined below, the council shall refer the amendment to the planning commission for a review and recommendation. If the changes are found to be minor, the city council shall act on the request. The city council shall notify the planning commission and any other applicable agency of its approval of such minor changes. The revised drawings as approved shall each be signed by the applicant and the owner(s) of record or the legal representative(s) of said owner(s). 
4.  Modifications to be considered major changes, for which amendment is required, shall include one or more of the following: 
a)  Change in concept of the development; 
b)  Change in use or character of the development; 
c)  Change in type of dwelling units identified on the approved area plan; 
d)  Change on the number of dwelling units; 
e)  Change in non-residential floor area of over five percent; 
f)  Rearrangements of lots, blocks and building tracts; 
g)  Change in the character or function of any street; 
h)  Reduction in land area set aside for common open space, or the relocation of such area(s); or 
i)  Increase in building height over the maximum stated in this article. 
5.  Modification to be considered minor changes, for which approve plans may be revised rather than amended, shall include; among other similar modifications the following: 
a)  A change in residential floor area still meeting the minimum of this article; 
b)  A change in non-residential floor area of five percent or less; 
c)  Minor variations in layout which do not constitute major changes, such as to roadway alignment; 
d)  Any change in the architectural style or building design which still meets the standards of this article. 
6.  The city council shall have the authority to determine whether a requested change is major or minor, in accordance with this section. The burden shall be on the applicant to show good cause for any request change. 
D.  Performance guarantees. 
1.  Performance bonds, irrevocable bank letters of credit, cash deposits, or other forms of security acceptable as to type and amount to the city council shall be provided by the applicant to the city clerk. Such security shall be for construction of site improvements shown on the approved area plan. 
2.  The applicant shall submit a cost estimate of the improvements to be covered by the guarantee and verified as to amount by the city manager. The city council may release portions of a deposit in relation to work completed and approved upon inspection as complying with an approved plan provided, however, that the balance on deposit will be sufficient to complete remaining site improvements. In the event that the applicant shall fail to provide improvements according to an approved plan, the city council shall have the authority to have such work completed, and to reimburse itself for costs of such work by appropriating funds from the deposited security, or may require performance by the bonding company. 
ARTICLE 11. - PUD, PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT 

Section 11.00. - Intent. 
    Planned Unit Development District (PUD) standards are provided to: 
a)  Permit flexibility in the regulation of land development allowing for higher quality of design through innovation in land use, variety in design, layout, and type of structures constructed. 
b)  Ensure various land uses and building bulk will relate to each other and to adjoining existing and planned uses in such a way that they will be compatible, with no material adverse impact of one use on another. 
c)  Protect and preserve natural resources, natural features, open space, and historical or significant architectural features. 
d)  Minimize adverse traffic impacts. 
e)  Provide convenient vehicular access throughout the development and minimizing adverse traffic impacts. 
f)  Provide complete non-motorized circulation to, from, and within developments. 
g)  Encourage development of convenient recreational facilities as an integral part of residential developments. 
h)  Eliminate or reduce the degree of non-conforming uses or structures. 
i)  Promote efficient provision of public services and utilities. 
j)  Provide adequate housing and employment. 
    The PUD standards are not intended to avoid the imposition of standards and requirements of other zoning classifications rather than to achieve the stated purposes herein set forth. 
    For properties approved for PUD designation, these PUD standards provide the developer with flexibility in design and permit variation of the specific bulk, area, and in some specified situations the density requirements of this ordinance on the basis of the total PUD plan, subject to the approval of the PUD plan by the planning commission and city council in accordance with the requirements as herein set forth. 
    This article provides for four types of PUD: 1) a residential overlay, 2) a Morrish Road Overlay, 3) a downtown overlay and 4) an industrial overlay. Each of the PUDs include both supplementary standards which apply simultaneously, or replace, standards of the underlying residential zoning district. 
Section 11.01. - Eligibility criteria. 
    To be eligible for PUD approval, the applicant must demonstrate that each of the following criteria will be met: 
(a)  Demonstrated benefit. The PUD shall provide one or more of the following benefits not possible under the requirements of another zoning district, as determined by the planning commission: 
(1)  The site has significant natural or historic features which will be preserved through development under the PUD standards, as determined by the planning commission. 
(2)  A complementary mixture of uses or a variety of housing types. 
(3)  The PUD will create a more desirable environment than would be possible through the application of strict zoning requirements applied in other sections of this ordinance. 
(4)  Common open space for passive or active recreational use or a design which preserves common open space, not possible under the standards of another zoning district. 
(5)  Mitigation to offset community impacts. 
(6)  Redevelopment of a non-conforming site where creative design can address unique site constraints. 
(b)  Availability and capacity of public services. The site shall be served by a sanitary sewer system and the municipal water system. The proposed type and density of use shall not result in an unreasonable increase in the use of public services, public facilities, and utility capacities. 
(c)  Compatibility with the master plan. The proposed development shall not have an adverse impact on future development as proposed in the Swartz Creek Master Plan. 
(d)  Compatibility with the planned unit development intent. The proposed development shall be consistent with the intent and spirit of this ordinance. 
(e)  Development impact. The proposed development shall not impede the continued use or development of surrounding properties for uses that are permitted in this ordinance. 
(f)  Unified control of property. The Planned Unit Development District site shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners and shall be capable of being planned and developed as one integral unit. 
(g)  Petition for PUD. A PUD zoning classification may be initiated only by a petition. 
(h)  Minimum land area. No minimum size is required. 
Section 11.02. - Types of PUD zoning designations. 
    A property meeting the eligibility criteria may be rezoned to a PUD District, based on the requirements shown in Table 11.03 and appropriate requirements contained elsewhere in this ordinance. The PUD rezoning shall be concurrent with the approval of a PUD conceptual plan. Any changes to the underlying/pre-PUD zoning designation may be done concurrently with the PUD rezoning where such rezoning would be in accordance with the city's master plan. The PUD designation shall be noted in the application and on the official zoning map upon approval. 
Section 11.03. - City of Swartz Creek-Planned Unit Development Districts. 
;100;LightGray> District
Name Type of
DistrictPermitted
UsesSpecial Land
UsesAdditional ProvisionsResidential Planned Unit Development (RPUD) Overlay of a residential district Open space or cluster housing projects with one or more types of residential uses 
Existing dwellings Same as underlying residential district Maximum density, minimum floor area and maximum height shall comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, but the lot area, setback and width requirements may be reduced by up to 20 percent with the resultant area preserved as open space. Wetland setbacks may not be reduced. Wetlands and land without perkable soils shall be credited as 25 percent of their area for purposes of calculating overall density. 
The overall density may be increased by up to ten percent for sites of at least 100 acres where the planning commission determines significant natural resources and open space will be preserved in a natural state and the increased density would be compatible with surrounding zoning. Morrish Road Planned Unit Development (MRPUD) Overlay of a GBD District Same as underlying district 
Existing dwellings Same as underlying residential district Maximum density, minimum floor area and maximum height shall comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, but the lot area, setback and width requirements may be reduced by up to 20 percent upon a determination that the building contributes to an attractive entranceway into Swartz Creek, preferably with an emphasis on the well-being of downtown. Downtown Planned Unit Development (DPUD) Overlay of the CBD, Central Business District Same as underlying district 
Existing dwellings Same as underlying district Maximum density, minimum floor area and maximum building height shall comply with the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district, but the lot area, setback and width requirements may be reduced by up to 20 percent upon a determination that the building contributes to the well-being of the downtown area. 
On-site parking required by the zoning ordinance may be reduced by up to 25 percent where it can be demonstrated that the parking requirements are excessive, are needed at peak hours only, and/or that alternative parking facilities (including on-street spaces, shared parking areas, municipal parking lots) are available. Planned Industrial Parks (PID) Overlay of Industrial District Uses permitted in the Industrial and Office Districts Special Land Uses of the Industrial and Office Districts All buildings, structures, accessory structures and parking areas shall meet the minimum setback standards of the Industrial District along the site lot lines, as specified in the Table of Dimensional Standards. Minimum lot size shall be two acres except up to 25 percent of the total number of lots may be between one and one-half and two acres in size. Maximum building height shall be consistent with the standards for the Industrial District.  
Section 11.04. - Application and review procedure. 
    The application process for a PUD involves the following steps: 
A.  Request for rezoning to appropriate PUD designation and a conceptual (preliminary) site plan. 
B.  A final site plan(s). 
C.  A contractual agreement between the applicant and the city. 
D.  A final site plan review for each building or project phase, where appropriate. 
Section 11.05. - Zoning and conceptual PUD plan approval process. 
(a)  Pre-application workshop. An optional pre-application workshop with the planning commission may be requested by the applicant to discuss the appropriateness of a PUD concept, solicit feedback and receive requests for additional materials supporting the proposal. An applicant desiring a workshop shall request placement on the planning commission agenda. 
(b)  Application. A petition for a PUD District classification for a parcel of land may be made by the owner(s) of record or by any person(s) acting on behalf of the owner(s) of record of the subject parcel. The petition, including 12 copies of all conceptual submittal items listed in section 11.06, shall be filed with the city clerk who shall transmit the petition and the PUD concept plan to the city council. The city council shall forward the petition to the planning commission. The complete application shall be submitted at least 45 days prior to the meeting at which the planning commission shall first review the request. 
(c)  Planning commission public hearing. The planning commission shall review the rezoning request, the conceptual PUD site plan, and PUD agreement, conduct a public hearing, said hearing to be held within 32 days of the receipt by the planning commission of the information required for the PUD. The planning commission shall give notice of the public hearing as required by The Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
(d)  Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council based on the following standards: 
(1)  The PUD shall satisfy the eligibility criteria of section 11.01. 
(2)  The PUD shall comply with the requirements of this article, other applicable sections of this ordinance and the subdivision or condominium requirements of the city, as applicable. 
(3)  The PUD shall be designed and constructed in a manner harmonious with the character of adjacent property and the surrounding area. 
(4)  The PUD shall be adequately served by essential public facilities and services, such as roads, pedestrian or bicycle facilities, police and fire protection, drainage systems, water supply, and sewage facilities. The design shall minimize the negative impact on the road system in consideration of items such as vehicle trip generation, access location and design, circulation, roadway capacity, traffic operations at proposed access points and nearby intersections. 
(5)  The proposed PUD shall not have an unacceptable significant adverse effect on the quality of the natural environment in comparison to the impacts associated with a conventional development. 
(e)  Revisions. The applicant shall make any revisions to incorporate conditions noted by the planning commission and submit 12 copies to the city to provide sufficient time for review prior to the city council meeting. 
(f)  City council approval of conceptual PUD plan. Within 90 days following receipt of a recommendation from the planning commission, the city council shall conduct a public hearing on the requested PUD rezoning and the conceptual PUD site plan and either approve, deny or approve with a list of conditions made part of the approval. The city council may require a re-submittal of the conceptual PUD site plan reflecting the conditions for approval by the zoning administrator prior to submittal of a PUD final site plan. 
(g)  Time limits for conceptual plan approval. Approval of the conceptual PUD site plan by the city council shall confer upon the owner the right to proceed through the subsequent planning phase for a period not to exceed two years from date of approval. If application for final PUD site plan approval is not requested within this time period, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing to revert the site to the pre-PUD zoning. The city council may extend the period up to an additional two years, if requested in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date. 
(h)  Conditions. Reasonable conditions may be required with the approval of a PUD for the purpose of ensuring that public services and facilities affected by a proposed land use or activity will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the land use or activity, protecting the natural environment and conserving natural resources, ensuring compatibility with adjacent uses of land, promoting the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner, and further the implementation of the Swartz Creek Master Plan. Conditions attached shall be included in the PUD agreement. 
(i)  Final approvals. Following approval of the conceptual PUD plan, the application shall follow the procedures and requirements for approvals under the subdivision, condominium or site plan review process, as applicable. All site plans or tentative preliminary plats subsequently submitted shall conform with the preliminary PUD concept plan, all conditions attached to preliminary approval, the PUD agreement and the requirements of this ordinance. Where the planning commission determines that changes to the final site plan or final preliminary plat significantly deviate from the preliminary PUD concept plan, the planning commission shall conduct another public hearing and review the plan as an amended resubmission of the concept plan under the requirements of this article. 
Section 11.06. - Conceptual PUD plan submittal requirements. 
    The purpose of the conceptual review is to provide a mechanism whereby the applicant can obtain a substantial review of the proposed project in order to prepare final site engineering and architecture plans, and to execute necessary agreements between the applicant and the city. Submittal requirements are listed below. 
A.  Current proof of ownership of the land to be utilized or evidence of a contractual ability to acquire such land, such as an option or purchase agreement. 
B.  A completed application form, supplied by the city clerk and an application fee. A separate escrow deposit may be required for administrative charges to review the PUD submittal. 
C.  Sheet size of submitted drawings shall be at least 24 inches by 36 inches, with graphics at an engineers scale. 
D.  Cover sheet providing: 
1.  The applicant's name, address, telephone/fax number(s); 
2.  The name of the development; 
3.  The preparer's name and professional seal of architect, engineer, surveyor or landscape architect indicating license in the State of Michigan; 
4.  Date of preparation and any revisions; 
5.  North arrow; 
6.  Property lines and dimensions; 
7.  Complete and current legal description and size of property in acres; 
8.  Small location sketch of the subject site and area within one-half mile; and to scale; 
9.  Zoning and current land use of applicant's property and all abutting properties and of properties across any public or private street from the PUD site; 
10.  Lot lines and all structures on the property and within 100 feet of the PUD property lines; 
11.  Location of any access points on both sides of the street within 100 feet of the PUD site along streets where access to the PUD is proposed. 
E.  An overall area map at a scale of not less than one inch equals 2,000 feet showing the relationship of the development to its surroundings such as major roads or collector roads. 
1.  Physical development plan prepared at a minimum scale of one inch equals 100 [feet]. 
2.  Boundaries of proposed PUD and overall property dimensions. 
3.  Property lines of adjacent tracts of subdivided and unsubsidized land shown in relation to the PUD site, including those of areas across abutting roads. 
4.  Location, widths, and names of existing or prior platted roads and private roads, and public easements within or adjacent to the PUD site, including those located across abutting roads. 
5.  Location of existing sewers, water mains, storm drains and other underground facilities within or adjacent to the PUD site. 
6.  Topography drawn as contours with a one-foot contour interval. Topography to be based on USGS datum and be extended a minimum distance of 200 feet outside the PUD boundaries. 
7.  Location of existing buildings and structures. 
8.  Location of significant natural and historical features. 
9.  Existing limits of major stands of trees and a tree survey indicating the location, species and caliper of all trees with a caliper over eight inches, measured four feet above grade. 
F.  A conceptual PUD site plan sheet including: 
1.  Conceptual layout of proposed land use, acreage allotted to each use, residential density overall and by underlying zoning district (calculations shall be provided for both overall and useable acreage), building footprints, structures, roadways, parking areas, drives, driveways, and pedestrian paths. 
Note: Useable area is total area less public road rights-of-way, year-round surface water bodies, and MDEQ regulated wetlands. 
2.  Building setbacks and spacing. 
3.  General location and type of landscaping proposed (evergreen, deciduous, berm, etc.) noting existing trees over eight inches in caliper to be retained, and any woodlands that will be designated as "areas not to be disturbed in development of the PUD. 
4.  A storm water management system, water supply and wastewater disposal systems, any public or private easements, and a note of any utility lines to be removed. 
5.  A list of any requested deviations from the dimensional standards of the zoning ordinance or sign ordinance that otherwise would apply (permitted deviations include: minimum lot width, area or setbacks; private road standards). 
6.  If a multi-phase Planned Unit Development District is proposed, the area of each phase must be identified. For residential uses identify the number, type, and density proposed by phase. 
Section 11.07. - Standards for approval of conceptual PUD plan. 
    Based upon the following standards, the planning commission may recommend denial, approval, or approval with conditions, and the city council may deny, approve, or approve with conditions the proposed Planned Unit Development District. 
A.  The Planned Unit Development District meets the qualification requirements. 
B.  The uses proposed will have a beneficial effect, in terms of public health, safety, welfare, or convenience, on present and future potential surrounding land uses. The uses proposed will not adversely affect the public utility and circulation system, surrounding properties, or the environment. The public benefit shall be one which could not be achieved under the regulations of the underlying district alone, or that of any other zoning district. 
C.  The Planned Unit Development District is generally consistent with the goals, objectives and land use map of the future land use plan. 
D.  Judicious effort has been used to preserve significant natural and historical features, surface and underground water bodies and the integrity of the land. 
E.  Public water and sewer facilities are available or shall be provided for by the developer as part of the site development. The planning commission may approve a RPUD without public water and sewer, if the overall density is one unit per acres or less. 
F.  Safe, convenient, uncongested, and well defined vehicular and pedestrian circulation within and to the site is provided. Drives, streets and other elements shall be designed to discourage through traffic, while promoting safe and efficient traffic operations within the site and at its access points. 
G.  Any deviations from the applicable zoning regulations are reasonable and meet the intent of this article. 
The city council may impose additional reasonable conditions, 1) to insure that public services and facilities affected by a Planned Unit Development District will be capable of accommodating increased service and facility loads caused by the Planned Unit Development District, 2) to protect the natural environment and conserve natural resources and energy, 3) to insure compatibility with adjacent uses of land, and 4) to promote the use of land in a socially and economically desirable manner. 
H.  In a Planned Industrial Park (PID) a setback of 50 feet wide shall be provided along the perimeter of the PID fronting on a public street. 
I.  In a Planned Industrial Park (PID) a setback of 20 feet wide shall be provided along the perimeter of a PUD development not fronting on a public street. Such setback shall be designed and landscaped as a buffer strip; parking lots and driveways shall not be permitted in such yard, except that drives may cross such setback. 
J.  A setback at least 35 feet wide shall be provided along the right-of-way of a public collector street proposed within any PUD, and a setback 50 feet wide shall be provided along the right-of-way of a public principal or minor arterial street proposed within the PUD. Collector roads and principal and minor arterials roads are shown on the Transportation Map in the Swartz Creek Master Plan. 
K.  A landscaped setback at least ten feet wide shall be provided between a parking lot of five or more spaces and a property line within any PUD, and 20 feet from the perimeter property line of the PUD, except when adjacent to a public street right-of-way line, existing or proposed, in which case the preceding setbacks shall apply. 
L.  All required setbacks shall be landscaped and adequately and permanently maintained by the property owner, tenant, or organization responsible for maintaining common areas as provided herein. 
M.  Any single-family dwelling structure shall be located at least 20 feet from any other single-family dwelling structure unless structurally attached thereto. 
N.  The location of buildings and uses, and the distances between buildings shall be clearly shown on the area plan and shall control the development and continued use of the property. 
O.  There are no height regulations in a PUD provided that any buildings exceeding a height of two and one-half stories or 35 feet shall be approved as to specific height by the city council upon recommendation from the planning commission. Approval shall be based upon findings regarding light, air circulation, views, airport flight patterns and recommendations from the city fire chief regarding fire protection and safety. 
P.  Each lot or principal building in a PUD shall have vehicular access from a public street or from a private street. 
Q.  Each lot or principal building in a PUD shall have pedestrian access from a public or private sidewalk where deemed necessary by the city council. All parts and phases of the PUD shall be interconnected by a sidewalk system which will provide the necessary, safe and convenient movement of pedestrians. A bicycle path system shall also be provided in the PUD and may be part of the sidewalk system, where approved by the city council. Said system shall be connected to the public sidewalk system. 
R.  Public and private streets shall be designed and constructed according to standards established for public streets. If, in the future, private streets in a PUD are to be dedicated to a public agency, the owners shall first fully agree to bear the full expense of construction or any other action required to make streets suitable for public acceptance. 
S.  An individual dwelling unit in any single-family, two-family townhouse, or similar residential structure shall not have direct access to a collector or arterial street. 
T.  Electrical, telephone, and cable television lines shall be underground. 
U.  Open space areas shall be conveniently and equitably located through the PUD in relation to the location of dwelling units and natural features. 
V.  Open space areas shall have minimum dimensions which, in the planning commission's opinion, are usable for the functions intended and which will be maintainable. 
W.  The city council may require, that natural amenities such as ravines, rock outcrops, wooded areas, tree or shrub specimens, unique wildlife habitats, ponds, streams, and marshes be preserved as part of the open space system of the PUD. 
X.  The city council may require dedication for road rights-of-way, schools and/or parks. 
Section 11.08. - Approval of conceptual PUD site plan. 
    Upon approval of the conceptual PUD site plan by the city council the property shall be rezoned to an appropriate Planned Unit Development District Zoning District, with the underlying zoning district noted on the official zoning. 
Section 11.09. - Expiration. 
    Approval of the conceptual PUD site plan by the city council shall confer upon the owner the right to proceed through the subsequent planning phase for a period not to exceed two years from date of approval. If application for final PUD site plan approval is not requested within this time period, re-submittal of the application shall be required. The city council may extend the period up to an additional two years, if requested in writing by the applicant prior to the expiration date. 
Section 11.10. - Process for final PUD site plan(s). 
A.  The applicant shall submit 12 copies of a detailed final site plan for the entire approved conceptual PUD site plan to the city clerk at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting at which the planning commission shall first review the request. 
B.  Upon submission of all required materials and fees required by Article 29, the planning commission shall hold such hearings as may be required by law, and shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions in accordance with the standards and regulations of Article 29, Site Plan Review. 
C.  If the final PUD site plan was approved with conditions, the applicant shall submit a revised site plan to the city clerk for approval prior to the issuance of any building permits. 
Section 11.11. - Final PUD site plan submittal procedures and approval. 
A  Final site plan review for each building or project phase shall be submitted according to the procedures and standards contained within this ordinance. The purpose of the PUD final review is to consider the final site plan for the entire PUD which is consistent with the approved conceptual PUD site plan. Receipt of a building permit shall require final approval by the city council. 
    The final submittal shall include the site plan information required by Article 29, and the following: 
A.  Development agreement. A proposed written agreement specifying all the terms and understanding of the PUD development, and the conditions upon which the PUD approval was based including a specific list of any approved deviations from the standards of this ordinance. The final site plan shall not be officially approved until said agreement has been reviewed by the city attorney, signed by representatives of both parties and received by the city clerk. The agreement shall be recorded in the office of Genesee County, Registrar of Deeds at the expense of the applicant. 
B.  Hydrological impact assessment. The planning commission may determine that a hydrological impact assessment is needed describing the existing ground and surface water resources including, but not limited to, a description of the water table, direction of groundwater flow, recharge and discharge areas, lake levels, surface drainage, floodplains, and water quality as well as the projected impact of the proposed development on such resources, in particular impacts associated with water supply development, wastewater disposal, and storm water management. 
    For projects over 100 acres, the applicant may submit a schematic site plan illustrating general building footprints, parking lot areas, road alignments, open space and general landscaping; with more detailed site plans submitted for the first building or project phase. Each detailed site plan shall be reviewed according to the procedures and standards of Article 29, Site Plan Review. 
    The final site plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission, which shall make recommendations to city council, according to the procedures outlined in Article 29, Site Plan Review. 
Section 11.12. - Condominium projects. 
    For any condominium section of a PUD, the applicant shall provide a copy of the master deed and condominium association bylaws for approval by the city council. The condominium documents shall provide limits on use of common areas or open space for accessory structures such as swimming pools, decks, playground equipment and buildings. A plan shall be provided indicating the limits of such accessory structures within a defined envelope. 
    Prior to approval of the final PUD site plan, the applicant shall submit a written agreement to the city attorney for review and approval by the city council. The agreement shall: 
A.  Set forth the conditions upon which the approval is based, with reference to the approved final PUD site plan. 
B.  When open space or common areas are indicated in the PUD plan for use by the residents, the open space or common areas shall be conveyed in fee or otherwise committed by dedication to an association of the residents, and the use shall be irrevocably dedicated for the useful life of the residences, and retained as open space for park, recreation or other common uses. 
C.  Set forth a program and financing for maintaining common areas and features, such as walkways, signs, lighting and landscaping. 
D.  Assure that trees and woodlands will be preserved as shown on the site plan, or replaced on a caliper for caliper basis. 
E.  Assure the construction and maintenance of all streets and necessary utilities (including public water, wastewater collection and treatment) through bonds or other satisfactory means, for any and all phases of the PUD. In the case of phased PUD's this requirement shall be reviewed at the time of any final site plan approval. 
F.  Address any other concerns of the city regarding construction and maintenance. 
Section 11.13. - Schedule of construction. 
    Final site plan approval of a PUD, PUD phase or a building within a PUD shall be effective for a period of three years. Further submittals under the PUD procedures shall be accepted for review upon a showing of substantial progress in development of previously approved phases, or upon a showing of good cause for not having made such progress. 
    In the development of a PUD, the percentage of single-family dwelling units under construction, or lots sold, shall be at least in the same proportion to the percentage of multiple-family dwelling units under construction at any one time, provided that this section shall be applied only if single-family dwelling units comprise 25 percent or more of the total housing stock proposed for the PUD. Non-residential structures designed to serve the PUD residents shall not be built until the PUD has enough dwelling units built to support such non-residential use. The planning commission may modify this requirement in their conceptual or final submittal review process. Further, this restriction does not apply to a Downtown PUD or the Morrish Road PUD since only non-residential might be constructed in the PUD. 
Section 11.14. - Amendments and deviations from approved final PUD site plan. 
    Deviations from the approved final PUD site plan may occur only when an applicant or property owner who was granted final PUD site plan approval notifies the zoning administrator of the proposed amendment to such approved site plan in writing, accompanied by a site plan illustrating the proposed change. The request shall be received prior to initiation of any construction in conflict with the approved final PUD site plan. 
A.  Procedure. Within 14 days of receipt of a request to amend the final PUD site plan, the zoning administrator shall determine whether the change is major, warranting review by the planning commission, and city council or minor, allowing administrative approval, as noted below. 
B.  Minor changes. The zoning administrator may approve the proposed revision upon finding the change would not alter the basic design nor any conditions imposed upon the original plan approval by the planning commission. The zoning administrator shall inform the planning commission of such approval in writing. The zoning administrator shall consider the following when determining a change to be minor. 
1.  For residential buildings, the size of structures may be reduced; or increased by five percent, provided the overall density of units does not increase and the minimum square footage requirements are met. 
2.  Gross floor area of non-residential buildings may be decreased; or increased by up to five percent or 10,000 square feet, whichever is smaller. 
3.  Floor plans may be changed if consistent with the character of the use. 
4.  Horizontal and/or vertical elevations may be altered by up to five percent. 
5.  Relocation of a building by up to five feet, if consistent with required setbacks and other standards. 
6.  Designated "Areas not to be disturbed" may be increased. 
7.  Plantings approved in the final PUD landscape plan may be replaced by similar types of landscaping on a one-to-one or greater basis. Any trees to be preserved which are lost during construction may be replaced by at least two trees of the same or similar species. 
8.  Improvements or slight relocation of site access or circulation, such as inclusion of deceleration lanes, boulevards, curbing, pedestrian/bicycle paths, etc. 
9.  Changes of building materials to another of higher quality, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
10.  Slight modification of sign placement or reduction of size. 
11.  Internal rearrangement of parking lot which does not affect the number of parking spaces or alter access locations or design. 
12.  Changes required or requested by the city, county or state for safety reasons. 
C.  Major changes. Where the zoning administrator determines the requested amendment to the approved final PUD site plan is major, re-submittal to the planning commission and city council shall be required. Should the planning commission determine that the modifications to the final PUD site plan significantly alter the intent of the conceptual PUD site plan, a revised conceptual PUD site plan shall be submitted. 
Section 11.15. - Performance guarantees. 
A.  Performance bonds, irrevocable bank letters of credit, cash deposits, or other forms of security acceptable as to type and amount to the city council shall be provided by the applicant to the city clerk. Such security shall be for construction of site improvements shown on the approved area plan. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a cost estimate of the improvements to be covered by the guarantee, and verified as to amount by the city manager. The city council may release portions of a deposit in relation to work completed and approved upon inspection as complying with an approved plan provided however, that the balance on deposit will be sufficient to complete remaining site improvements. In the event that the applicant shall fail to provide improvements according to an approved plan, the city council shall have the authority to have such work completed, and to reimburse itself for costs of such work by appropriating funds from the deposited security, or may require performance by the bonding company. 
Section 11.16. - Appeals and violations. 
    The zoning board of appeals shall have the authority to hear and decide appeal requests by property owners for variances from the city zoning ordinance. However, the zoning board of appeals shall not have the authority to change conditions or make interpretations to the PUD site plan or written agreement. 
    A violation of the PUD plan or agreement shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. 
A.  Violations of any deviation from the approved PUD site plan, except as authorized in this ordinance, shall be considered a violation of this article and treated as a misdemeanor. Further, any such deviation shall invalidate the PUD designation. 
B.  Violations of any plan approved under this section, or failure to comply with any requirements of this section, including any agreements and conditions attached to any approved plan, shall be considered a violation of this ordinance. 
ARTICLE 12. - NBD, NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 12.00. - Intent. 
    It is intended that this district provide for the location of retail, service and office enterprises serving a localized market area. It is intended that uses in this district serve the day to day needs of a neighborhood or group of neighborhoods. It is intended that structures in this district will generally be small in floor and site area. 
Section 12.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to the permitted use in this district. 
B.  Business establishments which perform services on premises such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loans and credit unions (not including drive-through branches), insurance offices and real estate offices, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
C.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship up to 250 seats. 
D.  Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly with the consumer and not using or storing hazardous materials. 
E.  Single-family and two-family dwellings existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
F.  Personal services such as beauty and barber shops, tailoring shops, laundry and shoe repair shops. 
G.  Professional or medical offices and clinics of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
H.  Publicly-owned libraries, parks, municipal buildings, etc. 
I.  Restaurants (not including drive-throughs), without sale of alcoholic beverages, where the patrons are served while seated within the building occupied by such establishments. 
J.  Retail sales, excluding drive-throughs and drive-ins, such as grocery store or supermarket; drug store; bakery; clothing or shoe store; hardware store; gift shop; florists, dry goods, book store; music; radio and TV sales, with a maximum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet. 
K.  Shopping centers, with any of the above uses, up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
L.  Convenience stores, with a maximum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet. 
Section 12.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the city council, in accordance with the general standards for all special land uses listed in Article 30: 
A.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use permit as permitted with the approved special land use permit; except use or storage of hazardous materials or above ground fuel storage, which require a special land use permit. 
B.  Banks, savings and loans and credit unions and restaurants with drive-through lanes. 
C.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
D.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship with more than 250 seats. 
E.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
F.  Expansion of an apartment unit within existing buildings in the NBD District may be permitted, subject to meeting the following standards: 
1.  Two means of access shall be provided to the residential apartment unit. The primary access shall not be through the existing business establishment. 
2.  A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be required for the apartment unit in addition to the minimum required parking spaces for the principal business use. 
3.  Minimum floor area requirements for the residential apartment unit shall be the same as those required for units in the R-4 and RM-1 Residential Districts. There shall be no more than one residential apartment per building. 
4.  The residential apartment use shall not detract or otherwise negatively impact adjacent development or detract from the business of the principal permitted use. 
G.  Funeral homes and mortuary establishments. 
H  Professional or medical offices and clinics of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with more than 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
I.  Retail sales, excluding drive-throughs and drive-ins, such as grocery store or supermarket; drug store; bakery; clothing or shoe store; hardware store; gift shop; florists, dry goods, book store; music; radio and TV sales, with more than 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
J.  Pet stores that do not perform veterinary services. 
K.  Shopping centers with a gross floor area of 15,001 to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
Section 12.03. - Required conditions. 
A.  All business establishments shall be retail or service establishments dealing directly with customers. All goods produced on the premises shall be sold at retail on premises where produced. 
B.  All business, servicing, or processing, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
Section 12.04. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
NBD District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 0 square feet Minimum lot width 0 feet Minimum front yard setback 5 feet Minimum side yard setback 0 feet Minimum rear yard setback 20 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings 0% Maximum building height 1. 30 feet; or 
2. 2 stories  
Notes to Table: 
a)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines, except as otherwise specified in the Building Code. 
b)  On the exterior side yard which borders on a residential district there shall be provided a side yard setback of not less than ten feet. If walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than 15 feet shall be provided. 
c)  Loading spaces shall be provided in the rear yard. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of the buildings, the rear setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 
d)  The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of required off-street parking, loading and unloading and required yards. 
e)  A wall or fence shall be provided on those sides of the property abutting land zoned for residential use. 
f)  A minimum five-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be provided within the road right-of-way for the entire frontage along a street. 
g)  A minimum of five-foot wide greenbelt shall be provided adjacent to a residential district and no structures or off-street parking spaces shall be located within the greenbelt. Grade changes to the greenbelt area shall not be permitted unless the planning commission finds that improved screening of the highway service district could be accomplished by changing the grade. The greenbelt area shall be maintained by one of, or a combination of, the following, depending, upon the characteristics of the area: 
1.  The greenbelt shall be left in its natural state if, in the judgment or the planning commission, it would provide the best protection for the residential district and preservation of the natural setting. The commission may require supplemental plantings, in accordance with the landscape design principles if it is necessary to provide adequate year-round screening. 
2.  If sufficient natural vegetation does not exist in the greenbelt area or if, in the opinion of the planning commission, it would not survive or is not suitable for saving, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earth berm shall be constructed in the greenbelt area. Landscaping shall be carried out in accordance with Article 28, the landscape design principles adopted by the planning commission. 
    In determining the proper buffering technique, the planning commission shall consider the effectiveness of the buffer in protecting the surrounding area and shall also consider the overall natural and manmade characteristics of the site. The construction of the wall shall be in accordance with Article 28. 
Section 12.05. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the NBD, Neighborhood Business District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
E.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 13. - CBD, CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 13.00. - Intent. 
    The Central Business District is designed and intended to promote the development of a pedestrian oriented and accessible, Central Commercial Service District in which a variety of retail, commercial, office, civic and residential uses are permitted. Each use shall be complementary to the stated function and purpose of the district and shall not have adverse impact upon adjacent street capacity and safety, utilities, and other city services. 
    The Central Business District is further designed and intended to: 
A.  Encourage innovative, neo-traditional residential/mixed use developments. 
B.  Extend greater opportunities for traditional community living, working, housing and recreation to all citizens and residents of the city. 
C.  Encourage a more efficient use of land and of public services and to reflect changes in technology of land development, by directing new development in a traditional pattern of mixed use and varied housing types. 
D.  Reduce the excessive sprawl of development and the segregation of land uses that cause unnecessary traffic congestion. 
E.  Discourage the development of drive-through facilities, which contributes to traffic congestion. 
F.  Discourage the development of separate off-street parking facilities for each individual use, and to encourage the development of off-street parking facilities designed to accommodate the needs of several individual uses. 
G.  Prohibit uses that are disruptive to pedestrian activities and have as their principal function the sale and services of motor vehicles, such as at automobile service stations, auto parts retail stores, car washes, new and used motor vehicle sales or service establishments, drive-in restaurants and restaurants with drive-through facilities, business with drive-through facilities (such as but not limited to banks, credit unions, pharmacies, etc.). 
H.  Promote the creation of urban places which are oriented to the pedestrian thereby promoting citizen security and social interaction. 
I.  Promote developments where the physical, visual and spatial characteristics are established and reinforced through the consistent use of compatible urban design and architectural design elements. Such elements shall relate to the design characteristics of an individual structure or development to other existing and planned structures or developments in a harmonious manner, resulting in coherent overall development patterns and streetscape. 
J.  Discourage commercial and business uses that create objectionable noise, glare or odors. 
K.  Encourage development of an urban "Main Street" with mixed land uses and shared parking. 
Section 13.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
A.  Businesses establishments which perform services on premises such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loans and credit unions (not including drive-thru branches), insurance offices and real estate offices, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. Pedestrian oriented ATM facilities. 
B.  Funeral homes. 
C.  Single-family and two-family dwellings existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
D.  Personal services such as beauty and barber shops, tailoring shops, laundry and shoe repair shops. 
E.  Professional or medical offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
F.  Restaurants, brewpubs, taverns and bars (not including drive-throughs), where the patrons are served while seated within the building occupied by such establishments. 
G.  Retail sales, excluding drive-throughs and drive-ins, such as grocery store or supermarket; drug store; bakery; clothing or shoe store; hardware store; gift shop; florists, dry goods, book store; music; radio and TV sales, with a maximum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet. Retail sales may be conducted outdoors on sidewalks provided: 
1.  At least six feet of sidewalk width is unobstructed for pedestrian traffic. 
2.  All equipment and merchandise is kept indoors during non-business hours. 
H.  Retail sales in which both a workshop and retail outlet or showroom are required, such as plumbing, electrician, interior decorating, upholstering, printing, photographic-reproducing, radio, and home appliance and similar establishments of similar character subject to the provision that not more than 80 percent of the total useable floor area of the establishment shall be used for servicing; repairing, or processing activities and further provided that such retail outlet or showroom activities area shall be provided in that portion of the building where the customer entrance is located. 
I.  Shopping centers up to 15,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
J.  Convenience stores, with a maximum gross floor area of 15,000 square feet. 
K.  Business schools and colleges. 
L.  Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
M.  Hotels. 
N.  Newspaper offices. 
O.  Public and quasi-public uses such as municipal offices, court houses, public off-street parking facilities, libraries, museums, public safety facilities and fractional organizations. 
P.  Residential dwellings; provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings shall meet requirements for the R-1 District. 
a)  The minimum distance between buildings shall be ten feet. 
b)  Front building setback shall equal the average setback line of the block. 
c)  Building setback to any side property line shall be 30 feet, except where adjacent to single-family residential property, in which case the setback shall be 75 feet. Driveways, parking and walls may be within the setback as long as a ten-foot greenbelt area is placed between the property line and any improvement. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling units and attached single-family units (i.e. cluster housing, duplex, townhouse) shall meet requirements of the RM-1 District and/or cluster housing option as modified herein. 
In a multiple-family development within the Central Business District the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not have more than the area of the parcel in square feet, divided by a factor of 1,200. If such multiple housing is within a mixed-use building a factor of 800 shall apply pursuant to the following: 
a)  Business and office uses may occupy a building used for residential uses provided that no such business or office use may be located on same floor as used for residential purposes, and no floor may be used for business or office use on a floor located above a floor used for residential purposes. Further, where there is mixed business/office and residential use in a building there shall be provided a separate, private pedestrian entranceway for the residential use. 
3.  Upper floor residential dwellings including apartments and/or condominium units provided they meet the minimum room size requirements of Michigan Construction Code. 
a.  Ground floor use must be commercial or office use. 
Q.  Accessory structures, uses, and signs incidental customarily to the permitted uses in this district. 
R.  Restaurants and other establishments with open front window service or pick-up window service, and outdoor eating areas in accordance with Article 20. 
S.  Outdoor cafes, outdoor eating areas and open front restaurants, with annual outdoor restaurant permit. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 3, 10-8-18) 
Section 13.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted, upon review and approval by the city council, in accordance with the general and specific standards for special land uses listed in Article 30. 
A.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. Reduced outdoor play space may be allowed by the planning commission upon a showing that alternative indoor space is available and that at least 35 square feet of outdoor space per child is available either on-site or on nearby available open space or publicly dedicated park land provided that safe pedestrian access is afforded across any intersecting road and that appropriate security is provided. 
B.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
C.  Indoor commercial recreational facilities such as health clubs, hard ball and racquetball facilities, pool and billiard establishments, tennis, batting, archery and soccer facilities. 
D.  Mixed use buildings for residential and office/business purposes, where the residential units are above or behind an office/business use. 
E.  Reserved. 
F.  Outdoor theater, plazas, parks, and public gathering places. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 4, 10-8-18) 
Section 13.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
CBD District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 0 Minimum lot width 0 Maximum front yard setback 0 feet Minimum side yard setback 0 (a) Minimum rear yard setback (a) (b) Maximum lot coverage 100% Maximum building height 50 feet or 4 stories  
Notes: 
(a)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines, except as otherwise specified in the building code. A four-foot high obscuring wall, fence, or greenbelt strip shall be provided on those sides of property abutting land zoned for residential. 
(b)  Loading space shall be provided in the rear calculated as five square feet per front foot of building. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 5, 10-8-18) 
Section 13.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the CBD Central Business District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the standards set out in Article 20. 
D.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
E.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 14. - GBD, GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT 

Section 14.00. - Intent. 
    The GBD, General Business District is intended to accommodate commercial establishments that serve community-wide shopping and service needs, including motorists using I-69. These districts are intended to create cohesive commercial areas that provide convenient vehicular and pedestrian access between business in attractive settings, thereby ensuring safety, and discouraging undesirable strip commercial development. 
Section 14.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    No building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless provided in this ordinance: 
A.  Businesses establishments which perform services on premises such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loans and credit unions (not including drive-thru branches), insurance offices and real estate offices, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. Pedestrian oriented ATM facilities. 
B.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship with up to 500 seats. 
C.  Single-family and two-family dwellings existing at the time of adoption of this ordinance. 
D.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
E.  Personal services such as beauty and barber shops, tailoring shops, laundry and shoe repair shops. 
F.  Professional or medical offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
G.  Restaurants, taverns, bars, and brew pubs where the patrons are served while seated within the building occupied by such establishments. 
H.  Retail businesses supplying merchandise on the premises in an enclosed building up to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, including sales of bakery goods (including bakery items produced on the premises), groceries, meats (no slaughtering is permitted on the premises), seafood, dairy products, drugs, books, shoes, apparel, florists, hardware, furniture, home furnishings, paint, wall paper, appliances, auto parts (without service bays), greeting cards, art galleries, beer/wine sales, convenience stores and similar retail establishments. 
I.  Retail sales in which both a workshop and retail outlet or showroom are required, such as plumbing, electrician, interior decorating, upholstering, printing, photographic-reproducing, radio, and home appliance and similar establishments of similar character subject to the provision that not more than 80 percent of the total useable floor area of the establishment shall be used for servicing; repairing, or processing activities and further provided that such retail outlet or showroom activities area shall be provided in that portion of the building where the customer entrance is located. 
J.  Shopping centers up to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
K.  Business schools and colleges. 
L.  Dry cleaning establishments, or pick-up stations, dealing directly with the consumer. Central dry cleaning plants serving more than one retail outlet shall be prohibited. 
M.  Hotels. 
N.  Newspaper offices. 
O.  Public and quasi-public uses such as municipal offices, court houses, public off-street parking facilities, libraries, museums, public safety facilities and fractional organizations. 
P.  Residential dwellings, provided the following conditions are met: 
1.  Single-family detached dwellings shall meet requirements for the R-1 District. 
a)  The minimum distance between buildings shall be ten feet. 
b)  Front building setback shall equal the average setback line of the block. 
c)  Building setback to any side property line shall be 30 feet, except where adjacent to single-family residential property, in which case the setback shall be 75 feet. Driveways, parking and walls may be within the setback as long as a ten-foot greenbelt area is placed between the property line and any improvement. 
2.  Multiple-family dwelling units and attached single-family units (i.e. cluster housing, duplex, townhouse) shall meet requirements of the RM-1 District and/or cluster housing option as modified herein. 
In a multiple-family development within the General Business District the total number of rooms (not including kitchen, dining and sanitary facilities) shall not have more than the area of the parcel in square feet, divided by a factor of 1,200. If such multiple housing is within a mixed-use building a factor of 800 shall apply pursuant to the following: 
a)  Business and office uses may occupy a building used for residential uses provided that no such business or office use may be located on same floor as used for residential purposes, and no floor may be used for business or office use on a floor located above a floor used for residential purposes. Further, where there is mixed business/office and residential use in a building there shall be provided a separate, private pedestrian entranceway for the residential use. 
Q.  Theaters, assembly halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings, up to 500 seats. 
R.  Business services establishment (mailing, copying, data processing). 
S.  Child day care centers. 
T.  Pet stores. 
U.  Private clubs, fraternal organizations, and lodge halls. 
V.  Self-service laundromats and dry cleaning establishments. 
W.  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to a principal use in this district. 
X.  Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities, open front window service or pick-up window service, and outdoor eating areas in accordance with Article 20 and applicable special requirements of Article 30. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 6, 10-8-18) 
Section 14.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review by the planning commission and approval by the city council, in accordance with the general and specific standards listed in Article 30, Special Land Uses: 
A.  Arcades and similar devices at public commercial mechanical amusement device centers. 
B.  Automobile service (gasoline) stations, including those accessory to another use. 
C.  Automobile service centers and automobile repair (minor maintenance and repair). 
D.  Automobile or vehicle dealerships. 
E.  Automobile washes, automatic or self-service. 
F.  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drive-through lanes, including an automatic letter drive-through lane(s). 
G.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
H.  Retail businesses supplying merchandise on the premises in an enclosed building with more than to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area, including sales of bakery goods (including bakery items produced on the premises), groceries, meats (no slaughtering is permitted on the premises), seafood, dairy products, drugs, books, shoes, apparel, florists, hardware, furniture, home furnishings, paint, wall paper, appliances, auto parts (without service bays), greeting cards, art galleries, beer/wine sales, convenience stores and similar retail establishments. 
I.  Churches, temples, and similar places of worship with more than 500 seats. 
J.  Commercial outdoor sales or storage and open air businesses (as permitted or accessory use). 
K.  Conference centers/convention facilities. 
L.  Essential public service buildings and storage yards. 
M.  Funeral homes and mortuary establishments. 
N.  Hospitals, general and specialty (including substance abuse treatment facilities). 
O.  Indoor commercial recreational facilities including but not limited to health clubs, hard ball and racquetball facilities, pool and billiard establishments, tennis, batting, archery and soccer facilities. 
P.  Kennels (commercial). 
Q.  Professional or medical offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with more than 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
R.  Motels, hotels, bed and breakfast inns, including accessory convention/meeting facilities and restaurants. 
S.  Nursing or convalescent homes. 
T.  Nurseries and lawn and garden centers. 
U.  Outdoor theater, plazas, parks, and public gathering places. 
V.  Recreation: Outdoor recreation establishments (except for golf-related uses). 
W.  Recreation: Golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses, golf courses. 
X.  Recreation: Indoor recreation (bowling alleys, billiard and pool halls, indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, etc.). 
Y.  Recreation: Private recreation facilities and swimming pool clubs. 
Z.  Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities, open front window service, and outdoor eating areas. 
AA.  Roadside market. 
BB.  Shopping centers and retail businesses with over 30,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
CC.  Theaters (indoor), cinemas, concert halls, play houses, assembly halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings, with more than 500 seats. 
DD.  Urgent medical care centers. 
EE.  Veterinary clinics, without outdoor runs or enclosures. 
FF.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use permit. 
( Ord. No. 407, § 2, 5-24-11 ; Ord. No. 431 , § 2, 12-12-16) 
Section 14.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
GBD District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 0 square feet Minimum lot width 0 feet Minimum front yard setback 5 feet Minimum side yard setback 0 feet Minimum rear yard setback 20 feet Max. lot coverage for all buildings 0% Maximum building height 30 feet or 2 stories  
Notes: 
a)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines, except as otherwise specified in the Building Code. On the exterior side yard which borders on a residential district there shall be provided a setback of not less than ten feet on the side, or residential street. If walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than 15 feet shall be provided. 
b)  Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of the buildings, the rear setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 
c)  A wall or fence shall be provided on those sides of the property abutting land zoned for residential use. 
d)  A minimum five-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be provided within the road right-of-way for the entire frontage along a street. 
e)  The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of required off-street parking, loading and unloading and required yards. 
f)  A minimum of five-foot wide greenbelt shall be provided adjacent to a residential district and no structures or off-street parking spaces shall be located within the greenbelt. Grade changes to the greenbelt area shall not be permitted unless the planning commission finds that improved screening of the Highway Service District could be accomplished by changing the grade. The greenbelt area shall be maintained as follows, depending, upon the characteristics of the area: 
1.  The greenbelt shall be left in its natural state if, in the judgment or the planning commission, it would provide the best protection for the residential district and preservation of the natural setting. The commission may require supplemental plantings, in accordance with the landscape design principles if it is necessary to provide adequate year-round screening. 
2.  If sufficient natural vegetation does not exist in the greenbelt area or if, in the opinion of the planning commission, it would not survive or is not suitable for saving, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earth berm shall be constructed in the greenbelt area. Landscaping shall be carried out in accordance with the landscape design principles adopted by the planning commission. 
    In determining the proper buffering technique, the planning commission shall consider the effectiveness of the buffer in protecting the surrounding area and shall also consider the overall natural and manmade characteristics of the site. The construction of the wall shall be in accordance with the standards set out in Article 28 (Landscaping). 
Section 14.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the GBD General Business District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements of Article 20 
D.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
E.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 15. - O-1 OFFICE DISTRICT 

Section 15.00. - Intent. 
    The O-1, Office District is intended to provide primarily for a community of business offices, professional offices, and research and related facilities. This area is further designed to insure the compatibility between the permitted and special uses and the existing character of the adjacent land uses. 
Section 15.01. - Principle uses permitted. 
    In an Office District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
A.  Businesses establishments which perform services on premises such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loans and credit unions (not including drive-thru branches), insurance offices and real estate offices, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. Pedestrian oriented ATM facilities. 
B.  Professional or medical offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with up to 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
C.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
D.  Research, design, and pilot experimental product development as principal function. 
E.  Technical training as principal function. 
F.  Office buildings, intended when incident to the above uses and the executive and administrative offices of businesses engaged in basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product design. 
G.  Essential public service buildings, structures and uses (without storage yards) when operating requirements necessitate their location within the district to serve the immediate vicinity. 
H.  Accessory uses, building signs, and structures customarily incidental to a principal use in their district, except use and storage of hazardous materials. 
Section 15.02. - Special land uses. 
A.  Businesses establishments which perform services on premises such as, but not limited to: banks, savings and loans and credit unions (not including drive-thru branches), insurance offices and real estate offices, with more than 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
B.  Professional or medical offices of doctors, lawyers, dentists, architects, engineers and similar professions, but not including veterinary offices or clinics, with more than 15,000 square feet gross floor area. 
C.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities. 
Section 15.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
O-1 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 2 acres Minimum lot width 250 feet Minimum front yard setback 40 feet Minimum side yard setback a) 30 feet each side 
b) 60 feet combined Minimum rear yard setback 30 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings a) 0% Maximum building height 1. 25 feet or 
2. 2 stories  
Notes: 
a)  The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of required off-street parking, loading and unloading and required yards. 
b)  Off-street parking for visitors may be permitted within the required front yard provided that such off-street parking is not located within 30 feet of the front lot line. The zoning board of appeals may permit the front yard requirement to be reduced to not less than 20 feet for buildings constructed prior to the effective date of this ordinance, provided that minimum off street parking requirements can still be met. 
c)  A minimum five-foot wide concrete sidewalk shall be provided within the road right-of-way for the entire frontage along a street. 
d)  No yard shall be required along the interior side lot lines when said property line is adjacent to like use districts or to railroad rights-of-way. A 20-foot greenbelt shall be provided, in addition to five- to eight-foot completely obscuring wall, within the required yard area and adjacent to the property line, when O-1 Office uses abut residential districts. 
Section 15.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the O-1, Office District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
E.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 16. - I-1, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Section 16.00. - Intent. 
    The I-1, Light Industrial Districts are designed so as to primarily accommodate wholesale activities, warehousing, and industrial operations whose external, physical effects are restricted to the area of the district and will not affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding districts. The I-1 District is so structured as to permit, along with any specified uses, the manufacturing, compounding, processing, packaging, assembly, and/or treatment of finished or semi-finished products from previously prepared material. The processing of raw material for shipment in bulk form, to be used in an industrial operation at another location, shall not be permitted. 
Section 16.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In a Light Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses: 
A.  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. The growing of any vegetation requisite to the conducting of basic research shall be excluded from the requirement of enclosure. 
B.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments, and trucking facilities. 
C.  Laboratories-Experimental, film, or testing. 
D.  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, or storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all Residential or Business Districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the city council in consideration of the type of use and surrounding uses. 
E.  Packaging plants. 
F.  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, with no retail service. 
G.  Commercial outdoor sales or storage and open air businesses (as permitted or accessory use). 
H.  Kennels (commercial), including boarding and outdoor runs. 
I.  Mini- or self-storage warehouses that meet the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be three acres. 
2.  Minimum building and parking setback shall be 50 feet from any public street right-of-way line, 50 feet setback from any residential district and 25 feet from any non-residential zoning district. 
3.  The front yard and any side yards adjacent to residential districts shall include wrought iron or similar decorative fencing and evergreen plantings spaced a maximum of ten feet apart on center. If approved by the city council, a fence, which meets the requirements of section 28.03 D. may be constructed provided evergreen trees spaced a maximum of ten feet apart on center are planted outside of the fence. 
4.  Mini-storage/warehouse establishments shall provide for storage only. All storage must be completely within an enclosed building, unless a separate special land use permit is granted for commercial outdoor storage on the premises. 
5.  Buildings must be oriented so that open service bays do not face adjacent collector or principal or minor arterial roads, as shown on the Transportation Map in the Swartz Creek Master Plan, unless screened by an adjoining lot, building, or buffer area in compliance with item I.3. above. 
6.  The exterior or any mini- or self-storage warehouse shall be of finished quality and design, compatible with the design of structures on surrounding property. 
7.  The following standards shall apply to on-site circulation and parking: 

i.  All one-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide loading/unloading lane adjacent to each storage unit building and one 15-foot travel lane. 
ii.  All two-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide loading/unloading lane adjacent to each storage unit building and two 12-foot travel lanes. 
iii.  The loading and unloading lanes may be eliminated if the driveway does not serve storage units. Signs and painted lines shall be used to indicate parking and traffic direction throughout the site. 
8.  The hours of operation may be limited by the city council when mini- or self-storage warehouse establishments abut a residentially zoned district or residential use. 
9.  All on-site lighting is to be shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. Where such establishments abut a residential district or use, on-site lighting is to be limited to pole lights that do not exceed 15 feet in height. There is to be no more than one footcandle at the property line. 
10.  Public address systems are prohibited. 
11.  A resident manager may be permitted on-site with the responsibility of maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval. The manager's residence shall conform to the provision of this ordinance. 
J.  Offices, professional or corporate offices. 
K.  Print shops and book publishing. 
L.  Public or private parks or open space. 
M.  Radio or television studios. 
N.  Essential public service and utilities storage yards. 
O.  Experimental, film, or testing laboratories. 
P.  Printing, lithography, blueprinting, publishing, and similar uses. 
Q.  Professional and corporate offices related to a permitted manufacturing operation. 
R.  Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops. 
S.  Vocational schools and technical training schools. 
T.  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the above principal uses. 
Section 16.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted upon review of the site plan by the planning commission, and approval by the city council, in accordance with the general and specific standards listed in Article 30. 
A.  Assembly, manufacture, compounding, processing, packaging, or treatment from previously prepared materials, or repair, of such products as, but not limited to: 
1)  Bakery goods and candy. 
2)  Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries. 
3)  Hardware and cutlery. 
4)  Pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
5)  Musical instruments, toys, sporting goods, and novelties. 
6)  Small molded rubber products. 
7)  Electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, electronic consumer products, and photographic equipment. 
8)  Electric or neon signs. 
9)  Light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, siding, cornices, eaves, and the like. 
10)  Textile goods. 
11)  Apparel, jewelry, and leather goods. 
12)  Furniture and fixtures. 
B.  Billboards in accordance with the standards of the city's sign ordinance. 
C.  Commercial breweries, distilleries, and wineries. 
D.  Adult and child residential care facilities in accordance with section 20.08, Adult and child care facilities, when on the perimeter of the district or affiliated with firms within the district. 
E.  Commercial composting centers. 
F.  Crematoria. 
G.  Fairgrounds, horse and dog race tracks. 
H.  Freezer locker plants and cold storage. 
I.  Indoor recreation center (including but not limited to bowling alleys, billiard and pool halls, indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, etc.). 
J.  Lumber and planing mills when completely enclosed and when located in the interior of the district so that no property line shall form the exterior boundary of the I-1 District. 
K.  Auto repair (major) such as auto engine, undercoating, and body repair shops conducted within an enclosed building. 
L.  Metal plating, buffing and polishing, subject to appropriate measures to prevent noxious results and/or nuisances. 
M.  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings. 
N.  Oil, gas, or brine wells. 
O.  Outdoor theaters. 
P.  Painting and varnishing shops. 
Q.  Recycling stations. 
R.  Retail uses which have an industrial character in terms of either their outdoor storage requirements or activities (such as, but not limited to: lumber yards, building materials, outlets, garage sales, upholsterer, cabinet maker, outdoor boat, or house trailer, automobile, or agricultural implement sales). 
S.  Retail, restaurants (including drive-throughs), and service establishments serving the needs of the Industrial District, such as, but not limited to: banks, credit unions, savings and loan associations (including drive-throughs), automobile service stations, motels, bowling alleys, trade or industrial schools, or industrial clinics. 
T.  Riding academies and stables. 
U.  Slaughterhouses. 
V.  Storage and transfer, and electric and gas service buildings and yards; public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water, propane and petroleum tank holders; railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way, and freight terminals. 
W.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use. 
Section 16.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
I-1 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 0 square feet Minimum lot width 0 feet Minimum front yard setback 50 feet Minimum side yard setback 1. 50 feet (each side) and 
2. 100 feet (total both sides) Minimum rear yard setback 0 feet Maximum lot coverage for all buildings 0% Maximum building height 40 feet  
Notes: 
a)  No side yards are required along the interior side lot lines that abut another property zoned for non-residential use, except as otherwise specified in the building code. On the exterior side yard which borders on a residential district or residential street there shall be provided a setback of not less than 50 feet. If walls of structures facing such interior side lot lines contain windows, or other openings, side yards of not less than 75 feet shall be provided. 
b)  Loading space shall be provided in the rear yard in the ratio of at least ten square feet per front foot of building and shall be computed separately from the off-street parking requirements. Where an alley exists or is provided at the rear of the buildings, the rear setback and loading requirements may be computed from the center of said alley. 
c)  A wall or fence shall be provided on those sides of the property abutting land zoned for residential use. 
d)  The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of required off-street parking, loading and unloading and required yards. 
e)  A minimum of five-foot wide greenbelt shall be provided adjacent to a residential district and no structures or off-street parking spaces shall be located within the greenbelt. Grade changes to the greenbelt area shall not be permitted unless the planning commission finds that improved screening of the Highway Service District could be accomplished by changing the grade. The greenbelt area shall be maintained by one of, or a combination of, the following, depending, upon the characteristics of the area: 
1.  The greenbelt shall be left in its natural state if, in the judgment or the planning commission, it would provide the best protection for the residential district and preservation of the natural setting. The commission may require supplemental plantings, in accordance with the landscape design principles if it is necessary to provide adequate year-round screening. 
2.  If sufficient natural vegetation does not exist in the greenbelt area or if, in the opinion of the planning commission, it would not survive or is not suitable for saving, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earth berm shall be constructed in the greenbelt area. Landscaping shall be carried out in accordance with the landscape design principles adopted by the planning commission. 
In determining the proper buffering technique, the planning commission shall consider the effectiveness of the buffer in protecting the surrounding area and shall also consider the overall natural and manmade characteristics of the site. 
f)  Parking shall be permitted in the front yard after recommended approval of the parking plan layout and points of access by the planning commission. The required front yard setback required by planning commission shall be measured from the nearest side of existing and or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
Section 16.04. - General development standards. 
    Buildings and uses in the I-1 Light Industrial District shall also be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
A.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
B.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
C.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements set out in Article 20. 
D.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
E.  Off-street (un)loading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
F.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 17. - I-2, HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS 

Section 17.00. - Intent. 
    The I-2, Heavy Industrial District is established primarily for manufacturing, assembling and fabrication activities including large-scale or specialized industrial operations whose external physical effects will be felt to some degree by surrounding districts. The I-2 District is so structured as to permit, in addition to I-1 Light Industrial uses, the manufacturing, processing and compounding of semi-finished or finished products from raw materials. 
Section 17.01. - Principal uses permitted. 
    In the I-2, Heavy Industrial District, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be erected except for one or more of the following specified uses, unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, and which shall conform to the performance standards set forth in Article 20: 
A.  Any use charged with the principal function of basic research, design, and pilot or experimental product development when conducted within a completely enclosed building. The growing of any vegetation requisite to the conducting of basic research shall be excluded from the requirement of enclosure. 
B.  Warehousing and wholesale establishments. 
C.  Assembly, manufacture, compounding, processing, finishing, packaging, or treatment from previously prepared materials, or repair, of such products as, but not limited to: 
1.  Auto parts manufacturing and assembly. 
2.  Bakery goods and candy. 
3.  Cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and toiletries. 
4.  Hardware and cutlery. 
5.  Pottery and figurines or other similar ceramic products using only previously pulverized clay and kilns fired only by electricity or gas. 
6.  Musical instruments, toys, sporting goods, and novelties. 
7.  Molded rubber products. 
8.  Electrical appliances, electronic instruments and devices, electronic consumer products, and photographic equipment. 
9.  Electric or neon signs. 
10.  Light sheet metal products, including heating and ventilating equipment, siding, cornices, eaves, and the like. 
11.  Textile goods. 
12.  Apparel, jewelry, and leather goods. 
13.  Furniture and fixtures. 
D.  Laboratories-Experimental, film, or testing. 
E.  Packaging plants. 
F.  Central dry cleaning plants or laundries, with no retail service. 
G.  Kennels (commercial), including boarding and outdoor runs. 
H.  Mini- or self-storage warehouses that meet the following requirements: 
1.  Minimum lot size shall be three acres. 
2.  Minimum building and parking setback shall be 50 feet from any public street right-of-way line, 50 feet setback from any residential district and 25 feet from any non-residential zoning district. 
3.  The front yard and any side yards adjacent to residential districts shall include wrought iron or similar decorative fencing and evergreen plantings spaced a maximum of ten feet apart on center. If approved by the city council, a fence, which meets the requirements of section 28.03 D. may be constructed provided evergreen trees spaced a maximum of ten feet apart on center are planted outside of the fence. 
4.  Mini- storage/warehouse establishments shall provide for storage only. All storage must be completely within an enclosed building, unless a separate special land use permit is granted for commercial outdoor storage on the premises. 
5.  Buildings must be oriented so that open service bays do not face adjacent major thoroughfares or arterial roads unless screened by an adjoining lot, building, or buffer area in compliance with H.3. above. 
6.  The exterior or any mini- or self-storage warehouse shall be of finished quality and design, compatible with the design of structures on surrounding property. 
7.  The following standards shall apply to on-site circulation and parking: 

i.  All one-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide loading/unloading lane and one 15-foot travel lane. 
ii.  All two-way driveways shall be designed with one ten-foot wide loading/unloading lane and two 12-foot travel lanes. 
iii.  The loading/unloading lanes may be eliminated if the driveway does not serve storage units. Signs and painted lines shall be used to indicate parking and traffic direction throughout the site. 
8.  The hours of operation may be limited by the city council when mini- or self-storage warehouse establishments abut a residentially zoned district or residential use. 
9.  All on-site lighting is to be shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. Where such establishments abut a residential district or use, on-site lighting is to be limited to pole lights that do not exceed 15 feet in height. There is to be no more than one footcandle at the property line. 
10.  Public address systems are prohibited. 
11.  A resident manager may be permitted on-site with the responsibility of maintaining the operation of the facility in conformance with the conditions of approval. 
I.  Offices, professional or corporate offices. 
J.  Print shops and book publishing. 
K.  Public or private parks or open space. 
L.  Radio or television studios. 
M.  Breweries, distilleries, and wineries. 
N.  Experimental, film, or testing laboratories. 
O.  Painting and varnishing shops. 
P.  Printing, lithography, blueprinting, publishing, and similar uses. 
Q.  Professional and corporate offices related to a permitted manufacturing operation. 
R.  Tool, die, gauge, and machine shops. 
S.  Vocational schools and technical training schools. 
T.  Accessory buildings, structures, and uses customarily incidental to any of the above principal uses. 
U.  Heating and electric power generating plants, and all accessory uses. 
V.  Any production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, repair, or storage of materials, goods, or products which conform with the performance standards set forth in Article 20. 
W.  Essential public services and utilities buildings without storage yards. 
X.  Accessory structures, uses and signs customarily incidental to a principal use in this district. 
Section 17.02. - Special land uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted after review of the site plan by the planning commission, and approval by the city council, in accordance with the general and specific standards in Article 30. 
A.  Adult regulated uses. 
B.  Auto repair (major) such as auto engine, undercoating, and body repair shops conducted within an enclosed building. 
C.  Auto race track (including midget auto and karting tracks). 
D.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
E.  Chemical plants and storage. 
F.  Commercial composting centers. 
G.  Crematoria. 
H.  Essential public services and utilities buildings with storage yards. 
I.  Gun clubs. 
J.  Incineration of garbage or refuse when conducted within an approved and enclosed incinerator plant. 
K.  Junk yards, provided such are entirely enclosed within an obscuring wall. There shall be no burning on the site and all industrial processes including the use of equipment for cutting, compressing or packaging shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
L.  Lumber and planting mills when completely enclosed in a building. 
M.  Mushroom farms. 
N.  Municipal uses such as water treatment plants, and reservoirs, sewage treatment plants, and all other municipal buildings. 
O.  Oil, gas, or brine wells. 
P.  Storage and transfer, and electric and gas service buildings and yards; public utility buildings, telephone exchange buildings, electrical transformer stations and substations, and gas regulator stations; water supply and sewage disposal plants; water, propane and petroleum tank holders; railroad transfer and storage tracks, railroad rights-of-way, and freight terminals. 
Q.  Storage facilities for building materials, sand, gravel, stone, lumber, or storage of contractor's equipment and supplies, provided such is enclosed within a building or within an obscuring wall or fence on those sides abutting all Residential or Business Districts, and on any yard abutting a public thoroughfare. The extent of such fence or wall may be determined by the city council in consideration of the type of use and surrounding uses. 
R.  Accessory uses, buildings and structures customarily incidental to an approved special land use. 
( Ord. No. 407, § 3, 5-24-11 ; Ord. No. 431 , § 3, 12-12-16) 
Section 17.03. - Site development requirements. 
    All permitted uses and special land uses are subject to the following setbacks, height, area, and lot dimensions are required as noted below: 
I-2 District Regulations Requirements Minimum lot area 0 square feet Minimum lot width 0 feet Minimum front yard setback 50 feet Minimum side yard setback 1. 50 feet (each side) 
2. 100 feet (total both sides) Minimum rear yard setback 50 Maximum lot coverage for all buildings 0% Maximum building height 40 feet  
Notes: 
a)  The maximum percentage of coverage shall be determined by the use and the provisions of required off-street parking, loading and unloading and required yards. 
b)  No yard shall be required along the interior side lot lines when said property line is adjacent to like use districts or to railroad rights-of-way. A 20-foot greenbelt shall be provided, in addition to five- to eight-foot completely obscuring wall, within the required yard area and adjacent to the property line, when I-2 industrial uses abut residential districts. 
c)  Parking shall be permitted in the front yard after recommended approval of the parking plan layout and points of access by the planning commission. The required front yard setback required by planning commission shall be measured from the nearest side of existing and or proposed right-of-way lines, whichever is greater. 
d)  A minimum of five-foot wide greenbelt shall be provided adjacent to a residential district and no structures or off-street parking spaces shall be located within the greenbelt. Grade changes to the greenbelt area shall not be permitted unless the planning commission finds that improved screening of the Highway Service District could be accomplished by changing the grade. The greenbelt area shall be maintained by one of, or a combination of, the following, depending, upon the characteristics of the area: 
1.  The greenbelt shall be left in its natural state if, in the judgment or the planning commission, it would provide the best protection for the residential district and preservation of the natural setting. The planning commission may require supplemental plantings, in accordance with the landscape design principles if it is necessary to provide adequate year-round screening. 
2.  If sufficient natural vegetation does not exist in the greenbelt area or if, in the opinion of the planning commission, it would not survive or is not suitable for saving, a minimum four-foot high landscaped earth berm shall be constructed in the greenbelt area. Landscaping shall be carried out in accordance with the landscape design principles adopted by the planning commission. 
3.  In determining the proper buffering technique, the planning commission shall consider the effectiveness of the buffer in protecting the surrounding area and shall also consider the overall natural and manmade characteristics of the site. 
Section 17.04. - General development standards. 
A.  A traffic impact statement/assessment is required for all uses that are expected to generate over 100 directional trips during peak hour or over 750 trips in an average day. 
B.  Buildings and uses in the I-2, Heavy Industrial District shall be subject to all applicable standards and requirements set forth in this ordinance, including the following: 
1.  Exterior lighting is required in accordance with Article 27. 
2.  Site plan review is required in accordance with the requirements of Article 29. 
3.  Area, height, and use exceptions are permitted in accordance with the requirements setout in Article 20. 
4.  Parking is required in accordance with Article 26. 
5.  Off-street loading and unloading is required in accordance with Article 26. 
6.  Landscaping is required in accordance with Article 28. 
ARTICLE 18. - CONDOMINIUMS 

Section 18.00. - Intent. 
    New condominium projects and conversion condominium projects shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance and all other applicable regulations of the city and the Condominium Act, P.A. 59 of 1978, as amended. Each condominium project shall be reviewed in a manner consistent with like projects within the underlying zoning district. A site condominium project shall be considered equivalent to a platted subdivision for the purposes of enforcing the zoning, site and building requirements of the city. It is the intent to regulate site condominium projects and other condominium projects in a manner consistent with a traditional subdivision plat, except that the review procedures within the following sections shall apply. 
Section 18.01. - General. 
    The following regulations shall apply to condominium projects: 
(a)  Lot. For all purposes of this ordinance, each condominium lot or unit lot shall be considered the equivalent of a platted lot of record as defined in this ordinance and shall comply with all applicable regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Computation. Any area within a public or private road right-of-way shall not be included in the computation of the minimum area of a condominium lot or in determination of dwelling density for a site. 
(c)  Dwelling unit. In the case of a condominium project in which the condominium units are intended for single-family residential purposes, not more than one single-family dwelling unit shall be proposed or constructed on a condominium lot, nor shall any dwelling unit be located on a condominium lot with any other principal use. 
(d)  Setback requirement. Yard setback requirements as specified in each district shall be measured from the perimeter of the condominium lot to the appropriate part of a structure. 
(e)  Utility connections. Each condominium unit shall be separately connected to any available community or public water supply and/or sanitary sewer system. 
(f)  Relocation of lot boundaries. Relocation of condominium lot boundaries, if allowed in the condominium documents, as permitted in Section 48 of the Condominium Act, shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. The relocation of the boundaries or any other change in the dimensions of a condominium lot or unit lot shall be considered an amendment to the condominium documents of the project and the related site plan. 
(g)  Resulting lots. Each condominium lot formed by the relocation of an existing condominium lot boundary, as permitted by Section 49 of the Condominium Act, shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(h)  Road requirements in condominium projects. All condominium projects shall require direct access and direct connection to a public road from the project site. Public and private roads within a condominium project shall conform to the requirements and specifications established by the city's engineering manual. 
(i)  Storm water. Storm water detention and retention ponds shall be included as general common elements within the condominium project and shall not be included within individual lots. The ponds shall be design in accordance with city and county standards. Where the ponds are not part of a county drainage district, the master deed shall establish a mechanism for long-term maintenance of the ponds by the condominium association. 
Section 18.02. - Condominium plan review process. 
(a)  Optional tentative review. A developer of a condominium may seek an optional tentative condominium site plan review prior to the forwarding of the ten-day notice of proposed action as required in Section 71 of the Condominium Act. A tentative approval may be beneficial to the developer of a site condominium as it parallels a tentative preliminary plat. 
    Based upon the design requirements and requirements set forth in this ordinance, the planning commission shall review and make a recommendation to the city council for an optional tentative condominium site plan. The council shall tentatively approve, subject to conditions, or deny the site plan. 
(1)  Effect of denial. A denial shall mean that the site plan for the proposed condominium project does not meet the requirements of this or other city ordinances. A city council motion of denial shall specify the reasons for the denial and those requirements which are not met. 
(2)  Effect of tentative approval. A tentative approval shall confer upon the developer the approval of unit sizes, unit orientations, and road layout only. All required additional information must be submitted and reviews processed. A tentative preliminary site plan approval shall be valid for one year from the date of approval. 
(b)  Preliminary review. Prior to recording of the master deed of the condominium project, as required by Section 72 of the Condominium Act, each condominium project shall be reviewed by the planning commission and submitted with comments recommending approval of the preliminary condominium site plan by the city council, based on a review and recommendation by the planning commission. 
(c)  Effect of preliminary approval. A preliminary approval shall mean that the site plan for a condominium project meets the requirements of this ordinance. Subject to any conditions imposed by the city council as part of its motion of approval, a preliminary approval assures the applicant that the project and site plan shall receive final approval if: 
(1)  The applicant meets the requirements as stated in Article 29 for final site plan approval. 
(2)  All other governmental approvals are obtained. 
(3)  No substantive negative comments are received from any governmental agencies or public utilities during the required notice period. 
(4)  All federal, state, and local laws and ordinances are met. All site condominium projects shall require the review and approval or comments from the following agencies prior to final site plan review by the city: 
1.  The Genesee County Road Commission if any part of the project includes or abuts a county road. 
2.  The Genesee County Drain Commissioner. 
3.  Michigan Department Health and/or the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality shall approve the extension of the water and sewer utilities. 
(5)  A preliminary condominium site plan approval shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of city council approval. 
(d)  Construction plan review. After preliminary site plan approval, a complete set of construction plans must be submitted to the city for review. Construction plans will not be considered for review until the applicant receives city approval of the preliminary site plan. The city zoning administrator shall forward the construction plans to the city engineer and other city consultants or agencies as deemed necessary for review. 
    Based on the review comments and recommendations of the city engineer and other review agencies, the zoning administrator shall approve or not approve the construction plans. The reasons that the construction plans are not approved will be given to the applicant. 
    Upon receiving city approval of the construction plans, applicable permits for construction may be issued by the zoning administrator following payment of the required fees. Construction plan approval shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of city approval of the construction plans. The applicant is required to obtain the soil erosion and sedimentation control permit from the Genesee County Drain Commissioner and other applicable agency permits before starting construction. 
(e)  Final review. Prior to the city assigning parcel identification numbers to each unit in the condominium development, a condominium project shall receive final condominium site plan approval from the city zoning administrator, the final site plan drawings shall be mylars of the Exhibit B Drawings to the Master Deed meeting the requirements of Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended. 
    The applicant will be required to provide a performance guarantee to the city to cover the costs of all site improvements included in the approved construction plans that are not completed at the time of final site plan approval. 
    A final site plan approval shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of approval. At the end of the two-year period, a new site plan approval shall be required before development of the remaining undeveloped property can proceed. In cases where the there is clear evidence that development is proceeding, planning commission may authorize up to a one-year extension of the site plan approval. 
Section 18.03. - Optional tentative plan submission requirements. 
    Application for a tentative condominium site plan review may be provided to the zoning administrator at least 30 days in advance of a meeting for which a review is scheduled. The tentative review will allow a developer to receive a limited approval for unit lot sizes, unit lot orientation, and road layout only. The following information must be included on, or attached to a tentative condominium project site plan: 
(a)  Ownership interests. All persons with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located, including a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner, optionee, lessee, or land contract vendee). 
(b)  Proposed use. The proposed use of the condominium project (for example: residential, commercial, or industrial). 
(c)  Density. The total acreage of the condominium site, acreage set aside for roads, number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel, and density computation on a unit per acre basis. 
(d)  Circulation. The vehicular and pedestrian circulation system planned for the proposed development, including the designation of any road(s) as to private ownership or proposed dedication to the public. 
(e)  Road layout. The location of existing private and public roads adjacent to the proposed development with an indication of how they will connect with the proposed circulation system for the new condominium project. 
(f)  Condominium lot orientation. The proposed layout of structures, condominium lots, parking areas, open space and recreation/park areas. 
(g)  Drainage. Site drainage showing topography and flow directions, including computations of flows into storm sewers or retention and/or detention areas. 
(h)  Natural features. Specific locations and dimensions of wetland areas, wetland buffers, floodplain, and significant natural features such as tree stands, unusual slopes, streams, and water drainage areas. Acreage of wetland areas and open space. 
Section 18.04. - Preliminary site plan submission requirements. 
    A preliminary site plan for a condominium project shall be provided to the zoning administrator at least 30 days in advance of a meeting for which a review is scheduled. The site plan may be reviewed and processed concurrently with the notice required to be given the city pursuant to Section 71 of the Condominium Act. The following information shall be included on, or attached to a preliminary condominium project site plan: 
(a)  Tentative site plan data. All information required for the optional tentative site plan review in section 18.03 above shall be submitted. If tentative approval was received, the information must be updated with any changes clearly delineated. 
(b)  Landscaping. Proposed landscape screening, including greenbelt and berms, and screening walls and a maintenance plan detailing maintenance responsibilities. 
(c)  Condominium regulations. All deed restrictions or other regulations proposed to be included in the condominium documents in the nature of restrictive covenants which regulate the layout, use and maintenance of public or common areas, accessory structures, payment of assessments, and enforcement of condominium regulations. These items shall be physically incorporated as part of the site plan through detail sheets attached with the plan. 
(d)  Common areas shown. Limited common elements, common elements, unit lots, preservation areas, convertible areas and any other designated ownership areas must be clearly delineated on the site plan. 
(e)  Condominium documents. All condominium documents, including the master deed, must be provided for review by the city attorney. 
(f)  Additional information. The following additional information must be submitted for city review: 
(1)  Cross sections of roads, drive aisles, and paved area. 
(2)  Preliminary approval by the county health department and drain commissioner of proposed septic, sanitary, storm, and/or water system locations. 
(3)  All condominium documents as defined in this ordinance. 
(4)  All necessary easement documents showing the dedication of land areas for the purposes of constructing, operating, inspecting, maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, and/or removing pipelines, mains, conduits and other installations of a similar character for the purpose of providing public utilities, including conveyance of sewage, water and storm water runoff across, through and under the property subject to said easement, and excavating and refilling ditches and trenches necessary for the location of the structures. 
Section 18.05. - Final site plan submission requirements. 
    The developer or proprietor may request final approval by submitting to the city the following items: 
(a)  Revised plan. A revised, dated condominium plan incorporating all of the changes, if any, required for preliminary approval. 
(b)  Approvals or comments. Verification of all required state and county approvals or comments. 
(c)  Section 71 comments. Presentation of all comments pursuant to Section 71 of the Condominium Act. 
(d)  Condominium documents. Copies of the recorded condominium documents or copies of the documents in their final recordable form, including the required condominium site plan. 
Section 18.06. - Project requirements. 
    The following requirements are applicable to condominiums: 
(a)  Single-family site condominiums. Single-family site condominium units and unit lots shall be subject to all dimensional and area requirements for lots and other city design requirements for the zoning district in which they are located as stated in each district, and other requirements of this ordinance. These regulations shall be applied by requiring that the minimum area of condominium unit and the surrounding limited common element be, at least equal to the minimum lot area and lot width requirements for lots of record in the district in which the project is located. The area that the condominium unit encompasses for the principal building and the surrounding limited common element shall incorporate, at a minimum the equivalent of the minimum yard setback requirements as defined within this ordinance and shall meet all the dimensional requirements of a lot for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  Commercial, office, or industrial site condominiums. Commercial, office, or industrial site condominium projects shall be subject to all requirements applicable to the zoning district in which they are located. These regulations shall be applied by requiring that minimum area of the site condominium unit and a surrounding limited common element be at least equal to the minimum area and width requirements for the district in which the project is located. The uses contained in a commercial, office, or industrial site condominium project must be appropriate as allowed uses of the underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Subdivision requirements. The substantive requirements for roads, sidewalks, utilities, storm drainage and subdivision lot layout and design as set forth in the Subdivision Control Act of 1967, Act 288 of the Public Acts of 1967, as amended, MCLA 560.101 et seq., and the City's Subdivision Regulations, are intended to apply to all site condominium projects. 
(d)  Conversion condominium. All conversion condominium projects shall be subject to the provisions of this ordinance and shall require site plan approval by the planning commission prior to the occupancy of any converted condominium unit. The site plan submitted for a conversion project shall include all existing conditions and clearly identify all proposed site changes. The planning commission will review the site plan for a condominium conversion as a new site plan and may modify any previous site plan approval. Approval of a conversion condominium site plan shall be subject to site plan requirements and review of the planning commission. 
(e)  Public utilities. All condominium projects will be required to connect to public utilities at the time of construction, if available. If public utilities are not available at the time of construction the development must be designed to accommodate future connection to the system upon availability. 
Section 18.07. - Survey monuments required. 
    All site condominium projects shall be marked with survey monuments as follows: 
(a)  Required. Survey monuments shall be placed in the ground according to the following requirements but it is not intended or required that monuments be placed within the traveled portion of a road to mark angles in the boundary of the condominium project if the angle points can be readily reestablished by reference to monuments along the sidelines of the roads. 
(b)  Construction. All survey monuments used shall be made of solid iron or steel bars at least one-half inch in diameter and 36 inches long and completely encased in concrete at least four inches in diameter. 
(c)  Location. Survey monuments shall be located in the ground at all angles in the boundaries of the condominium project; at the intersection lines of roads and at the intersection of the lines of roads with the boundaries of the condominium project; at all points of curvature, points of tangency, points of compound curvature, points of reverse curvature and angle points in the side lines of roads and alleys; at all angles of an intermediate traverse line and at the intersection of all limited common elements and all common elements. 
(1)  If the required location of a monument is inaccessible, or if the locating of a monument would be clearly impracticable, it is sufficient to place a reference monument nearby and the precise location thereof be clearly indicated on the plans and referenced to the true point. 
(2)  If a point required to be monumented is on a bedrock outcropping, a steel rod, at least one-half inch in diameter shall be drilled and grouted into solid rock to a depth of at least eight inches. 
(3)  All required monuments shall be placed flush with the surrounding grade where practicable. 
(d)  Condominium unit. Each condominium unit corner shall be monumented in the field by iron or steel bars or iron pipes at least 18 inches long and one-half inch in diameter, or markers approved by the city engineer. Each condominium lot must be able to be defined by reference to appropriate condominium unit monuments. 
(e)  Timing. The city council, on recommendation of the city engineer, may waive the placing of any of the required monuments and markers for a reasonable time, not to exceed one year, following the date of final site plan approval, on the condition that the proprietor deposits with the city clerk cash or a certified check, or irrevocable bank letter of credit running to the city, whichever the proprietor selects, in an amount approved by the city. Such cash, certified check or irrevocable bank letter of credit shall be returned to the proprietor upon receipt of a certificate by a surveyor that the monuments and markers have been placed as required within the time specified. 
Section 18.08. - Post construction documents. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of a developer or proprietor of a condominium project to furnish the city, through the zoning administrator, the following items: 
(1)  One copy of the recorded master deed. 
(2)  One copy of all restrictive covenants. 
(3)  Two copies of an "as built survey" sealed by a licensed surveyor or, professional engineer. 
(4)  One 18-inch by 24-inch and one 24-inch by 36-inch mylar of the site plan sealed by a professional engineer or land surveyor. 
(5)  One CD containing digital files that are compatible with the city's geographic information system software (AutoCAD). Acceptable data formats are DXF or DWG. Digital files shall contain information which references either government corners or existing public right-of-way intersections in distance and direction from the project area. Any digital files which are not created 1:1 shall include appropriate scale information. Feature or element information within the digital files shall be isolated by both feature groups (files) and layers/levels. Any other information provided within the digital files shall be layer isolated and shall include a written description of both the layer name and the information contained on the layer(s). Digital information provided to the city shall be delivered in a format compatible with the city's operating system. 
(b)  The above documents must be submitted prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy to any structure within the condominium project. 
(c)  The developer or proprietor must also furnish one copy of the site plan sealed by a professional engineer, landscape architect or registered planner on a mylar sheet of at least 13 inches by 16 inches with an image not to exceed 101/2 inches by 14 inches to the Genesee County Register of Deeds. 
Section 18.09. - Temporary occupancy. 
    The city council, upon recommendation from the city zoning administrator, may allow occupancy of a condominium unit before all required improvements are installed, provided that a bond is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of all remaining improvements without expense to the city before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit. 
Section 18.10. - Condominium plan revision. 
    If the condominium subdivision plan as required by the Condominium Act is revised, the final site plan shall be revised accordingly and submitted for the review by the city council prior to the issuance of any additional building permit. A new condominium site plan review, consistent with the procedures of these regulations, shall be required for any major change to an approved site plan as defined by the requirements stated in Article 29 (Site Plan Review). 
Section 18.11. - Amendment of condominium documents. 
    An amendment to any condominium document that affects the preliminary or final site plan, or any conditions of the preliminary or final site plan approval, shall be approved by the city council prior to the issuance of a building permit. The city council may require a new site plan review of the amended site plan, if, in its sole opinion, such changes in a document require significant changes to an approved site plan. 
ARTICLE 19. - NON-CONFORMING LOTS, USES, BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES 

Section 19.00. - Intent. 
A.  Non-conformities are considered to be incompatible with the current or intended use of land, buildings or structures in the district in which they are located. This article is intended to meet the objectives stated below by establishing regulations that govern the completion, restoration, reconstruction, extension, and/or substitution of non-conformities, and specify the circumstances and conditions under which non-conformities shall be permitted to continue. 
B.  The intent of this article is to eliminate, or bring into compliance, lots, buildings, structures and uses which legally existed at the date of adoption of this ordinance, but do not meet the current standards of this ordinance. This ordinance also has special provisions to permit certain non-conforming situations considered to be less harmful to continue under certain conditions, but to discourage their expansion, enlargement, or extension. The requirement and standards of this article are intended to accomplish the following: 
1.  Terminate and remove any use, building, accessory structure or any combination thereof that was established after the effective date of this ordinance and in violation of this ordinance. Such uses, buildings, or accessory structures are classified as violations of this ordinance and shall not receive any of the rights, privileges or protection conferred by this article for non-conforming situations. 
2.  Discourage the continuation of non-conforming uses that are more intense than the uses permitted within the zoning district and are considered to be incompatible with permitted uses, or encourage their redevelopment into a more conforming use. 
3.  Permit legal non-conforming buildings, structures or uses to remain until they are discontinued, removed or abandoned. 
4.  Encourage a gradual upgrading to a more conforming status of site landscaping, parking, paving, signs and other features of a site required by the zoning ordinance and sign ordinance developed in compliance with the requirements at the time of their construction, but which do not meet the site requirements of such ordinance. 
5.  Encourage the combination of contiguous non-conforming lots of record to create lots which conform or more closely conform to current requirements, for better compatibility with other lots in the zoning districts in which they are located, to promote the public health, safety and welfare and to eliminate problems associated with the overcrowding of land. 
Section 19.01. - Applicability. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to require a change in plans, construction, or designated use of any building on which actual construction was lawfully begun prior to the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, upon which actual building construction has been diligently continued and there is a valid building permit. Actual construction is hereby defined to include the placing of construction materials in permanent position and fastened in a permanent manner. Where demolition or removal of an existing building has been substantially begun preparatory to rebuilding such work shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that such work shall be diligently continued until completion of the building involved. 
Section 19.02. - Non-conforming uses. 
    Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, a lawful use on open land, a lot(s), building(s) or accessory structure(s) exists that is made non-conforming by this ordinance or its amendments, such use may be continued, as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Expansions: Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use, and which existed at the effective date of this ordinance. Except for one-family dwellings as permitted below, a non-conforming use shall not be enlarged, expanded or extended to occupy a greater area of land, constructed, reconstructed or structurally altered except with approval by the zoning board of appeals (ZBA). 
B.  Accessory uses and structures: No new accessory use, building or structure shall be established. 
C.  Relocation: The non-conforming use shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of this ordinance. 
D.  Change in use: If no structural alterations are made, any non-conforming use of a building, or building and land in combination, may be changed to another non-conforming use if the ZBA finds the proposed use is more appropriate to the district than the existing non-conforming use. In permitting the change, the ZBA may require conditions and safeguards in accord with the purpose and intent of this ordinance. Where a non-conforming use of a structure, land, or structure and land in combination is hereafter changed to a more conforming use, it shall not thereafter be changed to a less conforming use. 
E.  Removal: Where non-conforming use status applies to a structure and land in combination, removal or destruction of the structure shall eliminate the non-conforming status of the land. 
F.  Abandonment or discontinuance: If the non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period exceeding one year and the zoning administrator determines that the owner has established intent to abandon the non-conforming use, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the requirements specified by this ordinance for the zoning district in which it is located. A non-conforming use shall be determined to be abandoned if one or more of the following conditions exists, and shall be deemed to constitute an intent on the part of the property owner to abandon the non-conforming use: 
1.  Utilities, such as water, gas and electric to the property, have been disconnected. 
2.  The property, buildings, and grounds, have fallen into disrepair. 
3.  Signs or other indications of the existence of the non-conforming use have been removed. 
4.  Removal of equipment or fixtures which are necessary for the operation of the non-conforming use. 
5.  Other actions, which in the opinion of the zoning administrator constitute an intention of the part of the property owner or lessee to abandon the non-conforming use. 
G.  Special standards for one-family dwellings in a non-residential district: 
1.  An existing one-family residential dwelling in a zoning district which does not permit that use may be expanded to occupy the floor area necessary for living purposes required by the building code. 
2.  A one-family dwelling and its accessory structures, in a zoning district which does not permit that use may be continued, replaced, repaired or remodeled if damaged by flood, fire, or vandalism, if approved by the ZBA. Such approval requires a finding that the resulting building footprint and floor area will be the same size or smaller than that of the building before such change. Replacement of such non-conforming one-family building shall commence no sooner then receiving a valid building permit and no later than six months of the date of damage. Work shall be diligently pursued toward completion. The applicant may be required to provide the city with evidence, visual or otherwise, that demonstrates to the satisfaction of the city that work is being diligently pursued. Failure to complete replacement or to diligently work toward completion shall constitute abandonment and result in the loss of its non-conforming status unless good cause for the delay is accepted at a hearing before the ZBA. 
Section 19.03. - Non-conforming buildings or structures. 
    Where a lawful building or structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this ordinance, that building or structure may be continued provided it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions. Except as noted below, no building or structure may be enlarged unless a variance is granted by the ZBA. 
A.  Damage by fire or other catastrophe: Any non-conforming structure or building, or any structure or building that contains a non-conforming use that is damaged by fire, flood, or other means to a point where the cost of repairs will be in excess of the structure and/or building's pre-catastrophe market value (as described in paragraph (I) below) shall not be rebuilt, repaired, or reconstructed, except in complete conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
In the event that the cost of repairing the damage is less than the structure or building's pre-catastrophe market value (as described in paragraph (I) below), the structure or building may be restored to its pre-catastrophe status. Such restoration shall take place only upon approval of the zoning administrator and all construction shall be in full compliance with applicable provisions of this ordinance and other applicable city codes. Any request for such rebuilding, repair, or restoration shall be made to the zoning administrator within 180 days following the incident. Any such rebuilding, repair, or restoration shall be completed within one year from the date of the catastrophe. 
B.  Replacement of a non-conforming one-family dwelling: A non-conforming building used as a one-family residence, and its accessory structures, may be continued, replaced, repaired or remodeled if damaged by flood, fire, vandalism, accident or other natural disaster if approved by the ZBA. Such approval requires a finding that the resulting building footprint will be the same size or smaller than that of the building before such change or that the building will become more conforming. Replacement of such a non-conforming one-family building shall commence within one year of the date of damage and work shall be diligently pursued toward completion. Failure to complete replacement or to diligently work toward completion shall result in the loss of legal non-conforming status unless good cause for the delay is accepted at a hearing before the ZBA. 
C.  Relocation of a non-conforming building or structure: Should any non-conforming building or structure be relocated or moved for any reason for any distance, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is relocated or moved. 
D.  Safety related repairs, improvements, and modernization: Repairs, improvements, or modernization of non-conforming buildings or structures deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to maintain a non-conforming building in a structurally safe and sound condition are permitted provided such repairs or improvements do not exceed the market value (as described in paragraph (I) below) of the building or structure during any period of 12 consecutive months. This cost/value calculation shall not include any costs associated with modernization of electrical, plumbing, heating or cooling systems to meet building code requirements. Any such repairs, improvements, and modernization shall not result in an enlargement of the non-conforming structure. However, if a non-conforming building or a structure containing a non-conforming use becomes physically unsafe, dangerous, and/or unlawful due to lack of maintenance and repairs and is formally declared as such by the zoning administrator, it shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in full conformity with the regulations in the district in which it is located. 
E.  Non-safety improvements and modernization: Repairs, improvements, or modernization of non-conforming buildings or structures which are not deemed necessary by the building department to keep a non-conforming building structurally safe and sound shall be permitted provided such repairs or improvements do not exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure (as described in paragraph (I) below) during any period of 12 consecutive months. Any such repairs, improvements or modernization shall not result in an enlargement of the non-conforming structure or building. 
F.  Alterations that decrease non-conformity: Any non-conforming structure or building or structure or building containing a non-conforming use, may be altered if such alteration serves to clearly decrease the non-conforming nature of the structure, building, and/or use. The zoning administrator shall determine if a proposed alteration decreases the degree of non-conformity. 
G.  Permitted expansions to one-family dwellings: An expansion (footprint or floor area) of a non-conforming one-family building or structure shall be permitted when both of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Only one wall of the existing building or structure does not comply with the applicable setback requirement. 
2.  The expansion is on a conforming wall of the existing building or structure and will comply with applicable setback and height requirements. 
H.  Elimination of non-conformity: In the event a non-conforming situation is removed, the corresponding section of the building or structure shall thereafter conform. 
I.  Market value: For the purpose of this article, market value shall be determined by an acceptable independent appraisal provided by the applicant. The city assessor and zoning administrator shall review the appraisal. The value of the repairs or improvements shall be based on a written estimate from a licensed contractor provided by the applicant. This estimate shall be reviewed by the zoning administrator. 
Section 19.04. - Non-conforming lots. 
    The following regulations shall apply to any non-conforming lot of record or non-conforming lot described in a deed or land contract executed and delivered prior to the effective date of the zoning ordinance or amendment thereto: 
A.  Use of non-conforming lots: Any non-conforming lot may be used only for a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  Variance from area and bulk requirements: In any district in which one-family dwellings are permitted, a one-family dwelling and customary accessory building(s) may be erected on a lot that does not meet the requirements for lot width, lot area, or both without obtaining a variance from the ZBA provided that all other applicable requirements are met. In all other circumstances, use of a non-conforming lot requires a variance from the lot width and/or lot area requirements as applicable. 
C.  Non-conforming contiguous lots under the same ownership: To develop a non-conforming lot(s) under the provisions of paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section, the applicant is required to submit evidence that ownership of the lot is not under contiguous single ownership with other lots that could be combined into a conforming or more conforming lot. The following regulations shall apply to non-conforming contiguous lots under the same ownership. 
1.  If two or more lots or combination of lots with contiguous frontage are or have been under single ownership are of record at the time of adoption or amendment of this ordinance, and if all or part of the individual lots do not meet the requirements established for lot width and area, the lands shall be considered as a singular, individual parcel for the purposes of this ordinance. Any altering of lot lines or combination of lots shall result in lots that more closely conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
2.  No portion of the non-conforming parcel shall be used, occupied, or sold in a manner that diminishes compliance with lot width and area requirements established by this ordinance, nor shall any division of a parcel be made that creates a new lot having a width or area less than the requirements stated in this ordinance. 
3.  These provisions shall not apply to contiguous lots in single ownership where each of the lots is occupied by an existing dwelling unit. 
D.  Combination of non-conforming lots: The following regulations shall apply to the combination of non-conforming lots. 
1.  Any combination, in whole or in part, of non-conforming lots of record shall result in lots that more closely conform to the requirements of this ordinance to the maximum extent feasible. 
2.  Once any combination that creates a conforming lot occurs, the resulting lot shall not retain non-conforming lot of record status and will hereafter be required to comply with the lot requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 19.05. - Non-conforming sites. 
    The intent of this section is to permit improvements and minor modifications to an otherwise conforming use and building which does not meet all of the various site improvement related regulations of this ordinance. The purpose is to allow gradual compliance with the site-related requirements, for the entire site, for sites which predate the various ordinance standards for landscaping, paving, and other non-safety site-related items. 
    Improvements or expansions may be permitted by the planning commission during special land use or site plan review without a complete upgrade of all site elements under the following conditions. The city may require a performance guarantee to ensure that all improvements permitted under this section will be made in accordance with the approved plan. 
A.  The applicant is proposing reasonable site improvements on the overall site in relation to the scale and construction cost of the building improvements or expansion. 
B.  The applicant has addressed safety related site issues on the overall site. 
C.  The improvements or minor expansion will not increase non-compliance with site requirements. 
D.  The applicant has upgraded the overall site landscaping consistent with Article 28. 
E.  Driveways that do not conform to the access management requirements of this ordinance shall be eliminated, provided that the minimum reasonable access shall be maintained, as determined by the standards of Article 25. 
F.  Signs must comply with the city's sign ordinance. 
G.  A site plan shall be submitted in accordance with Article 29. 
Section 19.06. - Change of tenancy or ownership, purchase, or condemnation. 
A.  In the event there is a change in tenancy, ownership, or management, a non-conforming use, structure or building shall be allowed to continue provided there is no change in the nature or character of such non-conformity and the use, structure, or building is otherwise in compliance with this ordinance. 
B.  The city council may acquire, by purchase, condemnation or otherwise private property or an interest in private property for the removal of non-conforming buildings, structures or uses. The cost and expense, or a portion thereof, of acquiring the private property may be paid from general funds or assessed to a special district in accordance with the applicable statutory provisions relating to the creation and operation of special assessment districts for public improvements in the city. 
C.  The elimination of the non-conforming buildings, structures, or uses is declared to be for a public purpose and for a public use. The city council may institute and prosecute proceedings for condemnation of non-conforming buildings, structures or uses under the power of eminent domain in accordance with Act 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended, being Sections 213.21 to 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws or other applicable statute. 
Section 19.07. - Acquisition of non-conforming buildings, structures, or uses. 
    The zoning administrator, from time to time, may recommend to the city council, the acquisition of private property for the purpose of removal of non-conformities. Where such acquisition is contemplated, the following procedures shall be followed: 
A.  Zoning administrator documentation and recommendation: Prior to initiating acquisition, the zoning administrator shall prepare or cause to have prepared a report for the city council. The report shall include the following: 
1.  A list of all requirements of this ordinance that are not met by the subject property. 
2.  An estimate of the expense of such acquisition. 
3.  An estimate of the cost of removing the non-conformities. 
4.  An estimate of the probable resale price of the property after acquisition and removal of the non-conformities. 
5.  Recommendations concerning the allocation of costs to be incurred by the city. 
B.  City council consideration: 
1.  Public hearing: After receiving and reviewing the report from the zoning administrator, the city council shall determine if acquisition of the non-conforming property should be pursued. If the city council decides to pursue acquisition, then it shall first set a public hearing. Not less than 15 calendar days prior to the public hearing, notice of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city, and sent by mail to the owners of property for which acquisition is being considered. The notice shall be sent to the owner's address as stated in the most recent assessment roll. 
2.  Special assessment: If any or all of the expense related to acquisition of the subject property is assessed to a special district, then the city assessor shall be directed to furnish the city council with a tentative special assessment district and tentative plan of assessment. The names and addresses of the owners of property located in the district (as stated in the latest assessment roll) shall be provided to the city council. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing shall be sent by mail to the owners of property located in the tentative special assessment district. 
3.  City council determination: If, following the public hearing, the city council finds that elimination of the non-conforming use, structure, or building would be for a legitimate public purpose, then it shall declare by resolution of the city council that the city shall proceed to acquire the non-conforming use, structure, or building in accordance with the laws of the State of Michigan and applicable city ordinances. The city clerk shall send by registered mail a certified copy of the resolution of the city council to the owners of property to be acquired and to owners of property in any special assessment district, at the addresses stated in the latest assessment roll. 
C.  Removal of non-conformity: Upon passing of title of the property so acquired by the city, the city council shall cause the discontinuance or removal of the non-conforming use, or the removal or demolition or remodeling of the non-conforming building or structure. 
D.  Disposition of property: The city council may thereafter elect to retain all or part of the property so acquired for municipal purposes. If acquisition costs and expenses are to be assessed against a special assessment district, the amount to be assessed shall be reduced by the market value of any part of the property retained for municipal use, as determined by the city assessor. The city council shall thereafter order the sale of the portion of the property not retained for municipal purposes, but only for use in conformance with this ordinance. The city council shall confirm the expenses related to the project and report the assessable cost to the city assessor, who shall then prepare an assessment roll in the manner provided for law. Such an assessment may, at the discretion of the city council, be paid in one or more, but not to exceed ten annual installments. 
Section 19.08. - Appeals. 
    An appeal by any party aggrieved by any order, determination, or decision of any officer, agency, board, commission, zoning board of appeals, or legislative body of the City of Swartz Creek made under this Article 19 shall be taken to the Genesee County Circuit Court. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 2, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
ARTICLE 20. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 20.00. - Accessory buildings or structures. 
    Accessory buildings, except as otherwise permitted in this ordinance, shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  Attached buildings or structures: Where the accessory building is structurally attached to a main building, it shall be subject to, and must conform to, all yard regulations of this ordinance applicable to main buildings. To be considered attached, the accessory building must share a wall with the main building or be connected in such a way that the structures are integrally connected. An accessory building that is attached to the main building by an unenclosed structure, breezeway, trellis, fence or other uninhabitable space shall be considered detached for the purpose of the yard regulations of this ordinance. 
B.  Maximum area: Accessory buildings may occupy not more than 30 percent of the rear yard. 
C.  Maximum number: The number of detached accessory buildings is limited to a maximum of two for any lot in Zoning Districts R-2 & R-3. Lots in Zoning District R-1 may have a maximum of three such structures. 
D.  Building or structure appearance: Building appearance for all new accessory structures shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with residences or similarly situated accessory structures in the surrounding area. The roof shall have a minimum 4:12 pitch and with a drainage system that will collect and concentrate the discharge of storm water or snow away from the sides of the dwelling. The roof shall have wood shake, asphalt, or other acceptable shingles. A roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides shall be provided. 
E.  Accessory buildings or structures in Nonresidential Districts: Accessory buildings in Nonresidential Districts shall comply with the maximum building height of the district in which it is located. 
F.  Additional standards applicable to accessory buildings and structures in Residential Districts: 


An accessory building must be at least 30 feet from each front lot line on corner lots 
1.  A detached building or structure accessory to a residential building shall be located no closer than ten feet to any main building nor shall it be located closer than four feet to any side or rear lot line. In those instances where the rear lot line is co-terminus with an alley right-of-way, the accessory building shall be no closer than one foot to such rear lot line. In no instance shall an accessory structure be located within a dedicated easement right-of-way. 
2.  A building accessory to a residential building shall not exceed one story or 14 feet in height. 
3.  When a building accessory to a residential building is located on a corner lot, the side lot line of which is substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the lot to its rear, said building shall not project beyond the front yard line required on the lot to the rear of such corner lot. An accessory building shall in no case be located nearer than 30 feet to a street right-of-way line. 
G.  Outdoor dining as accessory to otherwise allowed restaurants, subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Within public right-of-way or on easements for public use. Outdoor dining is allowed by permit, between April 1 and October 31 subject to approval by the zoning administrator, when located outside of public rights-of-way or easements for public use and comply with the following: 
1.  Outdoor dining areas in the public right-of-way or on an easement for public use, must apply and receive an outdoor dining permit. Outdoor dining permits must be re-applied for annually. 
2.  Pedestrian circulation and access to the building entrance shall not be impaired. A minimum sidewalk width of five feet along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables, chairs, and other encumbrances. The seating in an outdoor dining area must be accessible to people with disabilities. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility requirements must be met within the outdoor dining area. Five percent, or at least one, of the seating spaces in the outdoor café area must be accessible to people with disabilities. An accessible route connecting the outdoor dining area, the business entrance, and the restrooms must be provided. 
3.  The seating area on the public sidewalk shall only be limited to the area directly in front of the permitted restaurant use to which the seating area is accessory and shall not extend into adjoining sites. Seating may also be permitted within the front, side and rear yard area of the lot. 
4.  The seating area shall be kept free of debris and litter. Written procedures for cleaning and trash containment and removal must be submitted. 
5.  Tables, chairs, umbrellas, canopies, planters, waste receptacles, and other street furniture shall be compatible with the architectural character of the principal building. 
6.  Outdoor dining, including any canopies or covers associated with such dining, shall be permitted within the required setback. Said canopies or covers may be affixed to the ground. 
7.  Except as provided above, all fixtures and furnishings in the outdoor dining area including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, bar, server stations, and sources of heat shall be portable and not affixed to the ground, building, or other permanent structures. Permanent railings or fences may be permitted only where and to the extent that the building code requires an affixed fence for safety purposes. Permanent attachment of railings must be approved by the building department and permit emergency egress. 
8.  The hours of operation of outdoor dining shall not extend past the normal operating hours of the main use, the restaurant. 
9.  No sound or audio or video entertainment, including but not limited to television or radio playing of music and/or sports events, may be piped into, or played so as to be visible or audible from the outdoor dining area before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays and before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays. 
10.  Outdoor amplification is not permitted. 
11.  Outdoor dining areas shall not have permanent fixtures, tables or seating. 
12.  Tables, seating, barriers, and other furniture may be required to be removed at the end of every business day, if identified as a condition of the outdoor dining permit. 
13.  Heating is permitted in outdoor dining areas. Heaters must be portable and be removed at the end of every business day. 
14.  Outdoor grills are not permitted in outdoor dining areas. 
15.  Outdoor dining areas shall follow any other applicable zoning regulations, such as signs, etc. 
16.  Outdoor cafes provide an alternative to sitting inside but are not intended to be permanent expansions of a restaurant's capacity. 
17.  Additional signage may not be permitted. 
18.  Lighting in the outdoor dining area must meet lighting standards as specified in Article 27. 
19.  Requests for outdoor dining shall include submission of a sketch plan to determine compliance with the above requirements. The request may be administratively approved by the zoning administrator and building department. At the time of approval, a performance guarantee is required that provides liability coverage in an amount determined by the city. 
B.  Outdoor dining on private property. 
1.  Outdoor dining is allowed by permit subject to approval by the zoning administrator. 
2.  Permanent fences or barriers may be installed where safety is a concern or where such permanence is required by building code. They shall be shown on all applications and permits. 
3.  The hours of operation of outdoor dining shall not extend past the normal operating hours of the main use, the restaurant. 
4.  Outdoor dining located in side or rear yards, abutting or across from a residential district, shall not operate before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. 
5.  No sound or audio or video entertainment, including but not limited to television or radio playing of music and/or sports events, may be piped into, or played so as to be visible or audible from the outdoor dining area before 9:00 a.m. or after 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays and before 9:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. on Sundays through Thursdays. 
6.  The seating in an outdoor dining area must be accessible to people with disabilities. Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) accessibility requirements must be met within the outdoor dining area. Five percent, or at least one, of the seating spaces in the outdoor dining area must be accessible to people with disabilities. An accessible route connecting the outdoor dining area, the business entrance, and the restrooms must be provided. 
Lighting in the outdoor dining area must meet lighting standards as specified in Article 27. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 3, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ; Ord. No. 434 , § 10, 10-8-18) 
Section 20.01. - Temporary structures and uses. 
A.  Temporary structures used for residential purposes: A building or structure may be approved for temporary residential use only while damage to the principal dwelling due to fire, flood, ice, wind, or other natural disaster is being repaired. Any such temporary building shall not be used as a residence without prior review and approval by the zoning administrator. 
    Also, a manufactured dwelling unit or other approved living quarters may be occupied as a residence on a temporary basis on sites for which a building permit has been issued for construction, major repair, or remodeling of a new dwelling unit, subject to the following: 
1.  An occupancy permit is issued by the zoning administrator for the temporary residence. 
2.  Such permits may be issued by the zoning administrator for up to six months in duration and may be renewed for periods of up to six months, provided that work is proceeding in an expeditious manner. 
3.  Temporary structures shall comply with the setback standards for the district in which they are located. 
4.  The zoning administrator shall approve electrical and utility connections to any temporary structure. 
5.  An approved temporary structure may be moved onto a site 14 days prior to commencement of construction and shall be removed within 14 days following issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the permanent dwelling. 
B.  Performance guarantee: The applicant shall furnish the city with a performance guarantee to assure removal of the temporary structure. 
C.  Temporary structures used for non-residential purposes: Temporary buildings for non-residential use, including semi-trucks/trailers and concrete batch plants, shall be permitted only when the intended use is by a contractor or builder in conjunction with a construction project, and only after review and approval by the zoning administrator. Such temporary structures shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project and prior to a request for a certificate of occupancy for the project. 
D.  Permits: Permits for the utilization of temporary structures shall be issued by the zoning administrator. The permit shall specify a date for the removal of the temporary structure, and the zoning administrator may require posting of a bond to insure removal. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for such structures. 
E.  Use as an accessory structure: A temporary building or structure shall not be used as an accessory building or structure, except as permitted herein. 
F.  Special events and other temporary uses: The zoning administrator may grant temporary use of land and structures for special events and other temporary uses, subject to the following general conditions: 
1.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided. 
2.  The applicant shall specify the exact duration of the temporary use. 
3.  Electrical and utility connections shall be approved by the zoning administrator. 
4.  A performance bond may be required to assure proper clean-up. 
5.  Review by police and fire administrators. 
6.  Approval of other applicable government agencies to ensure compliance with applicable health and safety regulations and standards. 
G.  Specific temporary use conditions: The following conditions apply to specific temporary uses: 
1.  Carnival, circus, or festival: 
a)  Maximum duration: Ten days. 
b)  Operator, sponsor or beneficiary: Charitable entity. 
c)  City council approval required. 
2.  Sidewalk display and sales: 
a)  Maximum duration: 90 days. 
b)  Location: In commercial districts only. 
c)  Sidewalk coverage: Shall not cover more than 50 percent of the width of the sidewalk. 
d)  Zoning administrator approval required. 
3.  Christmas tree sales: 
a)  Maximum duration: 45 days. 
b)  Clean-up: Stumps, branches, and other debris shall be completely removed from site. 
c)  Zoning administrator approval required. 
4.  Roadside stands: See section 30.0940. 
Section 20.02. - Regulations applicable to manufactured dwellings outside of manufactured home communities. 
    Any manufactured home, constructed and erected on a lot outside a manufactured home community, shall be permitted only if it complies with all of the following requirements: 
A.  Manufactured homes: If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, it must either be: 
1.  New and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards of the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, as amended, the International Building Code, and any similar successor or replacement standards which may be promulgated. 
2.  Used and certified by the manufacturer and/or appropriate inspection agency as meeting the standards referenced in subsection (1) above, and found, on inspection by the zoning administrator or his designee, to be in excellent condition and safe and fit for residential occupancy. 
B.  Manufactured home installation: If the dwelling unit is a manufactured home, it shall be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the building site by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations, as amended, of the Michigan Manufactured Home Commission, or any similar or successor agency having regulatory responsibility for manufactured home parks or manufactured housing communities. The wheels and tongue shall be removed. 
C.  Garage. A manufactured home must be provided with a detached or attached garage. 
D.  Compliance with other codes: The dwelling unit shall comply with all applicable building, electrical, plumbing, fire, energy, and other similar codes adopted by the city, provided, that where a dwelling unit is required by law to comply with any federal or state standards or regulations for construction, and where such standards or regulations for construction are more strict than those imposed by city codes, then and such federal or state standards or regulations shall apply. Appropriate evidence of compliance with such standards or regulations shall be provided to the zoning administrator. 
E.  Compliance with bulk and area requirements: The dwelling unit and lot on which it is located shall comply with all restrictions and requirements of this ordinance, including, without limitation, the minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum residential floor area, yard requirements, and maximum building height requirements of the zoning district in which it is located. 
F.  Dwelling size and design: The dwelling unit shall meet the following standards: 
(1)  Minimum width of 24 feet. 
(2)  A shingled pitched roof with a minimum slope of 3:1. 
(3)  Exterior materials and overhangs to eaves relationship similar to other homes in the vicinity. 
G.  Anchoring: The dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent continuous foundation constructed on the building site. Such foundation must have a wall of the same perimeter dimensions as the dwelling unit and be constructed of such materials and type as required by the building code for on-site constructed one-family dwellings. The dwelling unit foundation and skirting shall fully enclose the chassis, and undercarriage. 
H.  Storage: A storage area not less than 120 square feet in area shall be provided within a building. This storage area may consist of a basement, attic, or attached garage in a principal building, or in a detached accessory building which is in compliance with all other applicable provisions of this ordinance pertaining to accessory buildings. 
I.  Steps and porches: Permanently attached steps or porch areas at least three feet in width shall be provided where there is an elevation difference greater than eight inches between the first floor entry of the dwelling unit and the adjacent grade. Railings shall be provided in accordance with the city building code. 
J.  Exterior finish: The exterior finish of the dwelling unit shall not cause glare or reflection that is greater than that from siding coated with clean, white, gloss exterior enamel. 
K.  Additions: The dwelling unit shall not contain any additions of rooms or other areas which are not constructed with similar quality workmanship and materials as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required herein. 
L.  Modification: The above standards may be modified by the zoning administrator upon determination that the proposed design is consistent with the predominant standard in the surrounding area. 
Section 20.03. - Regulations for infill housing for existing neighborhoods. 
A.  Intent: The development regulations contained herein are intended to regulate the character of new infill housing development in certain areas of the city which contain traditional and historic exterior design elements. The purpose of these regulations is to promote harmony in neighborhoods between new housing units and the existing buildings by assuring that new construction is of suitable character in terms of site layout, building dimensions, architectural design, and building materials. 
B.  Procedure: 
1.  All building permit applications for new one-family and two-family housing development located in platted subdivisions approved prior to 1967 must be submitted to the zoning administrator. 
2.  The zoning administrator shall have final approval on any applicable infill housing development. However, the zoning administrator may refer applications to the planning commission for final approval. 
C.  Site design and architectural standards for single- and two-family dwellings: 
1.  Lot coverage: The lot coverage of any proposed dwelling unit shall be no less than 90 percent and no more than 135 percent of the lot coverage of other one-family or two-family dwelling units within 300 feet of the subject lot, including dwelling units on both sides of the street of the same block. To avoid a skewed average, the zoning administrator has the discretion to eliminate from the average calculation a lot coverage figure that is more than 200 percent of the lot coverage requirement for the district. 
2.  Front yard setbacks: The front and side yard setbacks of any proposed one-family or two-family dwelling unit shall be no less than 90 percent and no more than 135 percent of the average established front setback of other one-family or two-family dwelling units on the same side of the street, within 300 feet of the side lot lines of the subject lot, but in no case shall the setback be less than the minimum setback by the district. To avoid a skewed average, the zoning administrator has the discretion to eliminate from the average calculation a front yard setback figure that is more than 200 percent of the lot coverage requirement for the district. 
3.  Building appearance: Building appearance for new one-family and two-family dwelling units shall reflect a continuity of design with surrounding buildings by maintaining the architectural styles, details, building materials, and design themes of dwelling units on both sides of the street within 300 feet of the subject lot. Similarity and compatibility with surrounding dwelling units in terms of the following features may be necessary in order to meet this requirement: 
a)  Roof and overhang style (e.g. gable, mansard, hip, A-frame, flat). 
b)  Façade appearance (door and window openings). 
c)  Building massing and height. 
d)  Exterior building materials. 
e)  Porches. 
f)  Detached garage style and design. 
Section 20.04. - Performance standards. 
    No use or activity in a non-residential zoning district shall be permitted to create noxious odors, noises, particulates, radiation or vibrations in such quantities or intensities so as to constitute a nuisance, unreasonable annoyance or hazard outside of the subject property. 
A.  Smoke: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, to permit the emission of any smoke from any source whatever that constitutes a nuisance. 
B.  Dust, dirt and fly ash: No person, firm or corporation shall operate or cause to be operated, maintained or cause to be maintained, any process for any purpose, or furnace or combustion device for the burning of coal or other natural or synthetic fuels, which creates a nuisance, unreasonable annoyance or hazard. 
C.  Open storage: Open storage shall be screened from public view, from a public street and from adjoining properties by an enclosure consisting of a wall not less than the height of the materials or equipment to be stored. Whenever such open storage is adjacent to, or across the street from, a residential zone, there shall be provided an obscuring masonry wall or wood fence as provided by Article 28. Such masonry wall or wood fence shall be repaired, maintained and kept in good condition by the owners. 
D.  Glare and radioactive materials: 
1.  Glare: Glare, whether direct or reflected, such as from floodlights or high temperature processes, and as differentiated from general illumination, shall not be visible at any property line. 
2.  Nuclear radiation: Research operations shall cause no dangerous radiation at any property line as specified by the regulations of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. 
3.  Electrical emissions: Any electrical emissions shall not adversely affect at any point any operations or any equipment, including not only professional research equipment but also equipment reserved for personal uses such as reception or public radio transmissions, use of cellular phones, etc., except equipment belonging to the creator of the radiation. 
4.  Lighting: Exterior lighting, except for overhead street lighting and warning, emergency or traffic signals, shall be installed in such a manner that the light source will be sufficiently obscured to prevent glare on public streets and walkways or into any residential area. 
E.  Fire and explosive hazards: The storage and handling of flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases, and explosives shall comply with the state rules and regulations as established by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). 
F.  Noise: The emission of noises in such intensities that constitute a nuisance shall be prohibited. 
G.  Odors: Creation of nuisance odors shall be prohibited. 
Section 20.05. - Use restrictions. 
    No portion of a lot or parcel once used in complying with the provisions of this ordinance for yards, lot area per family, density as for a development in the Multiple-Family District, or percentage of lot occupancy, in connection with an existing or proposed building or structure, shall again be used as part of the lot or parcel required in connection with any other building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time. 
Section 20.06. - Similar use determination. 
    This ordinance acknowledges that all potential uses of land cannot be specifically identified in the zoning districts. A land use which is not cited by name in a zoning district may be permitted upon determination by the planning commission that the use is clearly similar in nature and compatible with the principal uses permitted, special land use, or as a permitted accessory use listed in that district. This determination shall be made at a public hearing, with required notice given. The public hearing shall not replace the requirement for a separate public hearing to consider special land use approval, following the procedures and requirements of Article 30, if the use is determined to be a special land use. The applicant shall be required to submit pertinent information on the physical and operational characteristics of the proposed use and any additional information that may be requested by the planning commission. In making a determination of similarity and compatibility with the listed uses in that district, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
A.  Determination of compatibility: In making the determination of compatibility, the planning commission shall consider specific characteristics of the use in question and compare such characteristics with those of the uses which are expressly permitted by right or special land use in the district. Such characteristics shall include, but are not limited to, traffic generation, generation of nuisances, parking, types of service offered, types of goods produced, methods of operation, and building characteristics. 
B.  Method by which use may be permitted: If the planning commission determines that the proposed use is compatible with permitted uses in the district, the planning commission shall decide whether the proposed use is most similar to those permitted by right, as a special land use, or as a permitted accessory use. The proposed use shall be subject to the review and approval requirements for the district in which it is located. The planning commission shall have the authority to establish additional standards and conditions under which a use may be permitted in a district. 
C.  Use provided for in other district: No use shall be permitted in a district under the terms of this section if that use is specifically listed as a use permitted by right or as a special land use in any other district. 
D.  Prohibited uses: Certain uses may not be appropriate within the city given the existing development pattern, environmental conditions, and overall character in the community. All uses not permitted are prohibited. In finding that there is no appropriate location for the use within the city, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
1.  The land area required by the proposed use. 
2.  Existing environmental conditions and potential environmental hazards. 
3.  The potential impact on surrounding properties in terms of traffic, noise, lighting, property valuation, and views. 
4.  Demand and capacity of utilities and municipal services to support the proposed use. 
5.  The applicant cannot demonstrate to the satisfaction of the planning commission that there is not an alternative land use that will provide the property owner with a reasonable rate of return on investment. 
E.  In the event that an applicant for a similar use determination is not satisfied with the ruling of the planning commission, he/she may appeal the planning commission's ruling to the zoning board of appeals. 
Section 20.07. - Home occupations. 
A.  Intent: It is the intent of this section to allow for and regulate the establishment of home occupations that are compatible with the neighborhood in which they are located and which will preserve the peace, quiet, and domestic tranquility within all residential districts in the city. 
B.  Conditions: Home occupations may be permitted subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes, and not more than 20 percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling unit may be used for the purposes of the home occupation. 
A home occupation, including storage of materials and goods, shall be entirely conducted within the confines of the dwelling unit. 
2.  There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the structure or premises, or other visible evidence of conduct of the home occupation, and there shall be no external or internal alterations that are not customary in residential areas. 
3.  Unless specifically otherwise provided herein, no article shall be sold or offered for sale on the premises except as prepared within the dwelling or accessory building or is provided as incidental to the service or profession conducted therein. A retail showroom, sales area, outlet, or similar facility is prohibited. 
4.  Traffic generated by such operation shall not be greater than that for normal residential purposes. 
5.  No equipment or process shall be used in the home occupation that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, or electrical interference that are nuisances to persons off the lot. Any electrical equipment or process which creates visual or audible interference with any radio or television receivers off the premises or which cause fluctuations in line voltages off the premises shall be prohibited. 
6.  No outdoor display and/or storage of materials, goods, supplies, or equipment used in the home occupation shall be permitted on the premises with the exception of one commercial vehicle or trailer and/or trailer combination. 
7.  Any necessary parking spaces for vehicles generated by the conduct of the home occupation shall be provided off the road. 
8.  A permit and fee is required once every two years. 
9.  No employees other than occupants of the premises shall be engaged in such occupation. The operator of a home occupation shall reside within the same dwelling unit in which the activity is conducted. 
10.  In no way shall the appearance of the structure be altered or the occupation within the residence be conducted in a manner which would cause the premises to differ from its residential character either by the use of colors, materials, construction, lighting, or the emission of sounds, noises, or vibrations. 
11.  The home occupation shall not exceed 20 percent of the habitable floor area of the dwelling unit. Habitable floor area of a dwelling unit shall include the floor area of all heated and ventilated (habitable) rooms and areas within the dwelling unit including basements and habitable attic space. Further, the use shall not exceed 400 square feet and at least 850 square feet of the dwelling unit must remain in residential use. 
12.  There shall be no outside or visible storage of any kind related to the home occupation. 
13.  No equipment or process shall be used in a home occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, heat, dust, odors, or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot. The production, storage or dumping of combustible, hazardous materials, or toxic substances on the property is prohibited. 
14.  No use shall require internal or external alterations or involve construction features or the use of electrical or mechanical equipment that would change the fire rating of the structure or the fire district in which the structure is located. 
15.  In order to preserve the residential appearance and character of a neighborhood, signs and window or yard displays of merchandise for sale or trade shall not be permitted. 
16.  The home occupation may increase vehicular traffic and parking only such that no more than two additional vehicles other than those owned and operated by the resident family, are parked on the subject parcel at any time. The use shall not necessitate, or result in, on-street parking of vehicles. Parking shall not be permitted in the front yard. 
17.  The pickup and delivery of goods in connection with the home occupation shall not exceed one pickup and one delivery each day (between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.) and shall be restricted to the use of a vehicle having a gross vehicle weight of 14,000 pounds or less. 
18.  No home occupation shall cause an increase in the use of any one or more utilities (water, sewer, electricity, trash removal, etc.) such that the combined total use for the dwelling unit and home occupation exceeds by more than ten percent the average for the residence itself, measured over the previous 12-month period. 
C.  Procedure: A person may request a home occupation permit by: 
1.  Submitting to the zoning administrator an application for a home occupation permit on forms to be provided by the zoning administrator. 
2.  If the zoning administrator finds the application to be complete, and all conditions are met, a home occupation permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator. 
3.  The home occupation permit shall be renewed every two years, subject to review and approval by the zoning administrator. 
D.  Prohibited home occupations: The following uses are not permitted as home occupations: 
1.  Stables or kennels. 
2.  Automobile body repair, machine shop or any similar business. 
3.  Animal hospitals. 
4.  Welding service. 
5.  Funeral parlors or undertaking establishments. 
6.  Antique shops. 
7.  Rooming houses and tourist homes. 
8.  Dancing schools. 
9.  Contractors, such as building construction, electrical, plumbing landscaping, lawn mowing, masonry, snow plowing, excavating, and similar businesses. 
10.  Trailer rental. 
11.  Private clubs. 
12.  Restaurants and tea rooms. 
13.  Repair shops of any kind that may create nuisance factors. 
14.  Repair, maintenance, painting service, and storage of automobiles, machinery, tools, trucks, boats, recreational vehicles and similar items. 
15.  Utility and public service buildings 
16.  Any proposed home occupation neither specifically permitted above, nor specifically prohibited above, shall be reviewed as a special land use. The city council may establish appropriate standards for the operation of such special land use to meet the standards of the ordinance. The council may determine, after public hearing, that a use not specifically mentioned above that has similar negative impacts as one or more of the uses above is also not permitted. 
E.  Required application information: A site plan and a home occupation information sheet shall accompany a permit application for a home occupation. Issuance of home occupation permit shall be based on the site plan. For purposes of this section, the site plan shall illustrate at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Dimensions of a subject parcel. 
2.  Dimensions of the building in which the home occupation is proposed. 
3.  Dimensions of the exact area which is to be utilized for the home occupation. 
4.  Location of exterior doors. 
5.  The proposed location and dimensions of the parking area. 
F.  Voiding of permit: Home occupations may be monitored and reviewed to insure that they are operated in compliance with the requirements herein or any conditions stipulated in their approval. Non-compliance with the requirements herein and/or the conditions of approval relating to the permit for a home occupation shall constitute grounds for the zoning administrator to terminate said permit. 
Section 20.08. - Adult and child care facilities. 
A.  Adult and child care facilities, as defined in Article 2, are allowed only as provided for in the following table. Applicable conditions are listed as notes to the table. 
Adult and Child Care Facilities Regulations Type of Facility Zoning District R-1, R-2
& R-3R-4RM-1NBD,
BD,
CBD,
O-1, I-1Adult Day Care Facilities SLUs 
accessory SLU 
accessory SLU NA Adult Foster Care Family Home (6 or fewer adults 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) P P P NA Adult Foster Care Small Group Home (12 or fewer adults 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9) SLU SLU SLU NA Adult Foster Care Large Group Home (13 to 20 adults 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9) NA NA SLU NA Adult Foster Care Congregate Facility (more than 20 adults 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9) NA NA SLU NA Foster Family Home (4 or fewer children 24 hours per day) P P P NA Foster Family Group Home (5 to 6 children 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5) P P NA NA Family Day Care Home (6 or fewer children less than 24 hrs. per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 10) P P NA NA Group Day Care Home (7 to 12 children less than 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10) SLU SLU NA NA Child Day Care Center (more than 6 children less than 24 hours per day) (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9) SLU as accessory SLU as accessory SLU SLU P: Permitted use. 
  
SLU: May be allowed upon review and approval of a special land use, in accordance with the general standards in Article 30. 
  
SLU as accessory: May be allowed as an accessory to an approved use, such as a church, school, office, or other place of employment, upon review and approval of a special land use. 
  
NA: Not allowed in zoning district.  
Notes: 
1.  The use shall be registered with the city clerk's office and shall continually have on file with the city documentation of a valid license as required by the state. 
2.  Since the state law preempts in this area, the facility shall be brought into compliance with all state building and fire codes pursuant to State Licensing Rules R400.1831-R400.1835. Documentation of such compliance with State requirements shall be provided. 
3.  The site shall comply with the sign provisions of the city's sign ordinance. 
4.  Off-street parking shall be provided for the maximum number of employees on-site at any one time. 
5.  The building shall have an appearance which is non-intrusive and consistent in color, materials, roof-line, and architecture with the one-family or Multiple-Family Residential District in which it is located, as determined by the planning commission. 
6.  Documentation of sufficient indoor classroom, crib, or play area meeting state requirements shall be provided. Documentation of approved areas, as licensed by the state, shall be provided. 
7.  There shall be sufficient outdoor play area to meet state regulations. All required outdoor play areas shall be fenced with a four-foot tall fence, provided that no fenced outdoor play area shall be located in a front yard. 
8.  There shall be sufficient drop-off parking spaces to allow maneuvers without creating a hazard to traffic flow. 
9.  The lot shall be at least 1,500 feet from another group day care home or similar facility. This may be reduced by the planning commission upon a finding by the planning commission that the proposed facility will not contribute to an excessive concentration of state licensed residential care facilities in the area. 
10.  The facility shall operate not more than 16 hours per day. 
B.  A state-licensed residential adult or child care facility existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance that has been operating under a valid state license and is registered with the city no later than 60 days following the effective date of this ordinance, shall be considered an approved special land use, provided such use conforms with the conditions of this section. Any change in class of the use to a larger care facility shall require approval in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. 
Section 20.09. - Swimming pools. 
A  Requirement for fence: Every person owning land on which there is located a pool shall erect and maintain thereon a fence or enclosure approved by the building official in conformance with the City Building Code. 
B.  Restriction from front yard: Swimming pools, spas, hot tubs and similar devices shall not be located in any front yard. 
C.  Spacing: There shall be a minimum distance of not less than ten feet between the adjoining property line and the outside of the pool wall. The required side yard setbacks of the zoning district shall apply to side yards if greater than ten feet. There shall be a minimum distance of not less than four feet between the outside edge of the pool wall and any building located on the same lot. 
D.  Surrounding walk: All public swimming pools shall be surrounded by a slip resistant walk at least four feet wide. 
E.  Permits: Construction shall be in accordance with the city building code. Permits shall be applied for and issued from the zoning administrator prior to excavation or construction of any swimming pool, spa, hot tub or similar device requiring a fence as noted above. The application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans and specifications. A final inspection and approval from the zoning administrator must be obtained prior to use of the swimming pool. 
Section 20.10. - Fences and hedges. 
(A)  A fence is defined as any partition, structure or gate that is erected as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure (excluding hedges as defined below). 
(B)  A hedge is defined as any bush, shrub or any living green screen of any nature that serves as a dividing marker, barrier or enclosure. 
(C)  Regulations applicable to R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, PMSHDD, PUD, O-1, CBD, NBD, and GBD. 
1.  A fence shall not exceed six feet in height in the rear or side lot of any parcel. 
2.  Front yard fences or hedges must be less than 50 percent solid, impervious, or of an obscuring nature above a height of 30 inches above the curb or centerline of the street, and not exceed four feet in total height. Front yard fences may not be constructed of chain link fence unless such fence is coated or sealed to prevent rusting, such as vinyl coated fencing. 
3.  Fences and hedges in front yards that function as exterior side yards must follow front yard height restrictions unless the fence or hedge is installed or planted in the following manner: 
(a)  The fence is at least 25 feet back from the intersection of the front yard and side yard right-of-way lines, and 
(b)  The fence is at least 20 feet back from the intersection of any driveway or alley with that of a street, and 
(c)  The fence is at least ten feet back from the intersection of any driveway or alley with that of a sidewalk. 
4.  No fence or hedge shall extend across property lines. 
5.  The finished side of any fence shall face away from the property on which the fence is located. 
6.  No portion of any fence shall be constructed with or contain barbed wire, electric current or charge of electricity, glass, spikes or other sharp protruding objects. 
7.  Fences must be maintained so as not to endanger life or property. Any fence which, through lack of maintenance or type of construction which will obstruct vision so to create a hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians upon the public streets and/or sidewalks shall be deemed a nuisance. 
8.  Fences shall not be constructed, in whole or in part, with any of the following materials: 
(a)  Junk or other debris; 
(b)  Scrap building materials or metals; 
(c)  Organic materials known to be poisonous or hazardous to human or animal life; 
(d)  Materials which may be deemed unsafe to person or property by the zoning administrator or building official. 
9.  No hedge shall be constructed with noxious weeds or grasses, as defined by PA 359 of 1941, being MCL 247.62. 
(D)  Regulations applicable to industrial districts. 
1.  Fences, walls and screens are permitted in the required front, side and rear lots provided they do not exceed six feet in the front yard and eight feet in the side and rear lots. To preserve open space and aesthetic character in the front yard, fences higher than four feet must be setback two feet for each additional foot above four feet and all front yard fences must be black vinyl chain link or decorative in nature. 
2.  In the I-2 zoning district, barbed wire strands are permitted on fences six feet or higher on industrial parcels with the barbed wire tilted in toward the fenced parcel. 
3.  On any corner lot, no fence, wall or screen, whether structural or botanical, shall be more than 30 inches above the curb or the centerline of the street pavement within 25 feet of the intersection of the two right-of-way lines, so as to interfere with motorists' vision across the corner. 
(E)  The zoning administrator or building official may require removal, reconstruction, or repair of any fence or wall which, in their judgment is dilapidated, unsafe, or a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Swartz Creek. 
(F)  A permit shall be required for new fence construction, with a fee to be prescribed by resolution of the council. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 4, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ; Ord. No. 422 , § 1, 10-12-15) 
Section 20.11. - Flagpoles. 
(A)  The maximum height of flagpoles shall not exceed 40 feet measured from the average surrounding grade. 
(B)  A maximum of three flagpoles per site shall be permitted. 
(C)  Flagpoles shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any public right-of-way, private road, access easement, access drive, or property line. 
(D)  A maximum of two flags per flagpole shall be permitted provided that only one non-governmental or institutional flag per flagpole is allowed. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 5, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 20.12. - Mechanical equipment and utilities. 
(A)  Ground mounted mechanical equipment, such as blowers, ventilating fans, and air conditioning units, are permitted only in non-required side yards and in any rear yard, as determined by the Building Official/Zoning Administrator. 
(B)  Mechanical equipment shall be placed no closer than three feet to any lot line in the CBD. 
(C)  Any ground, building, or roof mounted mechanical equipment or utilities, including water and gas meters or related devices, utility boxes, transformers, elevator housings, stairways, tanks, heating, ventilation and air condition equipment (HVAC), and other similar equipment, shall comply with the following standards. 
1.  All such equipment shall be screened by a solid wall, fence, landscaping, and/or architectural features that are compatible in appearances with the principal building. 
2.  Roof mounted equipment shall not exceed a height of ten feet above the surrounding roof surface, and shall occupy no more than 15 percent of the total roof area. All roof mounted mechanical units must be screened so they are not visible from ground level. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 5, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
ARTICLE 21. - SIGN REGULATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 397, § 1, adopted January 22, 2007, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as Art. 21, §§ 21.00-21.14. Said provisions supersede provisions adopted by Ord. No. 396, adopted August 14, 2006. Subsequently, Ord. No. 401, § 6, adopted May 11, 2009 and effective June 15, 2009, amended Art. 21, §§ 21.00-21.14, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 21.00. - Signs intent and applicability. 
    The intent of this article is to regulate signs and to minimize outdoor advertising within the city so as to protect public safety, health, and welfare; minimize abundance, intensity (as it relates to the use of light, movement, reflection, and color), and size of signs to reduce visual clutter, motorist distraction, and loss of sight distances; promote public convenience; preserve property values; support and complement land use objectives as set forth in the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan and this ordinance; and enhance the aesthetic appearance and quality of life within the city. The standards contained herein are intended to be content neutral. 
    These objectives are accomplished by establishing the minimum amount of regulations necessary concerning the size, placement, construction, illumination, and other aspects of signs in the city so as to: 
A.  Recognize that the proliferation of signs is unduly distracting to motorists and nonmotorized travelers, reduces the effectiveness of signs directing and informing the public, creates confusion, reduces optimum uniform traffic flow, and creates potential for traffic incidents. 
B.  Prevent signs that are potentially dangerous to the public due to structural deficiencies or disrepair. 
C.  Reduce physical and visual obstructions due to a proliferation of signs which would diminish the city's character, property values, and quality of life. 
D.  Serve the public interest of and satisfy the principal intent of commercial signs which is to identify establishments on the premises, and not advertise special events, branding, or off-premises activity. 
E.  Enable the public to locate goods, services, and facilities without excessive difficulty and confusion by regulating the number and placement of signs. 
F.  Regulate placement of signs so as not to obstruct or conceal signs of adjacent uses or important visual objects, such as public safety signals or hazards. 
G.  Protect the public right to receive messages, especially non-commercial messages such as religious, political, economic, social, and other types of information protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution. 
H.  Maintain and improve the character or image of the city and its neighborhoods by encouraging signs of consistent size and composition which are compatible with and complementary to related structures and uses, and harmonious with their surroundings. 
I.  Prohibit portable commercial signs in recognition of their significant negative impact on traffic safety and aesthetics. 
J.  Enhance the character of the City's Downtown Commercial and Residential Districts (CBD & R-3) 
K.  Recognize the collective public benefit of individuals' need to erect temporary on-premises signs to sell real estate, hold garage sales, and express political or other speech while balancing this need with the public good by regulating the number, manner, and duration of such placement to promote less collective clutter and visual obstruction. 
L.  Recognize that the City of Swartz Creek and or its affiliates are in the unique position to hold, sponsor, or sanction educational, public, or community events that require identification, notice, or posting of temporary signs. Such events include but are not limited to public hearings, public notices, workshops, or promotional community events. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.01. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply in addition to the definitions set forth in Article 2 of this ordinance: 
A.  Abandoned sign: See "obsolete sign." 
B.  Awning or canopy: A retractable, foldable, collapsible or fixed shelter constructed of non-rigid or rigid materials on a supporting framework that projects from the exterior wall of a building. 
C.  Awning or canopy sign: A sign attached directly to, or painted or otherwise inscribed upon an awning or canopy. 
D.  Banner sign: A fabric, plastic, or other temporary sign made of non-rigid material without an enclosing structural framework. 


Business Center Sign
E.  Billboard: See off-premises sign. A structure for the permanent display of off-premises advertising. Off-premises advertising is any commercial message referring or relating to an enterprise or business that is not conducted on the premises where the sign is located. 
F.  Business center: Any group of three or more commercial establishments which: a) are under one common ownership or management; or b) have a common arrangement for the maintenance of the grounds and are connected by party walls, partitions, covered canopies or other structural members to form one continuous structure; or c) share a common parking area; or d) otherwise present the appearance of one continuous commercial area. 
G.  Community special event sign: Signs and banners, including decorations and displays celebrating a traditionally-accepted patriotic or religious holiday, or informing the public of community events, municipal, or school activities. 
H.  Construction sign: A temporary sign which identifies the owners, financiers, contractors, architects, and engineers of a project under construction. 


Construction Sign
I.  Corner parcel: See "lot, corner" in Article 2, Definitions. 
J.  Day: For the purpose of this ordinance, a calendar day rather than a business day. 
K.  Directional sign: A sign which gives directions, instructions, or facility information for the use on the lot on which the sign is located, such as parking or exit and entrance signs. 
L.  Flashing sign: Any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such is in use. Any moving, illuminated sign shall be considered a "flashing sign." 
M.  Freestanding/pole/pylon sign: A sign which is erected upon or supported by the ground on one or more poles, uprights or braces which do not have the appearance of a solid base. 
N.  Ground or monument sign: A three-dimensional, self-supporting, base-mounted freestanding sign, consisting of two or more sides extending up from the base, and upon which a message, business, group of businesses or center name is affixed. 
O.  Incidental sign: A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises. Examples of incidental signs include credit card signs, signs indicating the hours of business, no smoking signs, signs used to designate bathrooms, and signs providing information on business affiliations. 
P.  Institutional sign: A sign, which by symbol or name identifies an institutional use permitted within a Residential Zoning District and may also provide the announcement of services or activities to be held therein. 
Q.  Major thoroughfare: An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way for both the immediate municipal area and the region beyond. 
R.  Marquee: A permanent structure constructed of rigid materials that project from the exterior wall of a building. 
S.  Marquee sign: A sign attached directly to, or painted or otherwise inscribed upon a marquee. 
T.  Mural: A design or representation painted or drawn on a wall which does not advertise an establishment, product, service, or activity. 
U.  Nameplate: A non-electric on-premises identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants. 
V.  Obsolete sign: A sign that advertises a product that is no longer made or that advertises a business that has closed. 
W.  Off-premises sign: A sign which identifies a use or advertises products and services not available on the site or parcel on which the sign is located (e.g. billboards, garage sale signs, residential open house signs, business or institutional signs that are not located on the premises of the identified function). 
X.  Political sign: A temporary sign used in connection with an expression of a political opinion or message or an official Swartz Creek, school district, county, state, or federal election or referendum sign. 
Y.  Portable sign: A sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently attached to the ground, a structure, or a building, including signs with wheels, A-frame signs, signs mounted on vehicles for advertising purposes, hot-air and gas filled balloons, pennants, streamers, ribbons, pinwheels, non-governmental flags and searchlights. 
Z.  Poster panel signs: A portable advertising or business ground sign constructed in such a manner as to form an "A" or a tent-like shape, hinged or not hinged at the top; each angular face held at an appropriate distance by a supporting member. 
AA.  Reader board, message board or changeable message sign: The portion of a sign on which copy is changed manually or electronically. Electronic reader boards (ERB) are defined as a changeable message sign and further include dynamic message signs (DMS), electronic billboards (EBB), light emitting diode (LED) displays, and other similar signs. 
BB.  Real estate sign: A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for sale, rent, or lease. 
CC.  Roof line: The top edge of a roof or parapet wall, whichever is higher, but excluding any cupolas, chimneys, or other minor projections. 
DD.  Roof sign: A sign erected above the roof line of a building. 
EE.  Sign: A device, structure, fixture, display or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy designed specifically for the purpose of advertising or identifying an establishment, product, service, or activity. 
FF.  Special event sign: Temporary and portable signs containing public messages concerning special events sponsored by governmental agencies or nonprofit organizations. 
GG.  Temporary sign: A non-commercial sign constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric, wood, plastic or other light temporary material, with or without a structural frame that is intended for short-term use; not including decorative display for holidays or public demonstration. Such signs include but are not limited to on-site real estate signs used for the purpose of advertising the premises for sale, rent or lease; on-site garage sale signs; political signs; seasonal signs; non-commercial signs which contain non-commercial information or directional messages; and construction signs. 
HH.  Wall sign: A sign painted or attached directly to and parallel to the exterior wall of a building 
II.  Window sign: A temporary sign installed on or inside a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.02. - Exempt signs. 
    Subject to the conditions and requirements set forth in this section, the following signs shall be exempt from approval and permit requirements: 
A.  Address numbers with a numeral height no greater than six inches for residences and 18 inches for businesses. A limit of one address sign per lot shall be permitted per residence or business. In the case of a corner lot, a maximum of two address signs may be permitted per residence or business. Address numbers on mailboxes are excluded from these requirements. 
B.  Nameplates identifying the occupants of the building, not to exceed two square feet. A limit of one nameplate sign per lot shall be permitted per residence or business. In the case of a corner lot, a maximum of two nameplate signs may be permitted per residence or business. 
C.  Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection, monumental citations, commemorative tablets carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other non-combustible material and made an integral part of the structure and not exceeding 25 square feet. 
D.  Signs on a bus, truck, trailer, or other vehicle while operated and used for transport in the normal course of a business. 
E.  Regulatory, directional and street signs erected by a public agency in compliance with Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards and Michigan Barrier-Free Manual. 
F.  Flags bearing the official design of a nation, state, municipality, educational institution, or non-profit organization. 
G.  Plaques or signs designating a building as a historic structure. 
H.  Incidental signs, provided that total of all such signs shall not exceed two square feet per business. 
I.  Private traffic control signs which conform to the requirements of the Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
J.  Permanent signs on vending machines, gas pumps, or ice containers indicating only the contents of such devices, provided that the sign area shall not exceed six square feet per device. 
K.  Menu and order boards for drive-through facilities provided such signs shall be located on the interior of the lot and not legible from adjacent properties. The placement, size, content, manner of illumination and sound level of such signs shall not constitute a traffic or pedestrian hazard and shall not be located in a front yard. 
L.  Stadium signs and athletic scoreboards up to 200 square feet in total. 
M.  Portable real estate "open house" signs with an area no greater than four square feet. 
N.  "Help wanted" signs soliciting employees for the place of business, where posted, provided that the maximum area for all such signs shall be six square feet. 
O.  Any sign which is located completely within an enclosed building and not visible from outside the building. 
P.  Placards, not to exceed two square feet in area, located on top of gas station pumps. 
Q.  Placards, not to exceed two square feet in area which provide notices of a public nature such as "No Trespassing," "No Hunting," "Beware of Dog" and "No Dumping" signs. Such signs shall be posted a minimum of 30 feet apart, as measured across the property line, and not include any additional further identification, advertisement, or unrelated content. 
R.  Any sign that the city erects in the public right-of-way or on public property for a public purpose. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.03. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following signs are prohibited in all districts: 
A.  Any sign not expressly permitted. 
B.  Abandoned or obsolete signs. 
C.  Signs which incorporate flashing or moving lights. 
D.  Banners, balloons, pennants, festoons, inflatable figures, spinners, and streamers, unless specifically permitted in this article. 
E.  String lights used for commercial purposes, other than holiday decorations. Such holiday decorations are admissible only 45 days per calendar year per holiday. 
F.  Moving signs, including any sign which has visible moving parts, visible revolving parts, visible mechanical movement, or other visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means, including intermittent electric pulsations or movement caused by normal wind current. 
G.  Any sign or sign structure which: 
1)  Is structurally unsafe; 
2)  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment; 
3)  Constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of blocking views; 
4)  Is capable of causing electric shock to a person making contact with it; 
5)  Is unlawfully installed, erected, or maintained; 
6)  Is located in public street or utility right-of-way, except where expressly permitted herein; or 
7)  Is not kept in good repair, such that it has broken parts, missing letters, or non-operational lights. 
H.  Any sign erected on a tree or utility pole, except government or utility signs of a government or utility. 
I.  Any sign erected within ten feet of a fire hydrant. 
J.  Portable signs, except where expressly permitted in this article. 
K.  Signs affixed to a parked vehicle or truck trailer which is being used principally for advertising purposes, rather than for transportation purposes, and parked in a location that is selected for that purpose (e.g. a vehicle parked close to a street in a large commercial parking lot). 
L.  Any sign which obstructs vision or free access to or egress from a required door, window, fire escape, or other required exit from a building or structure. 
M.  Any sign which makes use of the words "Stop," "Look," or "Danger," or any other words, phrases, symbols, or characters, in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic. 
N.  Any sign which contains obscene, indecent, or immoral matter. 
O.  Roof signs. 
P.  Signs on canopies at gas stations, banks or other drive-through establishments except for "enter" and "exit" signs. 
Q.  Signs on street furniture, such as benches and trash receptacles, except for plaques of recognition. 
R.  Temporary signs no longer valid due to the sale, rental, or lease of the property; termination of identified event; or disrepair. 
S.  Business logos on directional signs. 
T.  Billboards. 
U.  Off-premises signs. 
V.  Signs placed or erected without the permission of the property owner. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.04. - General regulations. 
A.  Sign location. No sign, except those established by the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, or state or federal governments shall be located in, project or overhang into any public right-of-way or dedicated easement unless explicitly permitted herein. 
B.  Sign area. 


1.  Sign area shall be measured as the square footage of the sign face and any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate it from the background against which it is placed. 
2.  When a sign consists solely of lettering or other sign elements printed, painted or mounted on a wall of a building without any distinguishing border, panel or background, the calculation for sign area shall be measured by enclosing the most protruding edges of the sign elements within a parallelogram or rectangle. 
3.  The area of a double-faced freestanding sign shall be computed using only one face of the sign provided that: 1) the outline and dimensions of both faces are identical, and 2) the faces are back to back so that only one face is visible at any given time. 
C.  Design and construction. 


Landscaped Ground Sign
1.  Signs shall be designed to be compatible with the building materials and landscaping used on the property to promote an overall unified and aesthetic effect in accordance with the standards set forth herein. 
2.  Signs shall not be constructed from materials that are remnants or manufactured for a different purpose. 
3.  Signs shall not have light reflecting backgrounds but may use light reflecting lettering. 
4.  All ground signs must be planted with a combination of low shrubbery and perennial/annual plantings. 
5.  The maximum distance between parallel sign faces on a double-faced sign shall be 20 inches. 
6.  The background of a multiple-tenant commercial or shopping center signs, including individual sign panels within the sign, shall be one color. However, individual businesses may have different colored lettering or advertising. 
7.  Every sign shall be constructed and maintained in a manner consistent with the applicable building code provisions and maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, stained, sealed or preserved including all metal, wood, plastic, and other parts and supports. 
8.  All signs erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered or moved shall be constructed in such a manner and of such materials so that they meet applicable building code provisions. 
9.  All portable signs shall be constructed and maintained by the owner in such a manner and of such materials so that they withstand environmental conditions. 
D.  Sign height. 


1.  The permitted height of all signs supported by the ground shall be measured from the level of the ground adjacent to the sign if the finished grade is level. 
2.  If the ground adjacent to the sign is not level, the height of the sign shall be measured from the average elevation of the ground in the general area surrounding the sign. 
3.  The permitted height of signs shall not be measured from an area of the ground that has been built-up or constructed in a manner that would have the effect of allowing a higher sign height than permitted by this article (e.g. The height of signs erected on a berm shall be measured from the finished grade adjacent to the berm). 
E.  Illumination. 


Front Lit Sign - Gooseneck
1.  Signs shall be illuminated only by steady, stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign or internal to it. 
2.  Use of glaring undiffused lights or bulbs shall be prohibited. 
3.  Lights shall be shaded so as not to project onto adjoining properties or thoroughfares. 
4.  Underground wiring shall be required for all illuminated signs not attached to a building. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.05. - Specific sign type requirements. 
    Many of the following regulations are summarized in Table 2. 
A.  Wall signs. 
1.  Number of signs. One wall sign shall be permitted per street or highway frontage on each parcel. Buildings adjacent to I-69 shall be permitted one wall sign facing I-69. In the case of a multi-tenant building or shopping center, one wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public access into the building. Tenants occupying a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one sign on each side of the building. Where several tenants share a common entrance in a multi-tenant structure, only one wall sign shall be permitted, but the total sign area should be allocated among the tenants. 
2.  Wall signs shall extend no greater than 12 inches from the exterior face of the wall to which it is attached. 
3.  Wall signs must be a minimum of eight feet above the ground level or the sidewalk, whichever is greater. 
4.  The height of wall signs shall not exceed the maximum building height specified for the district it is located in. 
5.  The height of wall signs shall not be higher than the building on which the sign is located. 
B.  Window signs. 
1.  Window signs are not to cover more than 25 percent of a window. 
2.  One window sign is permitted per window. 
3.  The area of the window sign counts towards permitted wall sign area. 
4.  Window signs are not to be illuminated by a direct light source. 
C.  Awning and canopy signs. 
1.  Awnings or canopies may project a maximum of six feet into the public right-of-way or up to three feet from any street curb line on properties zoned CBD, Central Business District. In other districts, the awning or canopy may project a maximum of four feet from the wall of the building. 
2.  A minimum clearance of eight feet shall be maintained from ground level. 
3.  Any lettering or logos on the awning or canopy shall be included within the calculation of total permitted wall sign area. 
4.  Awnings and canopies may be front lit only on the sides of the building which contain a public entryway or those having a pedestrian sidewalk immediately adjacent to the building. 
D.  Directional signs. Directional signs used to direct vehicular or pedestrian traffic to driveways, parking areas, loading areas, or to certain buildings or locations on the site, shall not exceed four square feet in area, and four feet in height. Directional signs may be located in the front setback area, provided they are setback at least 15 feet from the existing or planned right-of-way line and do not include a logo. 
E.  Reader boards and changeable message signs. 
1.  Reader boards and changeable message signs are permitted only on ground signs in nonresidential zoned areas. 
2.  Reader boards and changeable message signs shall not exceed more than 50 percent of the total sign area. 
3.  No message occurrence shall be less than ten seconds in duration. 
4.  Such signs shall not be programmed with any animated, scrolling, or flashing messages, symbols, logos, or other graphics. Only static text and static logos are permissible. 
5.  Gasoline price signs may be permitted as part of a ground sign, but the price signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area. 
6.  Changeable marquee signs may be permitted for theaters but are not to exceed 100 square feet in area. 
7.  Colors of reader boards and changeable message signs shall be limited to a single background color and a single text color. 
8.  Reader boards and changeable message signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times. If any part of the message display is not functioning properly, the use of the reader board sign will be discontinued until sufficient repairs are made. 
9.  Electronic reader boards shall have a minimum separation distance of 200 feet from any other reader board. 
10.  Electronic reader boards must comply within the following thresholds for luminance: Day 600-1,000 cd/m 2 ; Night 100-350/m 2 . The day/night transition shall occur within one-half hour of the official sunrise/sunset. 
11.  Electronic reader boards may only operate during normal business hours or from 6am to 11pm, whichever is greater. 
F.  Poster panel signs (i.e. sandwich signs). Poster panel signs including sandwich signs and "A" frame signs shall be permitted in CBD, Central Business District, subject to the following: 
1.  The area of the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet per side. 
2.  One such sign shall be permitted per customer entrance. 
3.  The sign shall be no greater than four feet in height and three feet in width. 
4.  The sign shall not be illuminated in any manner. 
5.  The sign shall be located a minimum of four feet from the edge of the sidewalk and not be located in a manner as to interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or visibility. 
6.  The sign is permitted only during operating business hours and must be stored inside when the establishment is not open to the general public. 
7.  The sign must be constructed of weather-proof, durable material and kept in good repair. 
G.  Temporary signs. 
1.  Temporary signs shall be in accordance with Table 1. 
2.  Each temporary sign shall be removed within 45 days of placement. No sign may be erected on a single parcel for more than 45 calendar days out of every 90 calendar days. 
3.  Temporary signs shall not be placed within a public right-of-way or easement or within 20 feet of the edge of any traveled portion of a roadway. 
4.  Temporary signs shall not be erected, situated, or constructed so as to create a hazard of any kind or so as to interfere with, obstruct, confuse, or mislead traffic. 
H.  Institutional signs (public services, churches, schools, etc.). 
Institutional signs in a Nonresidential District are subject to the same standards as other signs in the district in which the institution is located. 
Institutions in Residential Districts may erect signs for the purpose of identifying a church, school, public building, church affiliated school, parsonage, or other facility; advertising the time or subject of programming; or presenting other related information. Such signs shall be subject to the following standards: 
1.  There shall be no more than one sign per parcel, except on a corner parcel, where two signs shall be permitted, with one facing each street. One additional sign shall be permitted for each school, parsonage, or other related facility. 
2.  The maximum size of each sign shall be 32 square feet. 
3.  Signs shall comply with the setback requirements for the district in which they are located. 
4.  The maximum height of church signs shall be six feet. 
I.  Entranceway signs. 
1.  One permanent entranceway sign, identifying the name of the subdivision or development, may be located at each entrance to the subdivision or development. 
2.  The maximum size of the sign shall be 12 square feet. 
3.  The sign shall cover no more than 50 percent of the entranceway structure it is attached to. 
4.  The sign shall only be illuminated by stationary, shielded light sources directed solely at the sign, or internal to it. 
J.  Pole or pylon signs. 
1.  Pole or Pylon signs are to be permitted only on properties that abut I-69 and are zoned and used for commercial purposes. 
2.  The sign must be located on the same lot as the commercial use that it advertises. Additional businesses on properties within 2,500 feet of the I-69 right-of-way may also be included on the sign. 
3.  The sign must not include any changeable messaging. 
4.  The height of the sign shall not be more than 35 feet higher than the elevation of I-69 directly opposite the lot on which the sign is located. 
5.  The sign shall not be less than 500 feet from any existing pole or pylon sign. 
6.  Except for the sign cabinet and sign face, the sign shall be constructed of brick or other masonry materials that match or are compatible with the building on the lot. 
7.  The sign shall have a maximum area of 100 square feet. In the case of a two-sided sign, each side may have an area of 100 square feet. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.06. - Legal non-conforming signs. 
A.  Any sign existing at the time of adoption of this article which does not comply with all provisions shall be considered a legal non-conforming sign and may be permitted to continue, subject to the limitations of Section 21.08 of this Article, if the sign is properly maintained and not detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
B.  If a non-conforming sign structure and frame are in good condition and can be reused by a new occupant in a leased or rented building, the building owner shall not be required to remove the sign structure and frame in the interim periods when the building is not occupied. If the building is unoccupied for less than 30 days the previous business' sign information may be retained. If the building is unoccupied for more than 30 days, the previous business' sign information must be removed. In such cases, the sign must be maintained in good condition and any openings must be covered with appropriate panels. 
C.  Legal non-conforming signs which are removed, blown down, destroyed, relocated, damaged or altered such that 50 percent of their value is lost, shall be required to be replaced with signs that conform to this article. 
D.  All portable signs, except those specifically permitted by this article, that exist on the effective date of this article, shall be removed immediately upon the enactment of this article. 
E.  All illegal non-conforming signs that exist on the effective date of this article shall be removed immediately upon the enactment of this article and should be replaced by signs that conform to this ordinance. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.07. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 410, § 1, adopted March 25, 2013, effective May 10, 2013, repealed § 21.07, which pertained to amortization of legal non-conforming signs. See also the Code Comparative Table. 
Section 21.08. - Administration. 
A.  Review and approval. No sign, permanent or temporary, shall be erected, structurally altered, or relocated, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance, without review and approval from the City of Swartz Creek Building Official. 
B.  Application. The application, on a form provided by the City of Swartz Creek Building Department, shall contain the proposed location of the sign, the name and address of the sign owner and of the sign erector, the name and address of the owner of the business and of the property if different from that of the sign owner, drawings and/or sketches showing the design and location of the sign, the estimated cost of construction and any other information as the building official may require to ensure compliance with this ordinance and with other ordinances of the city. 
C.  Staking of sign's proposed location. The location of a proposed sign shall be staked by the property owner. The building department will use the staked location to determine compliance with required setbacks set out in this article before issuing a sign permit. 
D.  Permit required. Upon approval, a sign permit will be issued by the City of Swartz Creek Building Official. The building official shall issue a numbered permit for all approved signs. Such number shall be permanently displayed at a conspicuous place on the sign. 
E.  Fees. All permit fees for signs shall be as established by resolution of the City of Swartz Creek City Council. 
F.  Nullification. A sign permit shall become null and void if the work for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of the permit. 
G.  Exceptions. The following shall not require a sign permit: 
1.  Replacing copy. The changing of the advertising copy or message on an approved painted or printed sign, on a theater marquee and on similar approved signs which are specifically designed for the use of replaceable copy; and 
2.  Maintenance. Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal maintenance or repair of a sign or a sign structure, unless a structural change is made. 
H.  Certificate of compliance. All signs shall require a final inspection and the issuance of a certificate of compliance from the building department. The property owner shall notify the building department immediately upon erecting the sign to request the final inspection. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.09. - Compliance with other laws. 
    All signs shall comply with the pertinent requirements of the city's adopted Building Code, as amended from time to time, except as modified in this article. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.10. - Inspections, maintenance and removal. 
A.  Inspections. Signs for which a permit is required may be inspected periodically by the building official, or his or her designee, for compliance with this ordinance and with other ordinances of the city. 
B.  Maintenance. All signs and components thereof shall be kept in good repair and in a safe, neat, clean and attractive condition. 
C.  Removal. 
1.  The building official may order the removal of any permanent sign and its supporting structure erected or maintained in violation of this ordinance. The building official shall give 30 days' notice in writing, to the owner of such sign and its supporting structure to bring it into compliance. Any sign erected of a temporary nature shall require written notice of only three days. 
2.  Upon failure to comply with this notice, the building department representative may remove the sign and its supporting structure. The building department representative may remove a sign and its supporting structure immediately and without notice if, in his or her opinion, the condition of the sign and its supporting structure presents an immediate threat to the safety of the public. The cost of such removal by the city shall be assessed against the owner of such sign or the owner of the building, structure or premises. 
3.  Any portable sign, except those expressly permitted in this article, shall be removed within six months from the effective date of this article. The building department may extend the date for removal of such portable signs up to an additional 12 months upon proving hardship. 
D.  Obsolete signs. An obsolete sign and its supporting structure shall be removed by the property owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business which it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the property owner or lessee fails to remove it within 60 days of the date that the business becomes inactive, the building official may remove the sign and its supporting structure and the cost of this work will be placed on the tax roll. 
E.  Where a successor to an inactive business agrees, within 30 days of the date of written notice by the building official, to maintain the sign as provided for in this article, this removal requirement shall not apply, provided that the existing sign and structure conforms to all current sign requirements. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.11. - Criteria for variance from the sign regulations. 
    The zoning board of appeals may hear requests for variances from the regulations set forth in this article. The building official and zoning administrator may require the applicant to present photographs of similar signs, color renderings or to erect a temporary mock-up of the sign on the site prior to rendering a decision on a variance request. A non-use variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals in cases involving practical difficulties and a use variance may be granted in cases involving undue hardship. Requests for variance shall be reviewed for compliance with the following: 
A.  Variances may be granted for any one of the following conditions: 
1.  The applicant has demonstrated a variance is needed due to a practical difficulty on the site, such as varied topography, horizontal or vertical road curvature, or presence of structures or desired trees that limit visibility of a sign on the premises compared to similar sites with conforming signs in the same zoning district; or 
2.  A variance is warranted due to the relatively large size of the site, frontage or building in comparison to other establishments in the same zoning district; or 
3.  A variance would significantly improve the conformity of an existing sign. 
B.  To grant a variance for one of the conditions specified above, all of the following standards must also be met: 
1.  The inability to conform with the requirements of this article is due to a hardship or practical difficulty that includes more than mere inconvenience or mere inability to attain a supposed higher financial return; and 
2.  That the alleged hardships or practical difficulties, or both, are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person who requested the variance, and result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the city; and 
3.  That allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this ordinance, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure of the zoning board of appeals to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance, and will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent of this article; and 
4.  The variance granted is the minimum necessary to allow the applicant to enjoy the same rights as other establishments in the same zoning district, have a reasonable outlet for free speech and meet the intent of this article; and 
5.  The variance will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of the public. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.12. - Costs of enforcement. 
    Any costs or expenses incurred by the city in enforcing this article shall be paid by the owner of the sign found to be in violation of this article; or upon default thereof, by the owner of the sign or the owner of the property to reimburse the city for costs and expenses incurred in such enforcement. The owner of the property shall be billed for such cost and expenses in the same manner as other taxes. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.13. - Penalties. 
    Any violation of this article shall be a municipal civil infraction punishable as provided in section 1-21 et seq. of Article II of Chapter 1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Swartz Creek. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 21.14. - Conflict with other laws. 
    In any case where a provision of this article is found to be in conflict with another provision of this ordinance, or any building, housing, fire, safety, or health ordinance of the City of Swartz Creek existing on the effective date of this article, the provisions which establish the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where a provision of any other ordinance or Code of the City of Swartz Creek establishes a lower standard for the promotion of health and safety of the people, the provisions of this article shall prevail, and such other ordinances or Codes are hereby declared to be repealed 
Table 21.1: SCHEDULE OF SIGN REGULATIONS 
Zoning Districts Wall Signs (a)(b) Ground Signs (c)(d)(e)(f)(h) Temporary Signs (k)(l)(m)   Max. Sign Area
(per linear ft.
of building frontage)Max. Area
(per side)Max. Height Setback from ROW, private road easement or access drive/setback from property line (g) Max. Size
per sign Total number of signs per parcel or per 100 linear ft. of frontage (whichever is greater) Max. Height R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1 and PMSHDD Districts (for permitted nonresidential uses) 1 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 90 sq. ft. 20 sq. ft. 6' 15'/15' 6 sq. ft. (j) 2 (j) 4 ft. (j) NBD, Neighborhood Business District 1.2 sq. ft per linear ft. up to 100 sq. ft. 1.2 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 100 sq. ft. 24 sq. ft. 6' 15'/10' 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i) CBD Central Business District 1.0 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 90 sq. ft. 1.0 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 90 sq. ft. not permitted not permitted not permitted 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i) GBD, General Business District 1.2 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 200 sq. ft. 90 sq.ft. 6' 15'/10' 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i) O-1, Office District 1.2 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 90 sq. ft. 24 sq. ft. 6' 15'/10' 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i) I-, Light Industrial and I-2, Heavy Industrial 1.5 sq. ft. per linear ft. up to 150 sq. ft. 90 sq. ft. 6' 15'/10' 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i) PUD, Planned Unit Development District In accordance with the underlying zoning district and PUD standards 24 sq. ft. (i) 2 (i) 6 ft. (i)  
Notes to Sign Schedule of Regulations: 
(a)  A maximum of one wall or canopy sign per principal building is permitted. One sign per tenant for shopping centers and office buildings shall be allowed. In the case of a multi-tenant building or shopping center, one wall sign shall be permitted for each tenant having an individual means of public access into the building. Tenants occupying a corner space in a multi-tenant structure shall be permitted to have one sign on each side of the building. Where several tenants share a common entrance in a multi-tenant structure, only one wall sign shall be permitted, and the total sign area should be allocated among the tenants. 
(b)  Maximum allowable sign areas may be increased as indicated in the table below up to a maximum of 250 square feet. 
Distance of Sign from ROW Line Allowable Increase in Sign Area 200-300 ft. 25% 301-400 ft. 30% 401-500 ft. 35% 501+ ft. 40%  
(c)  One ground sign shall be permitted per parcel except as follows: 
(1)  On corner lots, two ground signs, one on each street, shall be permitted. Signs shall be permitted along major public thoroughfares only. 
(2)  One ground sign per each 300 lineal feet of frontage along a major public thoroughfare shall be permitted. 
(d)  For multiple-tenant commercial or shopping center signs, a main identification sign with the name of the center only may be permitted not to exceed 40 square feet per sign face (80 square feet total area) and ten feet in height. 
(e)  Individual businesses within a business center, including multiple-tenant commercial or shopping centers and multiple-tenant office buildings, are not allowed to have individual freestanding signs, but individual businesses may have other signs permitted by this article. 
(f)  For multiple-tenant office signs, the sign area shall not exceed 40 square feet per sign face. 
(g)  Ground signs are not permitted in the Central Business District. 
(h)  All nonresidential signs shall be set back at least 50 feet from any Residential District. 
(i)  The temporary sign shall be setback at least 15 feet from any public right-of-way line and 100 feet from any Residential District property line. 
(j)  The temporary sign may be located in the required setback area, but must be set back at least ten feet from the public right-of-way. 
(k)  Community special event signs may include ground or wall signs, banners, pennants, or similar displays; the number, size and height of such signs shall be subject to building official or zoning administrator approval. 
(l)  The total of all window signs, temporary and permanent, shall not exceed 25 percent of the total window area of each window. The area of permanent window signs shall also be counted in determining compliance with standards for total area of wall signs. 
(m)  Temporary window signs that are faded, yellowed, ripped or otherwise damaged shall be removed immediately. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 6, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
ARTICLE 22. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS 

Section 22.00. - Creation and intent. 
    A Zoning board of appeals is hereby established in accordance with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006). The purpose of this article is to establish the authority, procedures and requirements under which the zoning board of appeals shall function. It shall also insure that the objectives of this ordinance are fully and equitably achieved, that a means be provided for competent interpretation of this ordinance, that flexibility be provided for the strict application of this ordinance, that the spirit of the ordinance be observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
Section 22.01. - Membership. 
A.  Base membership: The board shall consist of not less than five members appointed by the city council: the chairman of the planning commission, a member of the city council appointed by the city council; and the remaining members appointed by the city council from the electors residing in the city. 
B.  Alternates: The city council/township board may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the zoning board of appeals. The alternate members may be called upon as specified herein to sit as regular members of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve in the place of a regular member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the regular member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate having been appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision has been made. While serving, the alternate member shall have the same voting rights as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals. 
C.  Terms of appointment: Appointments shall be for a period of one, two, and three years, respectfully, so as nearly as may be to provide for appointment at an equal number each year, thereafter, each member to hold office for the full three-year term; provided, however, that the terms of members serving because of their membership on the planning commission or city council shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies. 
D.  Reappointment: Members may be reappointed. 
E.  Membership restrictions: An elected officer of the city shall not serve as chairperson of the zoning board of appeals. An employee of the city may not serve as a member of the board. 
F.  Removal: Members of the board of appeals shall be removable by the city council for nonfeasance, malfeasance, and misfeasance of office. 
G.  Conflict of interest: A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure to do so shall constitute misconduct in office. A member of the zoning board of appeals who is also a member of the planning commission or the city council shall not participate in a public hearing on or vote on the same matter that the member voted on as a member of the planning commission or the city council. However, the member may consider and vote on other unrelated matters involving the same property. 
H.  Compensation: The compensation of the appointed members of the zoning board of appeals may be fixed by the city council. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 7, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 22.02. - Organization. 
A.  Rules of procedure: The zoning board of appeals may adopt rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings and the implementation of its duties. The board shall annually elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary. 
B.  Meetings and quorum: Meetings of the zoning board of appeals shall be held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board in its rules of procedure may specify. The zoning board of appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the regular members of the zoning board of appeals are present. 
C.  Oaths and witnesses: The chairperson shall have the power to subpoena, administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses, compel testimony and the production of books, papers, files and other evidence pertinent to the matters before it. 
D.  Records: The minutes of all meetings shall contain the grounds for every determination made by the board and the final ruling on each case. The zoning board of appeals shall file its minutes in the office of the city clerk. 
E.  Fees: The city council may from time to time prescribe and amend by resolution a reasonable schedule of fees to be charged to applicants for appeals to the zoning board of appeals. At the time the notice of appeal is filed said fee shall be paid over to the city treasurer to the credit of the general revenue fund of the city. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 8, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 22.03. - Jurisdiction and responsibilities. 
    The board shall have all jurisdiction and powers granted by the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), and the following specific jurisdiction and powers: 
A.  Appeals: To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirements, permit, decision or determination made by the zoning administrator or any other administrative official or body in enforcing the provisions of this ordinance. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, permit, decision or determination as in the board's opinion ought to be made in the premises, and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official or body from whom the appeal is taken. 
B.  Interpretations: To hear and decide matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this ordinance adopted pursuant to the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006) of the state, or by other articles of this ordinance. 
C.  Variances: Where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the article applicable to the matter appealed from, the ZBA shall have power in passing upon appeals to vary or modify any of its rules, regulations or provisions relating to the construction, structural changes in, equipment, or alteration of buildings or structures or the uses of land, buildings or structures, so that the spirit of the particular article shall be preserved, public safety secured and substantial justice done. 
D.  Limits of authority: The board shall not have the power to alter or change the zoning district classification of any property. 
Section 22.04. - Appeals. 
A.  Filing an appeal: Appeals shall be filed with the zoning administrator. The application shall describe the action taken and specify the grounds for the appeal. The zoning administrator shall forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
B.  Appeal time limit: An appeal shall be filed within such reasonable time as prescribed by the board by general rule. If no general rule has been adopted, an appeal shall be filed within 60 days of the order, requirements or determination of an administrative official or body. 
C.  Stay of proceedings: An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed. The only exception is if the zoning administrator certifies to the board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property. In which case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by the circuit court for the county, on application, on notice to the zoning administrator and on due cause shown. 
D.  Public hearing: The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, and shall be within 60 days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. 
    Written notice of the public hearing shall be made as follows: 
(a)  The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. Individual addresses of properties are not required to be listed for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  State when and where the request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(b)  The notice shall be published and delivered not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This shall be the only notice required for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Where approval is being sought under this ordinance for an individual property or a rezoning affecting ten or fewer properties, notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
(3)  In addition to paragraph (2) above, notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. 
Section 22.05. - Interpretation of ordinance. 
    The board of appeals shall hear and decide upon request to: 
A.  Interpret provisions: Interpret the provisions of this ordinance when it is alleged that certain provisions are not clear or that they could have more than one meaning. In deciding upon such request the zoning board of appeals shall insure that its interpretation is consistent with the intent and purpose of the ordinance and the article in which the language in question is contained. 
B.  Determine zoning district boundaries: Determine the precise location of the boundary lines between zoning districts, overlay districts, and flood hazard area boundaries (See Article 23) when there is dissatisfaction with a decision made by the zoning administrator. 
Section 22.06. - Variances. 
    The board shall prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards to carry out the requirements of this subsection and shall not grant any variance unless it shall have made a finding of fact based upon the evidence as presented to it in each specific case as specified below: 
A.  Area or dimensional variance: The board may grant an area or dimensional variance only upon a finding that practical difficulties exist. An area or dimensional variance is a variance from any dimensional standard or requirement of this ordinance, such as, but not limited to, a deviation from lot width, lot size, density, building and sign height, building and sign bulk, building and sign setback, and other standards and requirements. A finding of practical difficulties shall require demonstration by the applicant of all of the following: 
1.  Strict compliance with restrictions governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other "non-use" matters that will unreasonably prevent the owner from using the property for a permitted purpose or will be unnecessarily burdensome. The variance will do substantial justice to the applicant, as well as to other property owners. 
2.  A lesser variance than that requested will not give substantial relief to the applicant and/or be consistent with justice to other property owners. 
3.  The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances or conditions peculiar to the property and not generally applicable in the area or to other properties in the same zoning district such as exceptional narrowness, shallowness, shape, topography or area. 
4.  The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been self-created by the applicant and/or the applicant's predecessor; this may or may not be considered depending upon whether the practical difficulty would have existed regardless of the action. 
5.  The variance will not alter the essential character of the area. In determining whether the effect the variance will have on the character of the area, the established type and pattern of land uses in the area and the natural characteristics of the site and surrounding area will be considered. 
6.  The granting of the variance will not materially impair the intent and purpose of this ordinance. 
7.  Other specific variance criteria as set forth elsewhere in this ordinance including but not limited to section 23.12, Flood hazard area zoning variances. 
B.  Use variance: The zoning board of appeals may grant a use variance only upon a finding that an unnecessary hardship exists that prevents use of the property as currently zoned. A use variance is a variance that permits a use that is otherwise not provided for in a zoning district. A finding of an unnecessary hardship shall require demonstration by the applicant of all of the following: 
1.  The applicant has demonstrated that the site can not reasonably be used for any of the uses allowed within the current zoning district designation. The zoning board of appeals may require submission of documentation from real estate or market experts, or a certified appraiser, to substantiate this finding. 
2.  The need for the variance is due to unique circumstances peculiar to the property and not generally applicable in the area or to other properties in the same zoning district. The applicant must prove that there are certain features or conditions of the land that are not generally applicable throughout the zone and that these features make it impossible to earn a reasonable return. In those situations where the difficulty is shared by others, the zoning board of appeals may find that relief should be accomplished by an amendment to the zoning ordinance, not a variance. 
3.  The problem and resulting need for the variance has not been self-created by any action of the applicant or the applicant's immediate predecessor. 
4.  The capacity and operations of public roads, utilities, other facilities and services will not be significantly compromised. 
5.  The use variance will not alter the essential character of the neighborhood nor be of detriment to adjacent properties. 
Section 22.07. - Decisions. 
A.  Matters coming before the board of appeals shall be decided no later than 30 days after the hearing on such matter is closed. 
B.  The decision of the board shall be final upon the earlier of: 
1.  Issuance of a written decision signed by the chairperson of the board; or 
2.  Approval of the minutes of the meeting at which the decision was made. 
C.  In its decisions, the board shall state a finding of facts underlying its decisions. 
D.  Area or dimensional variance votes: A concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board shall be required to reverse an order, requirements, decisions, or determination of an administrative official or body, or to decide in favor of the applicant, a matter upon which the board is required to pass under this ordinance. 
E.  Use variance votes: A concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance from uses of land permitted in this ordinance. 
F.  Decisions of the ZBA may be appealed to the appropriate court on the record and for that reason the board shall cause a record to be made of its proceedings. 
Section 22.08. - Orders, validity, and limitations. 
A.  No order of the zoning board of appeals permitting the erection or alteration of buildings shall be valid for a period longer than one year, unless a building permit for such erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to a completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
B.  No order of the zoning board of appeals permitting a use of a building or premises shall be valid for a period longer than one year unless such use is established within such period; provided, however, that if the use of such permit is dependent upon the erection or alteration of a building, such order shall continue in full force and effect if a building permit for such use, erection or alteration is obtained within such period and such erection or alteration is commenced and proceeds to completion in accordance with the terms of such permit. 
ARTICLE 23. - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 

Section 23.00. - Intent. 
A.  It is the purpose of this article to significantly reduce hazards to person and damage to property as a result of flood conditions in the City of Swartz Creek, and to comply with the provisions and requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program, as constituted in accord with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Emergency Management Agency, as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 41, No. 207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, as may be amended from time to time. 
B.  Further, the objectives of this article include: 
1.  The protection of human life, health and property from the dangerous and damaging effects of flood conditions. 
2.  The minimization of public expenditures for flood control projects, rescue and relief efforts in the aftermath of flooding, repair of flood damaged public facilities and utilities, and the redevelopment of flood damaged homes, neighborhoods, commercial and industrial areas. 
3.  The prevention of private and public economic loss and social disruption as a result of flood conditions. 
4.  The maintenance of stable development patterns not subject to the blighting influence of flood damage. 
5.  To insure that the public has access to information indicating the location of land areas subject to periodic flooding. 
6.  To preserve the ability of floodplains to carry and discharge a base flood. 
Section 23.01. - Delineation of the flood hazard overlay zone. 
A.  Hazard area boundary defined: The flood hazard area zone shall overlay existing zoning districts designed as the "100-year floodplain" on the official City of Swartz Creek Zoning Map. The boundaries of the flood hazard area zone shall coincide with the boundaries of the areas indicated as within the limits of the 100-year floodplain in the report entitled The Flood Insurance Study City of Swartz Creek, dated May 1, 1979 with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps available for inspection at the Swartz Creek City offices. 
B.  Regulatory floodway boundary defined: Within the 100-year floodplain, a regulatory floodway shall be designated. The boundaries of the regulatory floodway shall coincide with the floodway boundaries indicated on the flood boundary and the floodway map. The study and accompanying maps are adopted herein by reference, and declared to be a part of this ordinance and copies which are available at the city offices. The term flood hazard area as used in this ordinance shall mean the flood hazard area zone and the term floodway shall mean the designated regulatory floodway. 
C.  Boundary disputes: Where there are disputes as to the location of a flood hazard area zone boundary, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute in accordance with Article 22. 
Section 23.02. - Development permit. 
    Development, including the erection of structures and placement of manufactured homes, within a flood hazard area shall not occur except upon issuance of the applicable permit in accord with applicable requirements and the following standards: 
A.  In addition to other requirements of this ordinance applicable to development in the underlying zoning district, compliance with the requirements of this article shall be necessary for all development occurring within the flood hazard area zone. 
B.  Conflicts between the requirements of this article and other requirements of this ordinance or any other ordinance shall be resolved in favor of this article, except where the conflicting requirement is more stringent and would further the objectives of this article. In such cases the more stringent requirement shall be applied. 
C.  All necessary development permits shall have been issued by appropriate local, state and federal authorities, including a floodplain permit, approval, or letter of no authority from section 23.02(b) of the states floodplain regulatory authority found in Part 31, Water Resources Protection and Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
Section 23.03. - General standards for development in the flood hazard area. 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements within a flood hazard area, including the placement of manufactured homes, shall: 
1.  Be designated and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
2.  Be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
3.  Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
B.  All new and replacement water supply systems shall minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems. 
C.  All new sanitary sewage systems shall minimize infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from systems into flood waters. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to the system or contamination from the system during flooding. 
D.  All public utilities and facilities shall be designated, constructed and located to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
E.  Adequate drainage shall be provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
F.  The zoning administrator or his representative shall review development proposals to determine compliance with the standards in this section, and shall transmit his determination to the zoning administrator. 
G.  Land shall not be divided in a manner creating parcels or lots which cannot be used in conformance with the requirements of this article. 
H.  The flood-carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse not subject to state or federal regulations designed to insure flood-carrying capacity shall be maintained. 
I.  Available flood hazard data from federal, state or other sources shall be reasonably utilized in meeting the standards of this section. Data furnished by the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
Section 23.04. - Specific base flood elevation standards. 
A.  On the basis of the most recent available base flood elevation data the following standards shall apply in the flood hazard area zone: 
1.  As required by the Michigan Building Code and the Michigan Residential Building Code, all new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood level. 
2.  All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential structures shall have either: 
a)  The lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least one foot above the base flood level. 
b)  Be constructed such that below base flood level, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this subparagraph are satisfied, and that the flood-proofing methods employed are adequate to withstand the flood depths, pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated with a base flood in the location of the structure. Such certification shall be submitted as provided in section 23.04 and shall indicate the elevation to which the structure is flood-proofed. 
B.  The most recent base flood elevation data received form the Federal Emergency Management Agency shall take precedence over data from other sources. 
Section 23.05. - Manufactured home standards. 
A.  All manufactured homes shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and frame ties in accord with the following specifications: 
1.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the manufactured home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate locations, except that on manufactured homes less than 50 feet in length one tie per side shall be required. 
2.  Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the home with five additional ties per side at intermediate points, except that on manufactured homes less than 50 feet in length four ties per side shall be required. 
3.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of carrying a force of 4,800 pounds. 
4.  All additions to a manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
B.  An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape routes shall be filed with Genesee County Office of Civil Defense for manufactured housing communities. 
C.  Manufactured homes within zones A1-30 on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) shall be located in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  All manufactured homes shall be placed on stands or lots which are elevated on compacted fill or on pilings so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home will be at or above the base flood level. 
2.  Adequate surface drainage away from all structures and access for a manufactured home hauler shall be provided. 
3.  In the instance of elevation on pilings, lots shall be large enough to permit steps, piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten feet apart; and reinforcement shall be provided for piers more than six feet above ground level. 
4.  In manufactured home community which exists at the time this subsection is adopted, where repair, reconstruction or improvement of streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, the standards in subparagraphs A., B., and C. of this subsection shall be complied with. 
Section 23.06. - Floodway protection standards. 
A.  New construction, substantial improvements and all other development, including fill, shall be prohibited within zones numbered A1-30 on the FIRM, except where it is demonstrated to the zoning administrator that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968, and subsequent enactments and rules and regulations promulgated in furtherance of this program by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, Federal Emergency Management Agency, as published in the Federal Register, Vol. 41, No. 207, Tuesday, October 26, 1976, as may be amended from time to time, shall be required, provided that the allowable increase shall not exceed one foot. The provisions of this section shall not apply within the regulatory floodway. The provisions of subsection B. shall be applied to land situated within the regulatory floodway. 
B.  All development occurring within the regulatory floodway shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development shall be prohibited. Exception of this prohibition shall only be made upon certification by a registered professional engineer and a permit from the MDEQ that the development proposed will not result in any increases in flood levels during a base flood discharge, and compliance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968. 
2.  The placement of manufactured homes shall be prohibited except in manufactured home communities which exist at the time this article is adopted. 
3.  Development which is permitted in the regulatory floodway shall meet the requirements of sections 23.03 to 23.05. 
C.  The uses of land permitted in an underlying zoning district shall not be construed as being permitted within the regulatory floodway, except upon compliance with the provisions in this article. 
Section 23.07. - Disclaimer of liability. 
A.  The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based upon engineering and scientific methods of study. 
B.  Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes, such as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. 
C.  Approval of the use of land under this article shall not be considered a guarantee or warranty of safety from flood damage. 
D.  This ordinance does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard area will be free from flood damage. 
E.  This ordinance does not create liability on the part of the City of Swartz Creek or any officer or employees thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
Section 23.08. - Supplemental definitions. 
A.  Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
B.  Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
C.  Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
D.  Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
E.  Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow in inland or tidal waters. 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
F.  Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards have been designated as Zone A. 
G.  Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
H.  Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
I.  Flood hazard area means land which on the basis of available floodplain information is subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given area. 
J.  Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas designated in the flood insurance study which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood. 
K.  Harmful increase means an unnaturally high stage on a river, stream or lake which causes, or may cause damage to property, threat to life, personal injury, or damage to land or water resources. 
L.  MDEQ abbreviation for the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 
M.  New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of this ordinance. 
N.  Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, gas or liquid storage facility, as well as a manufactured home. 
O.  Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either, (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, flood [floor], or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
Section 23.09. - Floodplain management administrative duties. 
A.  With regard to the National Flood Insurance Program, and the regulation of the development within the flood hazard area zone as prescribed in Article 32 the duties of the zoning administrator shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  Notification to adjacent communities and the department of natural resources of the proposed alteration or relocation of any watercourse, and the submission of such notifications to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
2.  Verification and recording of the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures constructed within the flood hazard area, and in the case of flood-proofed structures, the elevation to which the structure was flood-proofed; 
3.  Recording of all certificates of flood-proofing, and written notification to all applicants to whom variances are granted in a flood hazard area zone indicating the terms of the variance, the increased danger to life and property, and that the cost of flood insurance will increase commensurate with the increased flood risk, and may reach amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage. A record of all variance notifications and variance actions shall be maintained together with the justification for each variance. 
B.  All records and maps pertaining to the National Flood Insurance Program shall be maintained in the office of the zoning administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the zoning administrator to obtain and utilize the best available flood hazard data for purposes of administering this ordinance in the absence of data from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
Section 23.10. - Flood hazard area application information. 
A.  In addition to the information required with an application for a site plan approval, building permit, special land use permit or any other type of development permission required under this ordinance the following information shall be submitted as a part of an application for permission to commence any type of development within a flood hazard area zone: 
1.  The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the floor, including basement, of all structures. 
2.  Where flood-proofing will be employed, the elevation in relation to mean sea level to which a structure will be flood-proofed. 
3.  Where flood-proofing will be employed, a certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing criteria of this ordinance will be met. 
4.  Where it can be determined that development is proposed within zones A1-30 on the FIRM or the regulatory floodway, a certification as required by this ordinance. 
5.  A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
6.  Proof of development permission from appropriate local, state and federal agencies as required by section 23003(1)c. including a floodplain permit approval, or letter of no authority from the Michigan DEQ under the authority of the state's floodplain regulatory authority found in Part 31, Water Resources Protection, of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, 1994 PA 451, as amended. 
7.  Base flood elevation data where the proposed development is subject to Public Act 288 of 1967 [MCL 560.101 et seq.] or greater than five acres in size. 
8.  Additional information which may be reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 23.11. - Flood hazard area zone variances. 
A.  Variances from the provisions of this article shall only be granted by the zoning board of appeals upon a determination of compliance with the general standards for variances contained in Article 22 and each of the following specific standards. The City of Swartz Creek Zoning Board of Appeals may attach conditions to the granting of a variance to insure compliance with the standards contained in this ordinance. 
1.  A variance shall not be granted within a regulatory floodway where the result would be any increase in flood levels during a base flood discharge, except upon certification by a registered professional engineer or the MDEQ that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not harmfully increase the water surface elevation of a base flood. In determining whether a harmful increase will occur, compliance with the National Flood Insurance Act of 1968 shall be required, provided that the allowable increase, including the increase used as the design standard for delineating the floodway, shall not exceed one foot. 
2.  A variance shall be granted only upon: 
a)  A showing of good and sufficient cause. 
b)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant. 
c)  A determination that the granting of the variance will not result in flood heights in excess of those permitted by this ordinance; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense; create nuisances; cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
3.  The variance granted shall be the minimum necessary considering the flood hazard, to afford relief to the applicant. 
B.  Variances may be granted for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Michigan Historic Markers listing of historic sites, or any other State Register of Historic Places without regard to the requirements of this section governing variances in flood hazard areas. 
Section 23.12. - Mapping disputes. 
A.  Where disputes arise as to the location of the flood hazard area boundary of the limits of the floodway, the zoning board of appeals shall resolve the dispute and establish the boundary location. In all cases, the decision of the zoning board of appeals shall be based upon the most current floodplain studies issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Where Federal Emergency Management Agency information is not available, the best available floodplain information shall be utilized. 
B.  Where a dispute involves an allegation that the boundary is incorrect as mapped and the Federal Emergency Management Agency floodplain studies are being questioned, the zoning board of appeals shall modify the boundary of the flood hazard area or the floodway only upon receipt of an official letter of map amendment issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
C.  All parties to a map dispute may submit technical evidence to the zoning board of appeals. 
ARTICLE 25. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND DRIVEWAY STANDARDS 

Section 25.00. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide access standards which will facilitate through traffic operations, ensure public safety along roadways, and protect the public investment in the street system; while providing property owners with reasonable, though not always direct, access. The standards are specifically designed for streets whose primary function is the movement of through traffic, as opposed to local streets whose primary function is access to adjacent properties. 
Section 25.01. - Application of standards. 
A.  The standards of this article shall be applied to the following major traffic routes (arterials and collectors) identified in the City of Swartz Creek City Master Plan: 
1.  Miller Road. 
2.  Elms Road. 
3.  Morrish Road. 
4.  Bristol Road. 
5.  Seymour Road. 
B.  The access standards contained herein shall be required in addition to, and where permissible shall supersede, the requirements of the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT). 
C.  The standards contained in this article shall apply to all uses, except permitted one-family and two-family dwelling units. 
D.  For expansion and/or redevelopment of existing sites where the planning commission recommends that compliance with all the standards of this article is unreasonable, the standards shall be applied to the maximum extent possible. In such situations, suitable alternatives which substantially achieve the purpose of this article may be accepted by the planning commission, provided that the applicant demonstrates all of the following apply: 
1.  Size of the parcel is insufficient to meet the dimensional standards. 
2.  The spacing of existing, adjacent driveways or environmental constraints prohibit adherence to the access standards at a reasonable cost. 
3.  The use will generate less than 500 total vehicle trips per day or less than 75 total vehicle trips in the peak hour of travel on the adjacent street, based on the most recent rates developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers. 
4.  There is no other reasonable means of access. 
Section 25.02. - Number of driveways. 
A.  Access to a parcel shall consist of either a single two-way driveway or a pair of one-way driveways wherein one driveway is designed and appropriately signed to accommodate ingress movements and the other egress movements. 
B.  Where parcel frontage is insufficient to provide a driveway meeting the minimum driveway width and radii, a shared driveway or other means of access may be required. 
C.  Where parcels have frontage along two streets on a parcel of at least two acres in area, access should be provided only along the street with the lower average daily traffic volume, unless the planning commission determines this would negatively affect traffic operations or surrounding land uses. 
D.  Where the property has continuous frontage of over 300 feet and the applicant can demonstrate, using the Institute of Transportation Engineers Trip Generation Manual or other accepted reference, that a second access is warranted, the planning commission may allow an additional access point. Where possible, this additional access should be spaced accordingly to the standards contained herein, located on a side street, shared with an adjacent property, and/or be designed to restrict one or both left turn movements. 
E.  Where the property has continuous frontage of over 600 feet, a maximum of three driveways may be allowed, with at least one such driveway being designed and signed for right-turns-in, right-turns-out only. 
Section 25.03. - Joint driveways, frontage roads, parking lot connections, and rear service drives. 
    Shared use of access between two or more property owners should be encouraged through use of driveways constructed along property lines, connecting parking lots and construction on-site of frontage roads and rear service drives; particularly within one-quarter mile of major intersections, for sites having dual frontage, where frontage dimensions are less than 300 feet, at locations with sight distance problems, and/or along roadway segments experiencing congestion or accidents. In such cases, shared access of some type may be the only access design allowed. 
A.  In cases where a site is adjacent to an existing frontage road, parking lot of a compatible use, or rear service drive, a connection to the adjacent facility may be required by the planning commission. 
B.  In cases where a site is adjacent to undeveloped property, the site should be designed to accommodate a future frontage road, parking lot connection or rear service drive. 
C.  The applicant shall provide the city with letters of agreement or access easements from all affected property owners. 
Section 25.04. - Adequate sight distance. 
A.  Requirements for minimum intersection or corner sight distance for driveways shall be in accordance with the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) guidelines defined in Chapter 9 of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, 1994. 
B.  The planning commission may adjust a driveway location where there is a concern regarding adequate sight distance. 
Section 25.05. - Driveway spacing from intersections. 
A.  Driveway spacing from intersections shall be measured from the centerline of the driveway to the extended edge of the intersecting street's right-of-way line. 
B.  In order to preserve intersection operations and safety, the minimum distance between a driveway and an intersecting street right-of-way shall be based on the following: 
1.  For locations in the vicinity of intersections experiencing congestion (peak hour operations below level of service "C" for one or more movements) and/or a significant number of traffic accidents (five or more annually), the planning commission may require that access be constructed along the property line furthest from the intersection. Source: AASHTO's 2000 Highway Capacity Manual, Special Report 209. 
2.  For locations within 200 feet of any signalized or four-way stop intersection, driveways shall be spaced a minimum of 150 feet from the intersection; where this spacing cannot be provided, driveways designed for "right-turn in, right-turn out only" movements may be allowed, with a minimum spacing of 75 feet from the intersecting street right-of-way. 
Figure:  Alignment of Driveways in Proximity to a Four-Way Stop or a Signalized Intersection. 

3.  For locations that are not a four-way stop or signalized, driveways shall be spaced a minimum of 100 feet from the intersection. 
Section 25.06. - Driveway spacing from other driveways. 
A.  Driveway spacing from other driveways shall be measured from the centerline of each driveway at the point where it crosses the street right-of-way line. 
B.  Driveways shall be directly aligned with those across the street or, where offset, the minimum driveway spacing from driveways across the street shall be a minimum of 150 feet, as determined by the planning commission, excluding when one or both driveways are designed and signed for right-turn-in, right-turn-out only. 
C.  Minimum driveway spacing from other driveways along the same side of the street shall be determined based on posted speed limits along the parcel for each particular frontage, as follows: 
Posted Speed (mph) Minimum Driveway Spacing 25 mph 100 feet 30 mph 125 feet 35 mph 150 feet 40 mph 185 feet 45 mph 230 feet 50 mph 275 feet 55 mph 350 feet  
Section 25.07. - Driveway design, channelized driveways, deceleration lanes and tapers, bypass lanes. 
A.  Driveways shall be designed to the standards of the Genesee County Road Commission, except where stricter standards are included herein or by the city driveway construction standards. 
B.  Driveway width and radii: 
1.  The typical driveway design shall include one ingress and one egress lane, with a combined maximum throat width of 30 feet, measured from face to face of curb. 
2.  Wherever the planning commission determines that traffic volumes or conditions may cause significant delays for traffic exiting left, two exit lanes may be required. 
3.  For one-way paired driveway systems, each driveway shall be 16 feet wide, measured perpendicularly. 
4.  In areas with pedestrian traffic, the exit and enter lanes may be separated by a median with a maximum width of ten feet. 
5.  Driveways shall be designed with a 25-foot radii; 30-foot radii where daily semi-truck traffic is expected. 
C.  Driveway vehicle stacking: Generally, the minimum of 40 feet of driveway vehicle stacking shall be provided for less intense developments and a minimum of 120 feet of driveway storage shall be required for larger developments. The specific amount of vehicle stacking shall be determined by the city's traffic engineer based on traffic volumes and conditions. Driveway storage shall be measured from the right-of-way line. 
D.  Directional driveways, divided driveways and deceleration tapers: Directional driveways, divided driveways, and deceleration tapers and/or bypass lanes may be required by the planning commission where they will reduce congestion and accident potential for vehicles accessing the proposed use or site. Right-turn tapers shall be a minimum of 75 feet in length and at least 11 feet wide. 
Section 25.08. - Design of frontage roads, rear service drives and parking lot connections. 
A.  General: Frontage roads, rear service drives and drives connecting two or more parking lots shall be constructed in accordance with the following standards: 
1.  Pavement width shall be a maximum of 30 feet, measured face of curb to face of curb; intersection approaches may be widened to 39 feet for a left turn lane. 
2.  Frontage road access to public streets shall be spaced according to the standards of sections 25.05 and 25.06. 
3.  Frontage roads shall have a minimum setback of 30 feet between the outer edge of pavement and the right-of-way line, with a minimum 60 feet of uninterrupted queuing (stacking) space at the intersections. 
4.  Parking along or which backs into a frontage road shall be prohibited. 
5.  For properties which are currently developed or are adjacent to developed uses, and the standards of 1. through 4. above are determined by the planning commission to be too restrictive, frontage roads can be defined through parking lots by raised and/or painted islands, provided that at least every third end island is raised. 
B.  Service road along Miller Road: Uses permitted in the GBD District located along Miller Road between I-69 and Dye Road may also be subject to the following conditions: 
1.  In those instances where the planning commission finds that an excessive number of access drives may occur with relation to a major thoroughfare and thereby diminish the carrying capacity of the thoroughfare, a service road may be required so that development of contiguous abutting properties will allow traffic circulation from one property to another without having to reenter the public thoroughfare. 
2.  The service road shall be parallel to the front property line and shall be at least 22 feet wide. Said service road shall be an easement which will permit the use of the service road for traffic circulation from one property to another. Said easement shall be in a form acceptable to the city council and approved as to form by the city attorney prior to the issuance of a building permit. No permanent structures shall be permitted within the interior easement which would block the flow of traffic. Each property owner shall be responsible for maintenance of the easement so that it remains usable as a means of getting from one property to another. The easement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds prior to the issuance of an occupancy permit. 
3.  In reviewing the site plan, the planning commission may permit temporary parking in the easement area, provided that the layout is such that the parking can be removed at a later date when the service road is needed for access to adjacent properties without disrupting the layout of the parking area. Temporary parking spaces permitted within the service drive shall not be included in computing the minimum off-street parking requirements under Article 26. 
4.  The edge of the service road easement nearest the street shall be located 15 feet from the existing or future right-of-way line of the street. An eight-foot wide greenbelt shall separate the service road from the parking area of the site. 
5.  The entire 22-foot service road area shall be paved up to abutting properties. The site plan shall indicate the proposed elevation of the service road at the property line and the zoning administrator shall maintain a record of all service road elevations so that their grades can be coordinated. Proposed service road elevations shall be not more than one-foot above or below the elevation of adjoining, undeveloped property. Paving of the service road shall meet construction specifications established by the city council. 
6.  Temporary entrances and exits may be approved for individual sites provided performance guarantees in a form acceptable to the city council are placed to assure elimination of temporary entrances and exits. 
7.  In determining which entrances and exits will be permanent and which will be temporary, the planning commission shall generally be guided by a minimum distance of 600 feet between entrances and exits and by the location of existing or approved drives on the opposite side of the street. 
8.  The planning commission may determine the maximum number of lots to be served by a service drive. 
ARTICLE 26. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING/UNLOADING REQUIREMENTS 

Section 26.00. - Intent. 
    The purpose of this article is to ensure sufficient automobile off-street parking space with adequate access to all spaces at the time of erection, enlargement or change in use, of any principle building or structure. Off-street parking and loading areas are to be designed, maintained and operated in a manner that will ensure their efficient use, promote public safety, improve aesthetics and, where appropriate, protect surrounding uses from undesirable impacts. The number of off-street parking spaces, in conjunction with all land or building uses shall be provided, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, as hereinafter prescribed. 
Section 26.01. - Scope. 
    Compliance with the off-street parking regulations shall be required as follows: 
A.  General applicability: For all buildings and uses established after the effective date of this ordinance, off-street parking shall be provided as required in this section prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. However, this requirement is subject to the vested rights set out in section 1.02 of this ordinance. 
B.  Change in use or intensity: If the use of a building or intensity of use of any building, structure, or lot is increased through the addition of dwelling units, increase in floor area, increase in seating capacity, or through other means, additional off-street parking shall be provided for such increase in intensity of use. 
C.  Existing parking facilities: 
1.  Off-street parking facilities in existence on the effective date of this ordinance shall not thereafter be reduced below, or if already less than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for the use being served as set forth in this ordinance. 
2.  An area designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless equal facilities are provided elsewhere in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
D.  Review procedures: Compliance with the requirements in this article shall be subject to site plan review and approval. 
Section 26.02. - General requirements. 
    In all zoning districts, off-street vehicle parking facilities shall be provided and maintained as herein prescribed: 
A.  Location: 
1.  Proximity to building or use being served. Off-street parking for multiple-family and non-residential uses shall be located on the same lot or parcel as the building or use being served or within 500 feet of the building it is intended to serve, measured from the nearest public building entrance to the nearest parking space, except as otherwise permitted for collective use of off-street parking. Ownership shall be shown on all lots or parcels intended or used as parking by the applicant. 
2.  Within yards. Off-street parking in commercial, office, multiple-family, and industrial uses may only be located in a rear yard or non-required front or side yard, provided that all landscaping requirements in Article 28 are complied with, and provided further that off-street parking shall not be permitted within 20 feet of a single-family residential district boundary, nor within ten feet of any road right-of-way line. 
B.  Perimeter landscaping: Greenbelts along the street frontage and buffer zones along lot lines may also be required (see Article 28). When required off-street parking in a non-residential district abuts a residential district, there shall be located a landscaped buffer strip 15 feet wide and parallel to the mutual boundary. The buffer strip shall be composed of trees and/or foliage. In lieu of a buffer strip, the planning commission may permit or require a solid fence or wall between six and 12 feet in height and shall be located along a mutual boundary. 
C.  Internal landscaping: Internal landscape islands may be required by the planning commission for all lots in excess of 25 spaces in accordance with the standards of Article 28. 
D.  Parking standards, by use: 
1.  One-family and two-family. Off-street parking spaces in one-family and two-family residential districts shall consist of a parking strip, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. No parking shall be permitted on lawns or other unpaved areas on residential lots, with the exception of approved gravel parking driveways and areas. A minimum three feet wide lawn or landscape strip, where feasible, shall be required between the edge of pavement and all property lines. 
2.  Other uses. Parking areas, other than for one-family detached homes or duplexes on individual lots, shall be approved as part of a site plan. Minor changes to the parking layout, as determined by the zoning administrator shall require submittal of a parking plan which indicates property lines, existing and proposed ground elevations at two-foot contour intervals, the number of spaces, calculations for meeting the minimum space requirements of this article, dimensions of aisles, driveways and typical parking stalls, location of curbs and curb blocks, location and size of signs, existing and proposed landscaping, existing and proposed lighting and drainage facilities. 
E.  Control of off-site parking: It shall be unlawful to park or store any motor vehicle on private property without the expressed or implied consent of the owner, holder, occupant, lessee, agent, or trustee of said private property. Where required parking is permitted on land other than on the same lot as the building or use being served, the land on which the parking is located shall be under the same ownership or control as the lot occupied by said building or use. 
F.  Limits on storage and repair: The use of required parking areas for material storage, refuse storage stations/dumpsters, storage or display of vehicles and/or merchandise, or for vehicle or machinery repair or maintenance is expressly prohibited. The use of semi-trailers for storage purposes on the premises for five or more consecutive days is prohibited. Emergency service required to start vehicles shall be permitted. 
G.  Duration: Except when land is used as permitted storage space in direct connection with a legitimate business, a 24-hour time limit for parking in non-residential off-street parking areas shall prevail, provided that it shall be unlawful to permit the storage of wrecked, inoperable, or junked vehicles in any parking area in any district. 
H.  Access to parking: Each off-street parking space shall open directly onto a clearly-defined aisle or driveway of sufficient width and design as to provide safe and efficient access to or from a public street or alley in a manner that will least interfere with the smooth flow of traffic. Access to off-street parking which serves a non-residential use shall not be permitted across land that is zoned or used for residential purposes. 
I.  Ingress and egress: A suitable means of ingress and egress shall be provided and located to minimize traffic congestion and interference with pedestrian movement. The location of all entrances and exits and directional signs, shall be approved by the planning commission, and where required, by the Genesee County Road Commission, and the Michigan Department of Transportation. 
J.  Limits on excessive parking: In order to minimize excessive areas of pavement which depreciate aesthetic standards and contribute to high rates of storm water runoff, exceeding the minimum parking space requirements by greater than 20 percent shall not be allowed, except as approved by the planning commission. In granting such additional space, the planning commission shall determine that such parking will be required, based on documented evidence, to accommodate the use on a typical day. 
K.  Collective use of off-street parking: Off-street parking for separate buildings or uses may be provided collectively subject to the following: 
1.  The total number of spaces provided collectively shall not be less than the sum of spaces required for each separate use, unless the operating hours of the building or uses do not overlap, in which case the planning commission may reduce the total number of spaces to a number deemed reasonable based on the characteristics of the buildings or uses. 
2.  Each use served by collective off-street parking shall have direct access to the parking without crossing streets. 
3.  The collective off-street parking shall not be located farther than 500 feet from the building or use being served. 
4.  Written easements which provide for continued use and maintenance of the parking shall be submitted to the city for approval. 
Note: A 20 percent reduction may be permitted for collective off-street parking lots if a signed agreement is provided by the property owner, and the planning commission determines that the peak usage will occur at different periods of the day. 
L.  Limits on changes: Any area once designated as required off-street parking shall not be changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities meeting the standards of this section are provided elsewhere, or the parking requirements of the site change. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this ordinance, in connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new building or new use. 
M.  Parking lot deferment: Where the property owner can demonstrate or the planning commission finds that the required amount of parking is excessive, the planning commission may approve a smaller parking area, provided that the area of sufficient size to meet the parking space requirements of this article is retained as open space, and the owner agrees to construct the additional parking at the direction of the planning commission based on observed usage within six months of being informed of such request in writing by the planning commission. 
A written legal agreement, which has been approved by the city attorney, to construct the deferred parking shall be provided by the applicant. The planning commission may require posting of a performance bond to cover the estimated construction cost of the deferred parking with a refund in two years if the additional parking is not found to be necessary. The site plan shall note the area where parking is being deferred, including dimensions and dotted parking lot layout. 
N.  Parking structures: Parking structures shall be permitted subject to the following standards: 
1.  Any parking structure shall comply with the required setbacks for the district in which it is located. 
2.  Parking structures shall be designed as integral elements of the overall site plan, taking into account the relationship to the principal building and other structures on the site. 
3.  The façade of the parking structure shall be compatible in design, color, and type of material to the principal building(s) on the site. 
4.  Landscaping shall be placed around the parking structure in accordance with an approved landscape plan. Any such landscaping shall be compatible with the overall landscape plan for the entire site. 
O.  Snow removal: All off-street parking and loading facilities required by this article shall be maintained free of accumulated snow, standing water, debris or other materials which prevent full use and occupancy of such facilities in accordance with the intent of this article, except for temporary periods of no more than five days in the event of heavy rainfall or snowfall. 
P.  Carports and garages: Carports and garages for multiple-family dwellings shall be calculated as parking spaces on a one-to-one basis. Carports and garages in multiple-family dwelling developments shall have a maximum height of 14 feet, measured from the grade to the peak of the structure. Carports shall be screened on the sides or front end facing any public or internal street or drive. A minimum four-foot high wall or landscape hedge may be required in accordance with the provisions of Article 28. 
Q.  Use of garages: Accessory garages shall only be used to store vehicles or equipment associated with a permitted use unless a private leasing garage or storage area is approved by the planning commission. 
R.  Construction parking: During construction, off-street parking shall be provided on-site for all construction vehicles and employees. 
S.  Recreational vehicle parking and storage: 
1.  Standards in residential districts. 
a)  Except as otherwise permitted in this section, recreational vehicles and equipment greater than 104 inches in width or 37 feet in length shall not be parked or stored on any lot or parcel or on the road in any Residential District. 
b)  Recreational vehicles and equipment 104 inches in width or 37 feet in length or less shall be parked and stored in the side or rear yards, and may project a maximum of five feet into the front yard. 
c)  For the purposes of loading and unloading, recreational vehicles, and equipment may be parked anywhere in a driveway or parking area on a residential premises for a period not to exceed three days. 
d)  Such equipment shall not be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a residential lot, or in any location not approved for such use. 
e)  Recreational vehicles and equipment shall not be parked or stored on any public right-of-way or easement. 
f)  Recreational vehicles and equipment may not be stored or parked in residential districts for the purpose of making major repairs, refurbishing, or reconstruction of the recreational vehicle or equipment. 
g)  Recreational vehicles must have a current or prior year license plate and registered to an occupant of the dwelling unit on the parcel on which it is stored. 
2.  Non-residential districts. The storage of recreational vehicles and equipment in non-residential districts when it is not associated with the business of the property, shall provide proper screening so that it is not visible from the road and abutting residential areas. 
T.  Repair of vehicles: The parking, carrying out of repair, restoration and maintenance procedures or projects on vehicles in any residential district, when such work is not conducted entirely within the interior of the vehicle, shall be subject to the following limitations: 
1.  All vehicles parked or being worked on outside shall be on an improved driveway surface, licensed, and operable. 
2.  Procedures exceeding 48 hours in duration or which require the vehicle to be inoperable in excess of 48 hours shall be conducted within an enclosed building. 
3.  Inoperable vehicles and vehicle parts shall be stored inside an enclosed building. 
U.  Parking of commercial vehicles: 
1.  Parking of commercial vehicles over two tons shall be prohibited in all residential districts; except this restriction shall not apply to essential public service vehicles. 
2.  It shall be unlawful for the owner, tenant, or lessee of any lot to permit the open storage or outdoor parking of semi-tractor (50-foot wheelbase or larger) trucks and/or semi-trailers, bulldozers, earth carriers, cranes, or any other similar equipment or machinery, unless the storage or display of such vehicles is an approved use or unless the vehicles are temporarily parked while in use for approved construction on such lot. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 7, 10-8-18) 
Section 26.03. - Minimum number of spaces required. 
    The following standards shall be used in determining the required number of parking spaces: 
A.  Definition of floor area: 
1.  For the purposes of determining required number of parking spaces, "floor area" shall mean the gross floor area (GFA), unless otherwise noted. 
2.  Where the floor area measurement is specified as gross leasable floor area, (GLA) or usable area, parking requirements shall apply to all internal building areas excluding the floor area used for storage, mechanical equipment rooms, heating/cooling systems and similar uses, and other areas nor intended for use by the general public. Where these areas are yet undefined, leasable floor area shall be considered to be 80 percent of the gross floor area. 
B.  Units of measure: 
1.  Fractional spaces. When calculations for determining the required number of parking spaces results in a fractional space, any fraction of less than one-half may be disregarded, while a fraction of one-half or more shall be counted as one parking space. 
2.  Employee parking. Parking spaces required for employees shall be based on the maximum number of employees on the premises at any one time. 
3.  Bench seating. In calculating bench seating for places of assembly, each 24 inches of benches, pews or other such seating, shall be counted as one seat. 
4.  Stacking spaces. Each required drive-through waiting or stacking space shall be 20 feet long and ten feet wide. 
C.  Uses not cited: For those uses not specifically mentioned, the requirements for off-street parking for a similar use shall apply, subject to review by the planning commission and/or zoning administrator. A factor of 1.5 times the average rate listed in the Institute of Transportation Engineers Parking Generation Manual may be used. 
D.  Parking during construction: Temporary off-street parking shall be provided for workers during construction at a rate of one space per employee. Gravel surfacing may be permitted for such temporary parking. 
E.  Accessible/barrier-free parking: Each parking lot that serves a building, except one-family and two-family dwelling units, shall have a number of level parking spaces, reserved for persons with disabilities, according to the following provisions: 
1.  Definitions. 
a)  Accessible/barrier-free: Describes a site, building, facility, or portion thereof that complies with the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards (UFAS) and that can be approached, entered, and used by persons with disabilities. 
b)  Accessible route: A continuous unobstructed path connecting all accessible spaces in a building or facility. Interior accessible routes may include corridors, floors, ramps, elevators, lifts, and clear floor space at fixtures. Exterior accessible routes may include parking access aisles, curb ramps, crosswalks at vehicular ways, walks, ramps, and lifts. 
c)  Access aisle: An accessible pedestrian space between elements, such as parking spaces, seating, and desks, that provides clearances appropriate for use of the elements. 
2.  Location. Parking spaces for persons with disabilities and accessible passenger loading zones that serve a particular building shall be the spaces or zones located closest to the nearest accessible entrance on an accessible route. In separate parking structures or lots that do not serve a particular building, parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be located on the shortest possible circulation route to an accessible pedestrian entrance of the parking facility. 
3.  Barrier-free parking spaces. 
a)  Parking spaces for persons with disabilities shall be at least 96 inches wide and shall have an adjacent access aisle 60 inches wide minimum. Parking access aisles shall be part of an accessible route to the building or facility entrance and shall comply with the requirements in the Uniform Federal Accessibility Standards, the State Barrier-Free Manual, and the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended. 
b)  Two accessible parking spaces may share a common access aisle. Parked vehicle overhangs shall not reduce the clear width of an accessible circulation route. 
c)  Parking spaces and access aisle shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 in all directions. One in every eight accessible spaces, but not less than one, shall be served by an access aisle 96 inches wide minimum and shall be designated "van accessible". All such spaces may be grouped on one level of a parking structure. 
4.  Signage. Accessible parking spaces shall be designated as reserved for persons with disabilities by a sign showing the International symbol of accessibility. Such signs shall not be obscured by a vehicle parked in the space. 
5.  Passenger loading zones. Passenger loading zones shall provide an access aisle at least 60 inches wide and 20 feet long adjacent and parallel to the vehicle pull-up space. If there are curbs between the access aisle and the vehicle pull-up space, then a curb ramp shall be provided. (Vehicle standing spaces and access aisles shall be level with surface slopes not exceeding 1:50 in all directions.) 
6.  Vehicle clearance. Provide minimum vehicle clearances of 114 inches at accessible passenger loading zones and along vehicle access routes to such areas from site entrances. If accessible van parking spaces are provided, then the minimum vertical clearance should be 114 inches. 
7.  Compliance. Accessibility shall be in compliance with the adopted City Building Code, the State of Michigan Barrier-Free Rules, Michigan Public Act No. 1 of 1966, as amended, and the American with Disabilities Act, as amended. 
F.  Use of loading space: Required loading space shall not be counted or used for required parking. 
G.  Minimum number of spaces for each use: The amount of required off-street parking space shall be determined in accordance with the schedule which follows. Where more than one standard is provided for a particular use, the standard that provides the most parking spaces shall be used. The planning commission may modify the numerical requirements for off-street parking, based on evidence that another standard would be more reasonable, because of the level of current or future employment and/or level of current or future customer traffic. 
H.  Central business district: All uses within the central business district shall calculate parking (residential and commercial) to require four parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(Ord. No. 434 , § 8, 10-8-18) 
Section 26.04. - Schedule of minimum off-street parking requirements. 
RESIDENTIAL   One-family and two-family dwellings 
 Up to 3 bedrooms 
 4 or more bedrooms   
2.0 spaces per dwelling unit 
3.0 spaces per dwelling unit Multiple-family dwellings 1.0 spaces per each efficiency or one bedroom dwelling unit, 
1.5 spaces per each unit with two bedrooms 
2.0 spaces for each unit with three or more bedrooms Note: In addition, multiple-family and attached single-family developments shall be required to provide supplemental guest off-street parking equal to at least 20 percent of the spaces required by the above standards. If community buildings, swimming pools, or recreation buildings are provided in the development, one space for every five units in the development shall be provided, and shall be within reasonable walking distance of the facility. Manufactured homes in a manufactured housing park 3.0 spaces per each manufactured home unit HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY Senior apartments and elderly housing complexes 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit Senior "interim care" and "intermediate care" units, retirement villages, etc. 1.0 space per each room or two beds, whichever is less, plus 1.0 space per each employee expected during the peak shift Congregate care and dependent care (convalescent/nursing home units) 1.0 space per each three beds or two rooms, whichever is less, up to 120 beds, plus 3.0 spaces for each bed over 120; plus 1.0 space for each employee during peak shift Note: Should units revert to general occupancy, the requirements for multiple-family housing shall be complied with. INSTITUTIONAL OR PUBLIC USES Churches, temples, and places of worship 1.0 space per each three seats or six linear feet of pews, plus land area shall be available for future development of additional spaces, equal to 50 percent of the specified parking requirements (to accommodate growth) Municipal office buildings 4.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area Community centers (incl. senior centers and teenage centers) 1.0 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area Child care or day care centers 2.0 spaces plus 1.0 additional space for each eight children of licensed authorized capacity; a paved unobstructed pick-up space with adequate stacking (as determined by the planning commission) shall be provided Fraternities, sororities, dormitories 1.0 for each five persons who may legally occupy the premises at one time, based on the occupancy load established by local codes, or one for each two beds, whichever is greater Group day care homes, adult foster care group homes, adult congregate care facilities, and children's homes 1.0 space per four clients plus 1.0 space per each employee plus designated drop-off spaces Hospitals 1.75 spaces per inpatient bed plus 1.0 spaces per each 175 gross square feet of hospital related office, research and administrative space. Other uses shall be computed separately Mixed health care related uses in the Health Care District 
Medical Center 5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area overall if parking facilities are shared, otherwise each use is computed separately Primary schools (elementary and junior high schools) 1.0 space per each instructor, plus 1.0 space per each employee and administrator, plus drop-off areas for school buses, plus spaces required for any assembly hall, auditorium and/or outdoor arena Secondary (high) schools, commercial schools, colleges 1.0 space per each instructor, plus 1.0 per each employee and administrator, plus 5.0 spaces per each classroom, plus drop-off areas for school buses, plus parking required for any assembly hall, auditorium or outdoor arena Auditorium, assembly halls, theaters and outdoor arenas 1.0 space per each three seats or six feet of bleachers, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 for each employee Public recreation centers 5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross floor area Dance halls, pool and billiard rooms, exhibition 1.0 parking space for each three persons permitted in such edifice as determined in the capacity limitations, thereof, by the fire marshal Union halls, fraternal orders, civic clubs and similar uses 1.0 space per every three persons of capacity authorized by the fire marshal Museum, library, cultural center, or similar facility 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. of usable floor space, plus 1.0 space for every employee on the maximum shift Post office 1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. of usable floor space, plus 1.0 space for every employee on the maximum shift Public utility use 1.0 space per every employee on the maximum shift OFFICE Medical/dental clinic/office 7.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 1.0 for each examining room, dental chair or similar use area. Medical clinic: Outpatient center, 24-hour urgent care centers, etc. 2.0 spaces per exam or outpatient procedure/operating room, plus care areas, 1.0 space per laboratory or recovery room, plus 1.0 space for each two rooms for employee parking General office building 1.0 space per 300 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area Branch bank, credit union or savings and loan 1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area, plus 2.0 spaces per each 24-hour teller, plus 4.0 stacking spaces per each drive-through window COMMERCIAL/RETAIL/SERVICE Appliance store 1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area Auto service (gasoline) station 2.0 spaces per each service bay (pump island), plus 1.0 space per employee, plus 1.0 space per each tow truck, plus 1.0 space for each 500 sq. ft. devoted to sales of automotive goods or convenience items. Plus requirements for auto service center if applicable. Automobile service center or auto repair center 3.0 spaces for employees, but not less than 2.0 for each lubrication stall, rack, pit, or similar service area, plus 2.0 waiting spaces for each service bay. Automobile or vehicle dealership 2.5 spaces for each 1,000 square feet of interior sales space plus one and one-half spaces per 1,000 square feet of exterior display, plus three spaces per service bay. Automobile wash 2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 designated space per each employee on peak shift, plus 12 stacking spaces per bay for a fully automatic car wash, 15 for a semi-automatic (motorist must leave auto) or 2.0 stacking spaces per bay for a self-serve car wash Barber shop/beauty parlor 3.0 spaces per each of the first two barber or beautician chair/stations, plus 1.5 spaces for each additional chair. Bookstores 1.0 spaces per 125 sq. ft. gross leasable area. Conference rooms, exhibit halls and similar uses 1.0 space per every two persons of capacity authorized by the Uniform Building Code, or 1.0 space per 100 sq. ft. gross floor area, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 space per employee. Convenience store, with or without gasoline service 1.0 space per 250 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, plus spaces required for auto service station activities or gasoline sales Dry cleaners 2.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area Funeral homes, mortuary establishments 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft. of service parlors, chapels and reception area, plus 1.0 space per each funeral vehicle stored on premises Furniture/carpet store, appliance, household equipment, repair shops, showroom of a plumber, decorator, electrician, or similar trade or uses. 1.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, plus 1.0 space for each two persons employed in the processing area. General retail business 1.0 space per 150 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GLA) Shopping centers over 600,000 GLA 5.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GLA) Shopping centers over 400,000-600,000 GLA 4.5 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GLA) Shopping centers over 25,000-400,000 GLA 4.0 per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GLA) Home improvement centers (over 40,000 sq. ft.) 5.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area (GLA) Laundromat and coin-operated dry cleaners 1.0 space per each two washing machines Mini- or self-storage warehouse Minimum of 6.0 spaces Motel/hotel with lounge, restaurant and conference or banquet rooms 1.0 space per guest room, plus 1.0 space per 100 sq. ft. of lounge, restaurant, conference or banquet rooms or exhibit space, plus 1.0 space per each two employees Motel/hotel with restaurant/lounge 1.0 space per guest room, plus 12.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of restaurant/lounge space, plus 1.0 space per each two employees Motel/hotel without restaurant/lounge; bed and breakfast inn 1.0 space per guest room, plus 1.0 space per each two employees. Outdoor sales, display 1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. of such area Recreational vehicle, boat, mobile home and similar sales 1.0 space per 800 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, plus 2.0 spaces per each vehicle sales service bay Restaurant-Sit-down type with liquor license 20.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area, or 0.6 spaces per seat, whichever is greater Bars, lounges, taverns, nightclubs (majority of sales consist of alcoholic beverages) 25.0 spaces for each 1,000 square feet usable floor area Restaurant-Standard (a family-type restaurant without a bar or lounge area) 14.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area or 0.5 space per seat, whichever is greater, plus any spaces required for any banquet or meeting rooms Restaurant-Fast food with drive-through window 22.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area, plus 5.0 spaces between the pick-up window and the order station, plus 10.0 stacking spaces which do not conflict with access to required parking spaces per order pick-up station, plus spaces for employees of a peak shift plus at least 2.0 longer spaces designated for recreational vehicles and semi-trucks if site is within 1/2 mile of expressway Restaurant-Carry-out or delicatessen with less than six tables and/or booths 6.0 spaces plus 1.0 space for each employee on peak shift Supermarket 1.0 space per 175 sq. ft. gross leasable floor area Video rental establishments 1.0 space per 100 sq. ft. leasable floor area, with a minimum of 8.0 spaces provided Wholesale establishments 1.0 space per each 500 sq. ft. of gross floor area, plus 1.0 per each two employees RECREATION/ENTERTAINMENT Batting cages 2.0 spaces per cage Billiard parlors, pool halls, dance halls, roller or skating rinks, exhibition halls, and assembly halls without fixed seats 1.0 for each three persons allowed within the maximum occupancy load as established by local county or state fire, building, or health codes. Bowling centers 5.0 spaces per lane plus 25 percent of the required parking for any lounge Commercial outdoor recreation centers 1.0 space per 200 sq. ft. gross floor area Golf course driving range 2.0 spaces per each three tees, plus 1.0 per employee Golf course, miniature 2.0 spaces per each course hole, plus 1.0 per employee Golf course, par three 3.0 spaces per each course hole, plus 1.0 per employee Golf course/country club 6.0 spaces per each course hole, plus 1.0 per employee Golf course banquet hall/lounge 0.5 space per seat, less spaces required for golf course Health fitness centers without swimming pool 5.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross leasable floor space Ice/roller skating rink 6.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area Private golf clubs, tennis clubs, or similar uses 1.0 space for each two member families or individuals Stadium, sports arenas, or similar place of outdoor assembly 1.0 space for each three seats or six feet of benches Swimming pool 1.0 space per each three persons of capacity authorized by the City Building Code Theater, cinema, auditoriums 1.0 space per each four seats, plus 4.0 spaces per screen or stage, plus 1.0 per employee Racquetball/tennis centers 1.0 space per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area or 6.0 spaces per court, whichever is greater Video arcades 1.0 space per 50 sq. ft. leasable floor area, with a minimum of 6.0 spaces required INDUSTRIAL Light industrial, manufacturing, testing labs, research and development centers 2.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. gross floor area or 0.6 spaces per employee at peak shift, whichever is greater; plus 1.0 space for each corporate vehicle, plus parking required for any sales area or office Warehousing 1.0 space per each 1,500 sq. ft. gross floor area or 1.0 space per employee at peak shift, whichever is greater, plus 1.0 space for each corporate vehicle (separate standard provided for mini-storage) CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT   All uses (residential and commercial) 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area Restaurant-Fast food with drive-through window 22.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area, plus 5.0 spaces between the pick-up window and the order station, plus 10.0 stacking spaces which do not conflict with access to required parking spaces per order pick-up station, plus spaces for employees of a peak shift plus at least 2.0 longer spaces designated for recreational vehicles and semi-trucks if site is within 1/2 mile of expressway Restaurant-with pick-up window 22.0 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross leasable floor area, plus 3.0 stacking spaces which do not conflict with access to required parking spaces per order pick-up station, plus spaces for employees of a peak shift plus at least 2.0 longer spaces designated for recreational vehicles and semi-trucks if site is within 1/2 mile of expressway  
(Ord. No. 434 , § 9, 10-8-18) 
Section 26.05. - Design, layout, and construction. 
    Off-street parking facilities containing four or more spaces shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
A.  Review and approval requirements: Plans for the construction of any parking lot in conjunction with a new development shall be submitted for review and approval according to the normal site plan review procedures. Plans for expansion of an existing parking lot that is not associated with other new development shall be submitted to the zoning administrator for review and approval prior to the start of construction. Upon completion of construction, the parking lot must be inspected and approved by the zoning administrator before a certificate of occupancy can be issued by the city for the parking lot and for the building or use the parking is intended to serve. 
Two sets of plans shall be prepared at a scale of not less than 50 feet equal to one inch. Plans shall indicate existing and proposed grades, drainage, (sewers), surfacing and base materials, and the proposed parking lot layout. The plans shall conform to the construction and design standards established by the city and the requirements of this article. 
In the event that the required parking cannot be completed because of cold or inclement weather, a temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued. 
B.  Dimensions: Off-street parking shall be designed in conformance with the following standards and the requirements of section 26.04, Minimum number of spaces required: 
OFF-STREET PARKING STANDARDS Parking
AngleManeuvering
Aisle WidthParking
Stall
WidthParking
Space
LengthTotal Width
of One Tier
of Spaces and
Maneuvering
LaneTotal Width
of Two Tiers
of Spaces and
Maneuvering
Lane0° (parallel) 12'-0? (one-way) 
24'-0? (two-way) 8'-0? 
8'-0? 24'-0? 
24'-0? 20'-0? 40'-0? 30° 12'-0? (one-way) 9'-0? 18'-0? 30'-0? 48'-0? 45° 12'-0? (one-way) 9'-0? 19'-0? 31'-0? 50'-0? 60° 15'-0? (one-way) 10'-0? 18'-0? 33'-0? 51'-0? 90° 24'-0? (two-way) 9'-0? 18'-0? 42'-0? 60'-0?  
C.  Ingress and egress: All spaces shall be provided with adequate access by means of clearly defined maneuvering lanes and driveways. Entrances and exits from off-street parking lots shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest point of any property zoned for single-family residential use. 
D.  Surfacing and drainage: 
1.  Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject to review and approval by the building inspector and/or city engineer in accordance with the specifications approved by the city council. All off-street parking areas, access lanes, driveways and other vehicle maneuvering areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material. However, the planning commission may permit a gravel surface, provided the applicant or property owner provides sufficient evidence that a paved surface is not necessary. This determination will be based upon the following criteria: 
a)  The types of uses to be conducted in the storage area; 
b)  The types and amounts of hazardous materials to be used at the site; 
c)  The extent of natural vegetation to filter dust generated by a gravel parking or loading area; 
d)  The existence of adjacent uses which may be impacted by dust generated by a gravel parking or loading area; 
e)  Existing hydraulic and ecologic features such as adjacent wetland complexes which may be better protected by the reduced runoff resulting from gravel parking or loading area; 
f)  Existing soil permeability sufficient to provide desired infiltration; and 
g)  The potential for, or ability to minimize, erosion and sedimentation from a gravel parking or loading area. 
2.  Required parking lots shall be installed and completed within one year of receipt of a building permit and before issuance of an occupancy permit. The planning commission may grant a single extension for an additional six months in the event adverse weather conditions or unusual delays beyond the control of the property owner. 
3.  Off-street parking areas, access lanes, and driveways shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an approved drainage plan. 
E.  Curbs, parking block: Installation of a curb of at least six inches in height may be required by the planning commission, to prevent motor vehicles from being driven or parked within two feet of abutting landscape areas, sidewalks, streets, buildings, or adjoining property. In lieu of a curb, parking blocks may be substituted to prevent vehicles from extending over grass areas, setback lines, or lot lines. 
F.  Lighting: All parking areas, driveways, and walkways shall be illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using areas, in accordance with the requirements in Article 27. Parking lot entrances shall be illuminated. Lighting shall be shielded from adjacent residential properties. 
G.  Buildings: No building or structure shall be permitted on an off-street parking lot, except for a maintenance building/attendant shelter, which shall not be more than 50 square feet in area and not more than 15 feet in height. 
H.  Signs: Accessory directional signs shall be permitted in parking areas in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. 
I.  Screening and landscaping: 
1.  All off-street parking areas, except those serving one-family and two-family dwellings, shall be screened and landscaped in accordance with the provisions set forth in Article 28. 
2.  When a front yard setback is required, all land between the parking area and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen material and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
J.  Walls and alleys: In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress or egress to an off-street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
K.  Maintenance: All parking areas shall be maintained free of dust, trash, and debris. Surfacing, curbing, lighting fixtures, signage, and related appearances shall be maintained in good condition. All required lawns, landscaping, and plantings shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. Trees and shrubs shall be properly pruned of dead and damaged limbs. Dead and severely damaged trees and shrubs shall be removed and replaced according to the minimum planting standards as outlined in Article 28. 
L.  Modifications: The planning commission, upon application by the property owner of the off-street parking area, may modify the yard or wall requirements where, in unusual circumstances, no good purpose would be served by the compliance with the requirements of this section. 
Section 26.06. - Off-street loading and unloading areas. 
A.  Scope of loading space requirements: Compliance with the loading space regulations set forth herein shall be required in order to avoid interference with the public use of streets, alleys, parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, and other public areas. 
1.  General applicability. On the same premises with every building, or part thereof, erected and occupied for manufacturing, storage, warehousing, display and sale of goods, including department stores, wholesale stores, markets, hotels, hospitals, mortuaries, laundries, dry cleaning establishments, and other uses involving the receipt or distribution of materials, merchandise, or vehicles, there shall be provided and maintained adequate space for loading and unloading as required in this section. 
2.  Change in use and intensity. Whenever use of a building, structure, or lot is changed, loading space shall be provided as required by this ordinance for the new use, regardless of any variance which may have been in effect prior to change of use. 
3.  Surfacing and drainage. Loading areas shall be hard-surfaced with concrete or plant-mixed bituminous material, so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. Loading areas shall be graded and drained so as to dispose of surface waters. Surface water shall not be permitted to drain onto adjoining property, unless in accordance with an approved drainage plan. Grading, surfacing, and drainage plans shall be subject to review and approval by the building inspector and/or city engineer in accordance with the specifications approved by the city council. 
4.  Storage and repair prohibited. The storage of merchandise, sale of motor vehicles, storage of inoperable vehicles, or repair of vehicles is prohibited in required front yards, external side yards and loading space. 
5.  Central loading. Central loading facilities may be substituted for individual loading spaces serving businesses on separate lots provided that all of the following conditions are fulfilled: 
a)  Each business served shall have direct access to the central loading area without crossing streets or alleys. 
b)  Total loading space provided shall meet the minimum requirements specified herein, in consideration of total floor area of all businesses served by the central loading space. 
c)  No building served shall be more than 300 feet from the central loading area. 
6.  Minimum loading space. The amount of required loading space shall be determined in accordance with the schedule that follows. The planning commission may modify these requirements upon making the determination that another standard would be more appropriate because of the number or type of deliveries experienced by a particular business or use. 
SCHEDULE OF LOADING SPACE REQUIREMENTS INSTITUTIONAL AND COMMERCIAL USES Up to 5,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space. Establishments containing less than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with adequate off-street loading space that is accessible by motor vehicle, but which does not interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic. The size of any such loading space shall be based on the types of delivery vehicles typically utilized by the establishment, provided that in Industrial Districts sufficient land area must be available to provide a ten ft. by 50 ft. space (with a clearance of at least 14 ft. in height) space in the event that the use of the property changes. 5,001 to 60,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space, plus 1.0 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA. 60,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space per each additional 50,000 sq. ft. GFA. OFFICE USES Up to 15,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space If over 30,000 sq. ft. GFA 2.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space for each additional 30,000 sq. ft. GFA INDUSTRIAL USES Up to 1,400 sq. ft. GFA 0 1,401-20,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space 20,001-100,000 sq. ft. GFA 1.0 space, plus 1.0 space per each additional 20,000 sq. ft. GFA in excess of 20,000 sq. ft. 100,001 sq. ft. GFA and over 5.0 spaces, plus 1.0 space for each additional 40,000 sq. ft. in excess of 100,000 sq. ft.  
ARTICLE 27. - LIGHTING STANDARDS 

Section 27.00. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public by recognizing that buildings and sites need to be illuminated for safety, security and visibility for pedestrians and motorists. To do so, this article provides standards for various forms of lighting that will: minimize light pollution; maintain safe nighttime driver performance on public roadways; preserve the restful quality of nighttime by eliminating intrusive artificial light and lighting that unnecessarily contributes to "sky glow"; reduce light pollution and light trespass from light sources onto adjacent properties; conserve electrical energy; and curtail the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. 
Section 27.01. - Applicability. 
    The standards in this article shall apply to any light source that is visible from any property line, or beyond, for the site from which the light is emanating. The building official/zoning administrator may review any building or site to determine compliance with the requirements under this article. Whenever a person is required to obtain a building permit, electrical permit for outdoor lighting or signage, a special land use approval, subdivision approval or site plan approval from the city, the applicant shall submit sufficient information to enable the building official/zoning administrator and/or planning commission to determine whether the proposed lighting complies with this article. 
Section 27.02. - Lighting definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  Canopy structure means any overhead protective structure which is constructed in such a manner as to allow pedestrians/vehicles to pass under. 
B.  Flood or spot light means any light fixture or lamp that incorporates a reflector or refractor to concentrate the light output into a directed beam in a particular direction. 
C.  Glare means a direct light emitted by a lamp, luminous tube lighting or other light source. 
D.  Lamp means the component of the luminaire that produces the actual light including luminous tube lighting. 
E.  Light fixture means the assembly that holds a lamp and may include an assembly housing, a mounting bracket or pole socket, a lamp holder, a ballast, a reflector or mirror, and a refractor or lens. A light fixture also includes the assembly for luminous tube and fluorescent lighting 
F.  Light pollution means an artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment, enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary illumination of adjacent properties. 
G.  Light trespass means the shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
H.  Luminaire means the complete lighting system including the lamp and light fixture. 
I.  Luminous tube lighting means gas filled tubing which, when subjected to high voltage, becomes luminescent in a color characteristic of the particular gas used, e.g., neon, argon, etc. 
J.  Outdoor light fixtures means outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other similar devices, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting, general illumination or advertisement. 
K.  Shielded fixture means outdoor light fixtures shielded or constructed so that light rays emitted by the fixture are projected below the horizontal plane passing through the lowest point on the fixture from which light is emitted, e.g. "shoebox-type" fixtures. A luminaire mounted in a recessed fashion under a canopy or other structure such that the surrounding structure effectively shields the light in the same manner is also considered fully shielded for the purposes of this article. 
Section 27.03. - Submittal requirements. 
    The following information must be included for all site plan submissions and where site plan approval is not required, some or all of the items may be required by the zoning administrator prior to lighting installation: 
A.  Location of all freestanding, building-mounted and canopy light fixtures on the site plan and building elevations. 
B.  Photometric grid overlaid on the proposed site plan indicating the overall light intensity throughout the site (in footcandles). 
C.  Specifications and details for the type of fixture being proposed including the total lumen output, type of lamp and method of shielding. 
D.  Purpose of the fixture proposed. 
E.  Any other information deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to determine compliance with provisions of this article. 
Section 27.04. - Lighting standards. 
    Unless exempted under section 27.05, Exemptions, all lighting must comply with the following standards: 
A.  Freestanding pole lighting: 
1.  Exterior lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light within a site shall not exceed ten footcandles within any site or one footcandle at any property line, except where it abuts a residential district or use whereby a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is permitted. The only exception is with gas station canopy and automobile dealership lighting, where a maximum of 20 footcandles is permitted within the site but the above standards shall apply to intensity at the property line. 
2.  Metal halide fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the city and minimize "sky glow." 
3.  The planning commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures are necessary to preserve the intended character of the site. 
4.  Lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 20 feet measured from the ground level to the centerline of the light source, except that fixtures as high as 30 feet shall be permitted in Industrial Districts. These light fixture height standards shall not apply to public lighting in a road right-of-way. 
a)  The planning commission may modify these height standards in Commercial and Industrial Districts, based on consideration of the following: the position and height of buildings, other structures, and trees on the site; the potential off-site impact of the lighting; the character of the proposed use; and, the character of surrounding land use. 
b)  In no case shall the lighting exceed the maximum building height in the district in which it is located. 
5.  Except where used for security purposes, all outdoor lighting fixtures, existing or hereafter installed and maintained upon private property within Commercial, Industrial and Office Zoning Districts shall be turned off between 11:00 p.m. and sunrise, except when used for commercial and industrial uses, such as in sales, assembly and repair areas, where such use continues after 11:00 p.m. but only for so long as such use continues. 
B.  Building-mounted lighting: 
1.  Building-mounted lighting shall be fully shielded and directed downward to prevent off-site glare. The intensity of light shall not exceed ten footcandles within any site or one footcandle at any property line, except where it abuts a residential district or use whereby a maximum of 0.5 footcandles is permitted at the property line. 
2.  Metal halide fixtures shall be used in an effort to maintain a unified lighting standard throughout the city and prevent "sky glow." 
3.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting is prohibited as an architectural detail on all buildings, e.g. along the roof line and eaves, around windows, etc. The planning commission may approve internally illuminated architectural bands when it can be shown that the treatment will enhance the appearance of the building or is necessary for security purposes. 
4.  The planning commission may approve decorative light fixtures as an alternative to shielded fixtures when it can be proven that there will be no off-site glare and the proposed fixtures will improve the appearance of the site. 
C.  Window lighting: 
1.  Any light fixtures visible through a window must be shielded to prevent glare at the property line. 
2.  Luminous tube and exposed bulb fluorescent lighting (visible from the property line) is prohibited unless it is part of a sign that meets the requirements of the city's sign ordinance. 
D.  Other lighting: 
1.  The internal illumination of canopies is prohibited. 
2.  Indirect illumination of signs, canopies and buildings is permitted provided a maximum 125-watt bulb is utilized and there is no glare. 
3.  The use of laser light source, search lights or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertisement or entertainment is prohibited. 
4.  Lighting shall not be of a flashing, moving or intermittent type. 
Section 27.05. - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the lighting requirements of this article, except that the building official/zoning administrator may take steps to eliminate the impact of the below exempted items when deemed necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public: 
A.  Sports fields. 
B.  Swimming pools. 
C.  Holiday decorations. 
D.  Window displays without glare. 
E.  Shielded pedestrian walkway lighting. 
F.  Residential lighting with no off-site glare. 
G.  Street lights. 
Section 27.06. - Lamp or fixture substitution. 
    Should any light fixture regulated under this article, or the type of light source therein, be changed after the permit has been issued, a change request must be submitted to the zoning administrator for his approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this ordinance, which must be received prior to substitution. 
ARTICLE 28. - LANDSCAPING 

Section 28.00. - Intent and scope of requirements. 
A.  Intent. Landscaping enhances the visual image of the city, improves property values and alleviates the impact of noise, traffic, and visual distraction associated with certain land uses. Screening is important to protect less intensive uses from the noise, light, traffic, litter and other impacts of more intensive, non-residential uses. Accordingly, these provisions are intended to set minimum standards for the design and use of landscaping, greenbelts, and screening, and for the protection and enhancement of the city's environment. More specifically, the intent of these provisions is to: 
1.  Improve the appearance of off-street parking areas, vehicular use areas, and property abutting public rights-of-way, and 
2.  Protect and preserve the appearance, character, and value of the neighborhoods that abut non-residential areas, parking areas, and other intensive use areas, thereby protecting the public health, safety and welfare. 
B.  Scope of application. No site plan shall be approved unless it contains landscaping that meets or exceeds the requirements of this article. No building permit shall be issued by the zoning administrator until the required landscape plan is submitted and approved, and no certificate of occupancy shall be granted unless provisions of this section have been met or a performance guarantee has been posted which may be in an amount equal to the value of outstanding landscaping improvements. 
C.  Minimum requirements. The requirements in this article are minimum requirements. Under no circumstances shall they preclude the installation of more extensive landscaping. Applicants are encouraged to provide additional landscaping to improve the function, appearance and value of the property. 
D.  Design creativity. Creativity in landscape design is encouraged. In several instances, the standards are intentionally flexible to encourage flexibility and creative design. Accordingly, required trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, randomly, or in groupings, depending on the designer's desired visual effect and, equally important, the intent of the city to coordinate landscaping on adjoining properties. 
E.  Exceptions to landscaping requirements. Notwithstanding the requirements of the article, planning commission may approve alternative landscaping standards when it is satisfied that the alternative standards will result in more creative or effective landscaping. 
Section 28.01. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  Berm. A continuous, raised earthen mound with flattened top and sloped sides, capable of supporting live landscaping materials, and with a height, width, and slope which complies with the requirements of this ordinance. 
B.  Buffer zone. A strip of land often required between certain zoning districts reserved for plant material, berms, walls or fencing to serve as a visual barrier. 
C.  Common open space. Designated areas unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward except for living plant material, recreational facilities, sidewalks, bike paths and necessary drives within a PUD, PMSHDD, single-family cluster option projects, subdivision or condominium projects designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of the public or residents of the development and/or for the protection of natural features. 
D.  Grass. Any family of plants with narrow leaves normally grown as permanent lawns in Southern Michigan. 
E.  Greenbelt. A strip of land of definite width and location reserved for the planting of a combination of shrubs, trees and ground cover to serve as an obscuring screen or buffer for noise or visual enhancement, in accordance with the requirements of this ordinance. In some cases a wall or fence may be permitted as part of the greenbelt. 
F.  Ground cover. Low-growing plants (including grass) that form a dense, extensive growth after one complete growing season, and tend to prevent weeds and soil erosion. 
G.  Shrub. A woody plant of one to 13 feet in height with several erect, spreading stems and a general bushy appearance. 
H.  Tree. A woody plant with an erect perennial trunk, which at maturity is 13 feet or more in height, which has a more or less definite crown of foliage. For purposes of this ordinance the following definitions of types of trees shall apply: 
1.  Deciduous tree: A tree which has foliage that is shed at the end of the growing season. 
2.  Evergreen tree: A tree which has foliage that persists and remains green throughout the year. 
3.  Ornamental tree: A deciduous tree which is typically grown because of its shape, flowering characteristics, or other attractive features, and which grows to a mature height of 25 feet or less. 
4.  Canopy tree: A deciduous tree which has a mature crown spread of greater than 15 feet and a mature height of 40 or more feet in southern Michigan, and which has a trunk with at least five feet of clear stem at maturity. 
Section 28.02. - General landscaping requirements. 
A.  General site requirements. All developed portions of the site shall conform to the following general landscaping standards, except where specific landscape elements, such as a greenbelt, berms, or screening are required: 
1.  All unpaved portions of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable live plant material, and shall extend to any abutting street pavement edge. 
2.  A mixture of evergreen and deciduous trees shall be planted on the unpaved open portions of non-residential parcels where specific landscaping minimums are not required within this article. Based upon the overall appearance of the proposed site and the amount of landscaping provided elsewhere on the site, the total number of trees required shall be approved at the time of site plan review. Required trees may be planted at uniform distances, randomly, or in groupings. 
B.  Landscaping adjacent to roads and road rights-of-way. Landscaping adjacent to roads and road rights-of-way shall comply with the following planting requirements: 
1.  Minimum requirements. 
a)  The landscaping area adjacent to roads or road rights-of-way shall consist of a minimum depth of 15 feet, except in situations where the minimum building or parking lot setbacks are less than 15 feet. In such cases, the landscaping area adjacent to roads or road rights-of-way shall consist of a minimum depth of ten feet. This landscaped area shall exclude approved openings for vehicle and pedestrian access. Through lots or corner lots shall provide such landscaping along all adjacent road rights-of-way. 
b)  The planning commission may permit all or a portion of the landscaped area to be located within a road right-of-way or elsewhere within the front setback area, provided that the planning commission finds that all of the following conditions exist regarding the proposed relocation: 
1)  The relocation is justified because of the physical characteristics of the site, the location of existing easements, sidewalks, or landscaping, the configuration of existing parking, the need to maintain emergency vehicle access, or because of other public health or safety concerns. 
2)  The landscaped area will not result in less landscaped area than would be required if the landscaped area had been located on private property contiguous to the road right-of-way. 
3)  The landscaped area is consistent with the intent of this section. 
4)  The landscaped area will not jeopardize traffic safety or the general planning of the city. 
2.  Required plantings. 
Type Requirements Deciduous tree* 1 canopy tree per 40 lineal ft. (rounded upward) of road frontage *The planning commission may approve substitution of evergreen trees for up to 50 percent of the required trees.  
For the purposes of computing length of road frontage, openings for driveways and sidewalks shall not be counted. Trees and shrubs may be planted at uniform distances, randomly, or in groupings. 
3.  Location. 
a)  Where planted, trees shall comply with the following minimum setbacks, as measured from the center of the tree: 
Location Minimum Required
Setback from edge of road 10 feet from fire hydrant 5 feet from vehicular drive or sidewalk 5 feet from fence line or property line 4 feet  
b)  When planted, shrubs shall comply with the following minimum setbacks, as measured from the edge of the shrub: 
Location Minimum Required
Setback from edge of road 5 feet from fire hydrant 5 feet from fence line or property line 4 feet  
C.  Berms. Where required, berms shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Dimensions. Unless otherwise indicated or appropriate, required berms shall be measured from the grade of the parking lot or first ground adjacent to the berm, and shall be constructed with slopes no steeper than one foot vertical for each three feet horizontal (33 percent slope), with at least a two-foot flat area on top. Berms may undulate in height, subject to review and approval of berm design as shown on the site plan. Unless otherwise indicated, the maximum height of required berms shall be three feet. 
2.  Protection from erosion. Any required berm shall be planted with sod, ground cover, or other suitable live plant material to protect it from erosion so that it retains its height and shape. The use of railroad ties, cement blocks, and other types of construction materials to retain the shape and height of a berm shall be prohibited unless specifically reviewed and approved as part of a site plan by the planning commission. 
3.  Required plantings. 
a)  Berms located in the front yard of non-residential parcels. Berms located in the front yard of non-residential parcels shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to roads, section 28.03, subsection B. 
b)  Berms used for screening other than in the front yard. Berms used for screening other than in the front yard shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements for screening, section 28.03, subsection D. 
4.  Measurement of berm length. For the purpose of calculating required plant material, berm length shall be measured along the exterior edge of the berm. 
D.  Screening, obscuring walls and fences. 
1.  Obscuring walls and fences. There shall be provided on those sides abutting or adjacent to a residential district a completely obscuring wall or fence. The height of such wall or fence shall be determined by the zoning administrator; provided, however, that he shall require only such height as shall be necessary to obscure the use within the fence from adjoining residential uses and in any event such wall or fence not exceed 12 feet from ground level. 
a)  Required walls or fences shall be located on the lot line except where underground utilities interfere and except in instances where this ordinance requires conformance with front yard setback lines in abutting residential districts. Required walls or fences may, upon approval of the zoning board of appeals, be located on the opposite side of an alley right-of-way from non-residential district that abuts a residential district when mutually agreeable to affected property owners. The continuity of the required wall or fence on a given block will be a major consideration of the zoning board of appeals in reviewing such request. 
b)  Such walls and screening barrier shall have no openings for vehicular traffic or other purposes, except such openings as may be approved by the chief of police and the zoning administrator. All walls herein required shall be constructed of masonry materials approved by the zoning administrator. Walls shall be erected on a concrete foundation which shall have a minimum depth of 42 inches below a grade approved by the zoning administrator and shall be not less than four inches wider than the wall to be erected. 
2.  General screening requirements. Unless otherwise specified, wherever an evergreen or landscaped screen is required, screening shall consist of closely-spaced evergreen plantings (no farther than 15 feet apart) that can be reasonably expected to form a complete visual barrier that is at least six feet above ground level within three years of planting. Deciduous plant materials may be used provided that a complete visual barrier is maintained throughout the year. 
3.  Screening of equipment. Mechanical equipment, such as air compressors, pool pumps, transformers, sprinkler pumps, satellite dish antennae, and similar equipment shall be screened on at least three sides by evergreen trees or shrubs planted three feet on-center. As practical, said screening shall exceed the vertical height of the equipment being screened by at least six inches within two years of planting. 
E.  Parking lot landscaping. In addition to required screening, all off-street parking areas with more than 25 spaces shall also provide landscaping as follows: 
1.  Dispersed landscaping. Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order to break up large expanses of pavement and assist with vehicular and pedestrian flow. 
2.  Required parking lot trees. At least one canopy tree shall be provided per eight parking spaces provided. 
3.  Location of parking lot trees. All of the required parking lot trees shall be placed within the parking lot envelope as described by the area including the parking lot surface and extending ten feet from the edge of the parking lot. A minimum of one-third of the required parking lots trees shall be placed within the interior of the parking area. 
4.  Size of islands. Parking lot islands shall be curbed and be at least 100 square feet in area. The length of the island shall be two feet shorter than an adjacent parking space. 
5.  Other plantings in islands. Only shrubs, grass or other living ground cover shall be used to supplement trees within parking lot islands. 
6.  Pedestrian connections through parking lots. The design and layout of the parking lots shall provide appropriate pedestrian circulation and connections to perimeter pedestrian connections. 
7.  Other landscaping. Required landscaping elsewhere on the parcel shall not be counted in meeting the parking lot landscaping requirements. 
F.  Buffers. 
1.  A buffer shall be provided between the subject site and all adjacent properties in accordance with the table below. The planning commission shall determine whether landscaping, a wall, a berm, or combination of these elements is needed to attain the intended screening. The use of canopy trees and associated understory are encouraged while walls and berms are discouraged. 
2.  At a minimum, the width of the buffer shall be equal to the required setback. However when a wall or berm are used, a larger buffer width may be required to accommodate both the required plant material and the wall or berm. All walls and berms shall be designed in accordance with the standards contained herein. (Note: Exceptions may be granted as outlined in section 28.08) 
Buffer Type Required Plantings in Buffers
(as noted in following Chart)Type A buffer Two canopy trees and four shrubs, or one canopy tree, one evergreen and four shrubs per 20 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward. Type B Buffer One canopy tree and four shrubs, or one evergreen tree and four shrubs per 20 linear feet along the property line, rounded upward.  
Zoning or
Proposed Use of
Subject SiteZoning or Use of Adjacent Site One- or
Two-Family
(R-1, R-2,
R-3, R-4)Multiple-
Family
(RM-1,
RM-2) Office
(O-1) Municipal or
Institutional Central
Business
District
(CBD) Other
Commercial
(NBD,
GBD) Industrial
(I-l, I-2) Outdoor
Storage
Areas in
any District Public
Utility
Buildings &
Structures Parking
Lots One- or Two-Family none Type B Type B Type A Type A Type A Type A Type A Type A Type A Multiple-Family Type B none Type B Type A Type A Type A Type Type A Type A Type A Office Type B Type B none Type B Type B Type B Type B Type B Type A Type B Municipal or Institutional Type A Type A Type B none Type B Type B Type A Type B Type A Type B Central Business District Type A Type A Type B Type B none Type B Type A Type A Type A Type B Commercial Type A Type A Type B Type B Type B none Type A Type A Type A Type B Industrial Type A Type A Type B Type A Type A Type A none Type B Type B Type B Outdoor Storage Areas in any District Type A Type A Type B Type B Type A Type A Type B none Type B Type B Public Utility Buildings & Structures Type A Type A Type A Type A Type A Type A Type B Type B none Type B Parking Lots Type A Type A Type B Type B Type B Type B Type B Type B Type B none  
G.  Landscaping of rights-of-way. 
1.  Public rights-of-way located adjacent to required landscaped areas and greenbelts shall be planted with grass or other suitable live ground cover, and shall be maintained by the owner or occupant of the adjacent property as if the rights-of-way were part of the required landscaped areas or greenbelts. 
2.  Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in the road right-of-way without first obtaining approval from the agency that has jurisdiction over the road. 
3.  Trees and shrubs shall be planted no closer to the edge of the road pavement than the distances specified in the following chart: 
Road Setback Requirements for Plantings (from edge of road) Trees 10 feet (measured from center of tree) Shrubs 5 feet (measured from perimeter of shrub)  
H.  Maintenance of unobstructed visibility for drivers. No landscaping shall be established or maintained on any parcel or in any parking lot that will obstruct the view of drivers. Accordingly, all landscaping shall comply with the provisions set forth in section 19.11, Corner clearance 
I.  Potential damage to utilities and public facilities. Landscaping material shall not be planted in a manner that will interfere with or cause damage to underground utility lines, public roads, or other public facilities. Species of trees whose roots are known to cause damage to public roadways, sewers, or other utilities shall not be planted closer than 15 feet from any such roadways, sewers, or utilities. Trees shall be setback from overhead utility lines as indicated in the following chart: 
Utility Setback Requirements for Plantings Potential
Tree Height Minimum Distance from Center
of Trunk to Nearest Utility Line Up to 15 feet 10 ft. 15 to 25 feet 20 ft. Over 25 feet 30 ft.  
J.  Landscaping of divider medians. Where traffic on driveways, maneuvering lanes, private roads, or similar means of vehicular access is separated by a divider median, the median shall be curbed (six-inch non-mountable curb) and have a minimum width of ten feet. A minimum of one deciduous or evergreen tree shall be planted for each 30 lineal feet or portion thereof of median. Trees may be planted at uniform distances, randomly, or in groupings, but in no instance shall the center-to-center distance between trees exceed 60 feet. 
K.  Irrigation. Each landscaped area shall have water access available. The site plan shall indicate the proposed method of providing water to landscaped areas. Although not required, installation of an in-ground irrigation or sprinkler system is encouraged, particularly in front yards. 
L.  Sight distance. The landscape plan shall be approved by the planning commission in consideration of sight distance, size of planting area, location of sidewalks, maintenance of adequate overhead clearance, accessibility to fire hydrants, visibility to approved signs and compatibility with the visual character of the surrounding area. Plantings within 15 feet of a fire hydrant shall be no taller than six inches. 
Section 28.03. - Specific landscaping requirements for zoning districts. 
A.  Requirements for Business, Office, and Industrial Districts. All lots or parcels of land located in Office, Commercial, or Industrial Zoning Districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements: 
1.  General site landscaping. Exclusive of parking lot requirements, at least six percent of the total area of the site shall be maintained as landscaped open area. All such open areas shall conform to the general site requirements in section 28.03, subsection A., except where specific landscape elements are required. 
2.  Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All business, office, and industrial developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in section 28.03, subsection B. 
3.  Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. The berm shall be located entirely on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. 
4.  Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required wherever a non-residential use in a Business, Office, or Industrial District abuts land zoned for residential purposes. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in section 28.03, subsection D. 
5.  Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than 25 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in section 28.03, subsection E. 
B.  Requirements for Central Business District. The purpose of this section is to promote development and redevelopment in the Central Business District in a manner that creates a safe and attractive environment for specified uses as well as cultivate an attractive gateway to the city. 
1.  Pedestrian related design features. Direct pedestrian access shall be provided from the principal entrance of the building to the sidewalk on Miller Road, Morrish Road or side street, if any. Pedestrian access shall be provided from rear parking facilities to the ground floor uses, either through rear or side building entrances, pedestrian ways along the perimeter of buildings, or by pedestrian throughways which connect the rear parking lots to the sidewalks along Miller and Morrish Roads. Pedestrian throughways may be located between buildings or may be incorporated in the interior design of a structure. Pedestrian throughways shall be a minimum of six feet wide (where practical), well lighted and visually accessible from either the interior of the building or street and parking areas. The intention is to provide a safe and aesthetically pleasing environment. 
Parking, vehicular service areas, and all pedestrian areas shall be well lighted to provide both a secure and aesthetically pleasing environment. Lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties and roadways. 
Combined ground floor and second floor building frontage on all front yards shall contain a minimum of 20 percent transparent or translucent materials per gross area of frontage. 
2.  Optional crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) review requirements. The planning commission may require a CPTED review for rezoning petitions, special land use petitions, and site development plans for all sites located in the Central Business District. The CPTED development plan review must be completed and signed by one law enforcement and one designated CPTED trained planning commission member or zoning administrator assigned to the petition prior to the petition being scheduled before the planning commission. The development plan presented to the planning commission and city council by the petitioner shall respond to all concerns noted by the CPTED reviewers. 
It is the intent of the guidelines listed below to assist in the creation and maintenance of a built environment that decreases the opportunity for crime and increases the perception of safety. The CPTED review performed by the individuals listed above shall encompass but not be limited to the following principles: 
a)  Provision of natural surveillance: 
1)  The placement and design of physical features to maximize visibility. This will include building orientation, windows, entrances and exits, parking lots, walkways, guard gates, landscape trees and shrubs, fences or walls, signage and any other physical obstructions. 
2)  The placement of persons and/or activities to maximize surveillance possibilities. 
3)  Lighting that provides the nighttime illumination of parking lots, walkways, entrances and exits. 
b)  Provision for natural access control: 
1)  The use of sidewalks, pavement, lighting and landscaping to clearly guide the public to and from entrances and exits. 
2)  The use of fences, walls or landscaping to prevent and/or discourage public access to or from dark and/or unmonitored areas. 
c)  Provision of territorial reinforcement: 
1)  The use of pavement treatments, landscaping, art, signage, screening and fences to define and outline ownership of property. 
d)  Maintenance: 
1)  The use of low-maintenance landscaping and lighting treatment to facilitate the CPTED principles of natural surveillance, natural access control and territorial reinforcement. 
C.  Requirements for Multiple-Family District. All lots or parcels of land located in the Multiple-Family Zoning District shall comply with the following landscaping requirements: 
1.  General site landscaping. A minimum of two (rounded upward) deciduous or evergreen trees, PLUS, four shrubs shall be planted per dwelling unit. Unless otherwise specified, required landscaping elsewhere in the multiple-family development shall not be counted in meeting these requirements for trees. 
2.  Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All multiple-family developments shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in section 28.03, subsection B. 
3.  Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the roadway or other public property, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. The berm shall be located totally on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. 
4.  Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required on all sides of a multiple-family development, except on sides facing a road. Landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in section 28.03, subsection D. A wall may be used instead of landscaping adjacent to non-residential districts. 
5.  Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than 15 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in section 28.03, subsection E. 
6.  Privacy screen. Where multiple-family dwellings are designed so that open common areas or individual patio areas abut a public street, a landscaped privacy screen shall be provided. The screen may consist of a combination of trees, shrubs, and landscaped berms, subject to site plan review and approval by the planning commission. 
D.  Requirements for non-residential uses in residential districts. All non-residential uses developed in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following landscaping requirements: 
1.  General site landscaping. At least ten percent of the site shall be maintained as landscaped open area. All such open areas shall conform to the general site requirements in section 28.03, subsection A., except where specific landscape elements are required. 
2.  Landscaping adjacent to road or road right-of-way. All non-residential developments located in residential districts shall comply with the requirements for landscaping adjacent to the road or road right-of-way in section 28.03, subsection B. 
3.  Berm requirements. A berm may be used to screen off-street parking from view of the road, in which case the berm shall be a maximum of three feet in height, and shall be planted in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. The berm shall be located entirely on private property, adjacent to the road right-of-way. Parking lot landscaping may be reduced if a berm is constructed to screen off-street parking, in accordance with section 28.03, subsection C. 
4.  Screening. Landscaped screening or a wall shall be required wherever a non-residential use abuts properties zoned for residential purposes obscuring walls, fences and landscaped screening shall comply with the requirements in section 28.03, subsection D. 
5.  Parking lot landscaping. Off-street parking areas containing greater than 15 spaces shall comply with the requirements for parking lot landscaping in section 28.03, subsection E. 
Section 28.04. - Standards for landscape materials. 
    Unless otherwise specified, all landscape materials shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Plant quality. Plant materials shall be nursery grown, free of pests and diseases, hardy in Genesee County, in conformance with the standards of the American Association of Nurserymen, and shall have passed inspections required under state regulations. 
B.  Non-living plant material. Plastic and any other non-living plant materials shall not be acceptable to meet the landscaping requirements of this ordinance. Upon approval of the planning commission through site plan review, water bodies, boulder groupings, landscape furniture, and manmade landscape ornaments, singly or in combination may account for a maximum of 30 percent of the ground area to be landscaped. 
C.  Recommended plant material. Use of the following plant materials is recommended because of their resilience and adoption to environmental conditions of Southeast Michigan. 
RECOMMENDED PLANT MATERIALS COMMON NAME GENUS Deciduous Canopy Trees 1. Oaks Quercus 2. Hard Maples (Except Japanese) Acer 3. Hackberry Celtis 4. Planetree (Sycamore) Platanus 5. Birch Betula 6. Beech Fagus 7. Gingko (male) Ginkgo 8. Honeylocust (Thornless Cultivars only) Gleditsia 9. Sweetgum Liquidambar 10. Hophornbeam (Ironwood) Ostrya 11. Linden Tilia 12. Hickory Carya 13. Hornbeam (Blue Beech) Carpinus Please note: Although the use of ashes is suggested, due to recent disease and pest problems associated with ashes in the area, it is recommended that more disease resistant ash cultivars be used and that no one cultivar be planted as the dominant tree type. Deciduous Ornamental Trees 1. Amelanchier Amelanchier 2. Redbud Cercis 3. Dogwood (Tree Form) Cornus 4. Hawthorn Crataegus 5. Flowering Crabapple (Disease Resistant Cultivars) Malus 6. Flowering Plum (Tree Form) Prunus 7. Flowering Pear Pyrus 8. Magnolia Magnolia 9. Hornbeam Carpinus 10. Rose of Sharon Hibiscus Evergreen Trees 1. Fir Abies 2. Hemlock Tsuga 3. Spruce Picea 4. Pine Pinus 5. Douglas Fir Pseudotsuga Please note: Dwarf, Globe, Pendulous species/Cultivars are not permitted. Narrow Evergreens 1. Juniper Juniperus 2. Arborvitae Thuja Please note: Dwarf, Globe, Spreading Species/Cultivars are not permitted. Large Shrubs 1. Deciduous  a. Dogwood (Shrub Form) Cornus  b. Cotoneaster Cotoneaster  c. Forsythia Forsythia  d. Mock-Orange Philadelphus  e. Sumac Rhus  f. Lilac Syringa  g. Viburnum Viburnum  h. Witchhazel Hamamelis  i. Euonymus Euonymus  j. Privet Ligustrum  k. Ninebark Physocarpus 2. Evergreens  a. Juniper (Hetz, Pfitzer, Savin) Juniperus  b. Yew (Pyramidal Japanese) Taxus Small Shrubs 1. Deciduous  a. Barberry Berberis  b. Boxwood Buxus  c. Quince Chaenomeles  d. Cotoneaster Cotoneaster  e. Euonymus Euonymus  f. Forsythia Forsythia  g. Hydrangea Hydrangea  h. Holly Ilex  i. Privet Ligustrum  j. Potentilla Potentilla  k. Currant Ribes  l. Lilac Syringa  m. Viburnum Viburnum  n. Weigela Weigela 2. Evergreens  a. Fir Abies  b. False Cypress Chamaecyparis  c. Juniper (Low Spreading) Juniperus  d. Spruce Picea  e. Pine Pinus  f. Yew (Globe, Spreading, Upright) Taxus  g. Arborvitae (Globe/Dwarf) Thuja  
D.  Prohibited plant material. Use of the following plant materials (or their clones on cultivars) is prohibited because of susceptibility to storm damage, drainage conflicts, disease, and other undesirable characteristics. 
1.  Ash; 
2.  Box Elder; 
3.  Soft Maples (Silver); 
4.  Elms (American, Siberian, slippery, red, and Chinese); 
5.  Poplars; 
6.  Willows; 
7.  Horse Chestnut (nut bearing; 
8.  Tree of Heaven; 
9.  Catalpa; 
10.  Ginkgo (female); 
11.  Cottonwood; 
12.  Black Locust; 
13.  Mulberry; 
14.  Honey Locust (with Thorns). 
    The planning commission, however, may allow generally prohibited trees from the above list when associated with an appropriate ecosystem, such as a wetland area. 
Section 28.05. - Installation and maintenance. 
    The following standards shall be observed where installation and maintenance of landscape materials are required: 
A.  Installation. Landscaping shall be installed in a sound, workmanlike manner to ensure the continued growth of healthy plant material. Trees, shrubs, hedges, and vines shall be generously mulched at the time of planting. 
1.  The required landscaping shall be planted with permanent living plant materials within six months from the date of occupancy and shall be continuously maintained in a sound, healthy, and vigorous growing condition. 
2.  The selection, spacing, and size of plant material shall be such as to create, within a five-year period from the date of planting, a horizontal obscuring effect for the entire length of the required greenbelt area, and a vertical obscuring effect of such height as is determined adequate by the planning commission for proper screening between land uses. 
3.  If the development is completed, at such time that the requirements of subsection A.1. above, can not be complied with, the owner shall provide a performance guarantee to ensure installation of required landscaping in the next planting season, in accordance with section 28.03. 
SUMMARY OF PLANT MATERIAL SPECIFICATIONS Minimum
Caliper Minimum
Height Minimum
Spread Minimum
Length Deciduous Trees 2 in. [1] 4 ft. first branch [4] Ornamental Trees 1 in. [2] 4 ft. first branch Evergreen Trees 6 ft. 2 ft. Shrubs 2 ft. 2 ft. Hedges 4 ft. [5] Vines 30 inches [3]  
Footnotes: 
[1]  Measured 12 inches above grade. 
[2]  Measured six inches above grade. Clumped trees (i.e. Birch) shall have a minimum height of six feet above grade. 
[3]  After one season. 
[4]  Trees planted along pedestrian routes (i.e. sidewalks, plazas, etc.) shall not have branches (lower than eight feet). Trees planted within street lines and sidewalks and planted along bikeways shall maintain a vertical clearance to obstructions of a minimum of ten feet. 
[5]  Hedges shall be planted and maintained so as to form a continuous, unbroken, visual screen within two years after planting, barring unusual growing conditions, such as drought or disease. 
[6]  Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonably complete coverage after one complete growing season. 
[7]  Grass area shall be planted using species normally grown as permanent lawns in Genesee County. Grass, sod, and seed shall be clean and free of weeds, pests, and diseases. Grass may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded. When grass is to be established by a method other than complete sodding or seeding, nurse grass seed shall be sown for immediate effect and protection until complete coverage is otherwise achieved. Straw or other mulch shall be used to protect newly seeded areas. 
[8]  Mulch used around trees, shrubs, and vines shall be a minimum of four inches deep, and installed in a manner as to present a finished appearance. 
B.  Spacing. Planting in formal groupings to create a naturalistic appearance is desirable whenever possible, plant materials shall not be placed closer than four feet from the fence line or property line. Plant materials used together in informal groupings shall meet the on-center spacing requirements: 
Plant
Material
Types Evergreen Narrow
Evergreen
Trees Large
Deciduous
Trees Small
Deciduous
Trees Large
Shrubs Small
Shrubs Evergreen 
Trees Min. 10' 
Max. 20' Min. 12' Min. 20' Min. 12" Min. 6' Min. 5' Narrow 
Evergreen 
Trees Min. 12' Min. 5' 
Max. 10' Min. 15' Min. 10' Min. 5' Min. 4' Large 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 20' Min. 15' Min. 20' 
Max. 30' Min. 15' Min. 5' Min. 3' Small 
Deciduous 
Trees Min. 12' Min. 10' Min. 15' Min. 8' 
Max. 15' Min. 6' Min. 3' Large Shrubs Min. 6' Min. 5' Min. 5' Min. 6' Min. 4' 
Max. 6' Min. 5' Small Shrubs Min. 5' Min. 4' Min. 3' Min. 3' Min. 5' Min. 3' 
Max. 4'  
C.  Mixing of species. The overall landscape plan shall not contain more than 33 percent of any one plant species. The use of trees native to the area and Southeast Michigan, and mixture of trees from the same species associates, is encouraged. Botanical genera containing trees native to Southeast Michigan are identified with an asterisk (*) in the Table of Recommended Plant Materials. 
D.  Protection from vehicles. All landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicles through use of curbs or wheel stops. All landscape areas shall be elevated above the pavement to a height adequate to protect the plants from snow removal, salt, and other hazards. 
E.  Off-season planting requirements. If development is completed during the off-season when plants cannot be installed, the owner shall provide a performance guarantee to the city to ensure installation of required landscaping in the next planting season. 
F.  Maintenance. Landscaping required by this ordinance or as approved by planning commission through site plan review shall be maintained in a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance, free from refuse and debris. All unhealthy and dead plant material shall be replaced immediately upon notice from the zoning administrator, unless the season is not appropriate for planting, in which case such plant material shall be replaced at the beginning of the next planting season. 
G.  All landscaped areas shall be provided with a readily available and acceptable supply of water, with at least one spigot located within 300 feet of all plant material to be established and maintained. Trees, shrubs, and other plantings and lawn areas shall be watered regularly throughout the growing season. 
H.  All constructed or manufactured landscape elements, such as but not limited to benches, retaining walls, edging, and so forth, shall be maintained in good condition and neat appearance. Rotted, deteriorated, or damaged landscape elements shall be repaired, replaced, or removed upon notice from the zoning administrator. 
Section 28.06. - Treatment of existing plant material. 
    The following regulations shall apply to existing plant material: 
A.  Consideration of existing elements in the landscape design. In instances where healthy plant material exists on a site prior to its development, the planning commission may permit substitution of existing plant material in lieu of part or all of the requirements in this section, provided that such substitution is in keeping with the spirit and intent of this article and the ordinance in general. 
Existing hedges, berms, walls, or other landscape elements may be used to satisfy the requirements set forth previously, provided that such existing elements conform to the requirements of this section. 
B.  Preservation of existing plant material. Site plans shall show all existing trees that are located in the portions of the site that will be built upon or otherwise altered, and are five inches or greater in caliper, measured 12 inches above grade. 
Such trees shall be clearly labeled "To Be Removed" or "To Be Saved" on the site plan. For trees labeled "To Be Saved" on the site plan, protective measures must be implemented during construction, such as the placement of fencing or stakes at the dripline around each tree. No vehicle or other construction equipment shall be parked or stored within the dripline of any tree or other plant material intended to be saved nor shall the grade of the soil within the dripline be changed as a result of the construction. In the event that existing healthy plant materials that are intended to meet the requirements of the ordinance are removed, damaged or destroyed during construction, the plant material shall be replaced with the same species as the damaged or removed tree, in accordance with the following schedule: 
CALIPER MEASURED 12 INCHES ABOVE GRADE Damaged Tree Replacement Tree Replacement Ratio Less than 6 inches 21/2 to 3 inches 1 for 1 More than 6 inches 21/2 to 3 inches 1 replacement tree for each 6 inches in caliper or fraction thereof of damaged tree  
Section 28.07. - Modifications to landscape requirements. 
    In consideration of the overall design and impact of a specific landscape plan, and in consideration of the amount of existing plant material to be retained on the site, the planning commission may modify the requirements of this article, provided that any adjustment maintains the intent of this article and the ordinance in general. In granting a modification, the planning commission shall make a finding of the following: 
A.  The public benefit intended by the landscape regulations will be better-achieved with a plan that varies from the strict requirements of the ordinance; and, 
1.  Topographic features or other unique features of the site create conditions such that strict application of the landscape regulations would result in a less effective screen than an alternative landscape design; or, 
2.  Parking, vehicular circulation, or land use are such that required landscaping would not enhance the site or result in the desired screening effect; and, 
B.  Need for security; and, 
C.  Abutting district or existing use; and, 
D.  That extending the existing natural vegetation provides the desired screening; and, 
E.  Building heights and views in relation to existing topography and vegetation as well as from adjacent uses. 
Section 28.08. - Trash enclosure screening. 
    All trash enclosures shall be located to have easy access for removal and not to interfere with traffic patterns of the parking lot and adjoining streets. All trash enclosures shall be enclosed and screened by a combination of the following: fence or wall and/landscape material as approved by the planning commission. A solid screen of a minimum height equal to the height of the trash enclosure shall be erected around three sides of the trash enclosure excluding the side for access. Access to the dumpster shall be screened by a solid gate and shall remain closed and secured at all times excluding the loading and unloading of material within said enclosure. No trash enclosure shall be located in the front yard or right-of-way of any parcel. 
ARTICLE 29. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 

Section 29.00. - Intent and purpose. 
    The intent of this article is to establish the procedures and consistent standards for review and approval of site plans to ensure full compliance with the regulations in this ordinance and other applicable ordinances and state and federal regulations of development proposals. Site plan review standards are intended to encourage consultation and cooperation between the applicant and the city to balance the property owner's right to a reasonable rate of return on investment with the city's overall land use goals and desire to minimize adverse impacts on the investments of surrounding landowners. Therefore, these site plan review standards insure a thorough evaluation of a development in relation to the goals of the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan and the potential impacts on the environment, drainage, utilities, traffic, aesthetics, property values and other public health, safety and welfare issues. 
    This section also contains special provisions to evaluate impacts of particular uses and to allow administrative approval in certain cases where there is a change in use, a minor change to an existing site or a minor change determined necessary in the field during construction. 
Section 29.01. - Relationship to platting and land divisions or combinations. 
    The city council shall require the platting of parcels of property and/or the approval of land divisions or land combinations prior to the consideration of site plans where the city council determines a site plan is needed to ensure compliance with the standards of the zoning ordinance or other ordinances. 
Section 29.02. - Uses requiring site plan review. 
    Except as specifically provided in section 29.02(d) the development of any new use, the construction of any new structures, any change of an existing use of land or site, and all other building or development activities in R-4, RM-1, NBD, GBD, CBD, PUD, PMSHDD, O-1, I-1 & I-2 Districts shall require site plan approval by the planning commission pursuant to the conditions of this article. 
    A building permit shall not be issued until a full site plan or sketch plan has been reviewed and approved in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth herein and all necessary review, inspection, and permit fees have been fully paid. The extent of site plan review for various types of projects is classified into four types in Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process. 
(a)  Full site plan. The most involved process for larger and more intense projects, including most new developments and major expansions. 
(b)  Limited site plan. A limited site plan, rather than a complete site plan package, may be submitted for minor modifications to a legally existing and conforming use and building which is permitted in the zoning district (i.e. special land uses are not eligible) including alterations to a building or site that do not result in expansion or substantially affect the character or intensity of the use, vehicular or pedestrian circulation, drainage patterns, the demand for public infrastructure or services, significant environmental impacts or increased potential for hazards 
(c)  Administrative review. Certain smaller scale projects and expansions or changes in use to existing sites, which are required to provide a limited site plan, do not require review by the planning commission; but instead shall undergo a formal review for approval by the zoning administrator. 
(d)  Exempt. Certain projects, such as single-family homes on an individual lot, are exempt from site plan review given their relatively low level of impact on adjacent land uses, and given that compliance with applicable zoning regulations can be addressed during the building permit review process. 
Table of Eligible Uses and Required Review Process Situation/Use Required Review Full
Site
PlanLimited
Site
PlanAdmin.
ReviewExemptNew Development Any development, except one-family residential, for which off-street parking areas are provided. X Any use in a RM-1, NBD, GBD, CBD, PUD, PMSHDD, O-1, I-1 & I-2 District lying contiguous to or across a street from a One-Family Residential District. X Any use except one-family residential which lies contiguous to a major thoroughfare or collector street. X Development of any non-single-family use or building in a residential district X Any residential development, except construction or expansion of one single-family or two-family dwelling unit on an individual lot or parcel in the residential zoning districts, or placement of dwelling units in an approved manufactured home park. X Development of any non-residential use or building. X The erection, relocation, conversion or structural alteration to any non-one-family or two-family building, structure or site which results in additional floor space. X Any development which would establish more than one (1) principal use on a single lot, for example, a one-family site condominium or similar project where a single parcel is to be developed with more than one (1) detached dwelling unit. X Special land uses in all zoning districts. X Telecommunications. X Essential public service and utility buildings and/or storage areas. State licensed residential facilities. X Home occupations. X Temporary uses, sales and seasonal events. X Modifications to upgrade a building to improve barrier-free design, or to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or other federal, state or county regulations. X A change in use in a non-conforming use building or site to a more conforming situation. X Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds or clearing of trees. X Approved changes to utility systems. X Construction or relocation of a permitted accessory building of less than 100 square feet. X Changes to the façade or architectural features (an elevation plan describing changes and construction materials is required). X Relocation of a waste receptacle to a more inconspicuous location or installation of screening around the waste receptacle. X Alterations to the off-street parking layout or installation of pavement or curbing improvements provided the total number of spaces shall remain constant, and the construction plans and lot construction are approved by the city engineer. X Improvements or installations of walls, fences, lighting or curbing consistent with the other requirements of this ordinance. X Expansion, replanting or alterations of landscaping areas consistent with the other requirements of this ordinance. X Improvements to outdoor recreational uses and parks. X An existing building and site are to be re-occupied by a use permitted in the subject zoning district and the new use will not require any significant changes in the existing site facilities such as landscaping, lighting, signs, bikepaths or sidewalks. X Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and/or structures accessory to a single- or two-family dwelling unit. X Construction or erection of permitted accessory buildings and/or structures less than 100 square feet in area accessory to a multiple-family, commercial, office, essential public services, municipal or industrial use. X Grading, excavation, filling, soil removal, creation of ponds or clearing of trees within an area up to 100 square feet, provided such activity is normally and customarily incidental to single-family uses on the site. X Permitted family foster care homes, family day homes and adult day care homes in Single-Family Zoning Districts. X Internal construction or change in the floor plan that does not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use or affect parking requirements on a site which meets all site design standards of the ordinance. X Construction or erection of retaining walls, fences, waste receptacles, sidewalks, antennas, lights, poles, cooling/heating or other mechanical equipment, telephone booths, newspaper boxes, landscaping and similar structures which conform to other city standards. X Minor changes during construction such as changes in landscape species to a similar variety, realignment of a driveway or road due to an unanticipated & documented constraint during construction, or to improve safety or protect natural features. X Minor changes during construction required by outside agencies. X Expansions Expansion of one (1) one-family dwelling on one (1) lot in a residential zoning district. X An increase in the floor area up to 25% of the existing floor area for a use requiring site plan approval. X An increase in the floor area greater than that specified above. X An increase in parking or loading area of up to 25% or 6,000 sq. ft. of pavement area without any building changes. X An increase in parking or loading area over 25% or 6,000 sq. ft. of pavement area without any building changes. X Changes to building height that do not add additional floor area. X Changes in Use Any change in the use of land or a building to a more intensive use, in terms of parking needs, noise, traffic volumes, and similar impacts. X A change in use to a similar or less intense use provided the site shall not require any significant changes in the existing site facilities such as parking, landscaping, lighting, or signs. X A change from a non-conforming use, building or site, to a more conforming situation. X Other Types of Projects Accessory buildings and structures in any zoning district. X Internal construction or change in the floor plan that does not increase gross floor area, increase the intensity of use or affect parking requirements on a site which meets all site design standards of this ordinance. X State licensed residential family care facilities and family day care homes. X Temporary uses. X Terraces, patios, porches, and decks (covered or uncovered). X Any use which, in the opinion of the development official, should be reviewed by the planning commission for site plan approval because of the intensity of development proposed and potential effects on properties in the general vicinity. X Other projects not specifically listed in this table. X  
Section 29.03. - Limited site plan review process. 
1.  Intent. The intent of this section is to permit submittal of a limited site plan in certain specific instances where a complete site plan is not considered essential to ensure compliance with the intent and standards of this zoning ordinance. 
2.  Procedure. The process for administrative approval shall involve submittal of a limited site plan and required application form and fee to the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator shall review the sketch plan to ensure compliance with standards of this ordinance and make a report to the planning commission. 
    The zoning administrator retains the option to require a complete site plan for review by the planning commission and city council, particularly for sites which do not comply with previously approved site plans, sites with parking deficiencies, sites abutting residential districts or sites experiencing problems with drainage, traffic, noise, aesthetics or other general health and safety issues. If a full site plan is required, the zoning administrator shall inform the applicant to submit a set of plans in accordance with section 29.06 of this ordinance within 14 days of receipt of the application. 
3.  Requirements for a limited site plan: A "limited site plan" submittal shall include at least the following: 
a)  Application form and review fee. 
b)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant and the person(s) responsible for preparing the plot plan. 
c)  North arrow. 
d)  Legal description of the property. 
e)  The "limited site plan" shall be drawn at an engineers scale. Any building expansion over 500 square feet within a five-year period involving public safety issues, as determined by the zoning administrator shall require a professional seal of an architect, landscape architect, engineer or surveyor. 
f)  Property lines and dimensions. 
g)  Existing and proposed buildings and structures with dimensions, setbacks and details or elevations where appropriate. 
h)  Existing and proposed parking including number of spaces provided v. required according to Article 26. If changes are made to the parking area, a detail of pavement, storm water runoff calculations and description of detention methods shall be provided. 
i)  Details on any new driveways or changes to existing driveways (radii, throat width, slope, boulevard design, etc.). 
j)  Location of existing signs and details on any proposed changes or new signs. 
k)  General illustrations of existing landscaping; location, size and species of any new landscaping. 
l)  Layout of any proposed changes to utilities. 
m)  Description of any proposed changes to drainage. 
n)  Floor plan of any new building area and building elevations, if applicable. 
o)  Any other items requested by city staff or the planning commission. 
Section 29.04. - Criteria for full site plan review. 
A.  The planning commission (and city council) shall review the site plan to insure that it complies with all of the criteria below: 
a)  The proposed use will not be injurious to the surrounding neighborhood. 
b)  The location of buildings, outside storage receptacles, parking areas, fences or obscuring walls, and utility areas will minimize adverse effects of the proposed use for the occupants of that property and the tenants, owners, and occupants of surrounding properties. 
c)  There is a proper relationship between major thoroughfares and proposed service drives, driveways, and parking areas to encourage the safety and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The site plan includes the minimum number of driveways required to provide reasonable access. Driveways are spaced as far apart from intersections and other driveways as practical to reduce accident and congestion potential. Sharing with adjacent uses is encouraged. The planning commission may require a traffic impact study. 
d)  The site plan provides for proper development of roads, easements, and public utilities and protects the general health, safety, and welfare of the city and its residents. 
e)  Building architecture, materials, roof line, colors, windows and similar elements shall be consistent with the majority of other buildings in the city, as determined by the planning commission. Brick construction or brick trim, varying façade depths and peaked roofs, is encouraged. Stark white or bold colors and reflective glass are discouraged. The intent of this standard is to provide a harmonious, unified community to help create a sense of place and contribute to the image and quality of life in the city. 
f)  The proposed site plan complies with all city codes and ordinances. Site plans for Mobile Home Park Districts shall comply with the preliminary plan requirements established in the Michigan Mobile Home Commission Acts. 
Section 29.05. - Site plan review process. 
    The city clerk shall refer the site plans to the city planning commission for processing. After considering all information, the planning commission shall forward its recommendations of the site plans and all other pertinent data to the city council. The city council shall then make its determination of approval, approval with conditions, denial. Upon approval of the site plans by the city council, an application for a building permit shall be made by the petitioner in accordance with provisions of Article 21 of this ordinance. 
A.  Upon approval of a site plan by city council, construction consistent with said site plan shall be commenced within one year of the date said site plan was approved. In the event construction is not so commenced said site plan approval shall become void and of no force and effect. 
B.  Upon a site plan approval becoming void pursuant to the provisions hereof no construction may commence upon said site unless and until the site plan approval process has been reinstituted and completed. In such event all applicable fees shall be paid. 
1.  The applicant shall submit the required number of copies of an application for site plan approval, site plans, and other information where applicable. The number of copies required will be determined by the zoning administrator. The applicant or the applicant's representative must be present at the scheduled reviews or the matter will be tabled. 
2.  If the site plan is in order and contains the required information, the site plan shall be placed on the agenda of a regular or special planning commission meeting. 
3.  The planning commission shall make a recommendation on the site plan and special land uses, with the final action by the city council. 
4.  The planning commission shall take action no sooner than 14 days and within 70 days of the meeting at which the application first appeared on the agenda. 
5.  The planning commission, as a condition of its approval of a site plan, may require reasonable modifications relating to: the location, height, number of stories, and size of dwellings, buildings, and other structures; the area of the yards, courts, and other open spaces; and the sanitary, safety, and protective measures which shall be required for such dwellings, buildings, and structures; and any other changes to meet the standards and intent of this zoning ordinance and other ordinances, laws and regulations. 
6.  For any approval with condition(s), the applicant shall submit a revised plan within 60 days illustrating compliance with all conditions for approval by the zoning administrator. No permits shall be issued until such revised plan is submitted and approved. 
7.  The applicant shall be responsible for the cost of preparing all site plan submittal information and for the evaluation of the site plan and related documents by consultants selected by the city. 
Section 29.06. - Application for full site plan review. 
    The detailed site plan presented for consideration shall contain all information required in this ordinance. 
1.  Application form. An application form provided by the city and required fee established by resolution of the city council, shall include the following: 
a)  Applicant's name, address and telephone/fax number(s). 
b)  Name and address of property owner, if different from applicant. 
c)  Common description of property and complete legal description including the tax identification number. 
d)  Dimensions of land and total acreage. 
e)  Existing zoning. 
f)  Proposed use of land and name of proposed development, if applicable. 
g)  Proposed buildings to be constructed, including square feet of gross floor area. 
h)  Proof of property ownership. 
i)  Anticipated number of employees at peak shift. 
j)  Names, addresses, and telephone/fax number(s) of engineers, attorneys, architects, and other professionals associated with the project. 
2.  Site plan drawings and illustrations (fully dimensioned): Site plans shall contain all of the required data prior to approval of such plans by the city. Site plans shall consist of an overall plan for the entire development. Sheet size shall be at least 24-inch by 36-inch, with the plan view drawn to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet for property less than three acres or one inch equals 100 feet for property of three or more acres. 
3.  Descriptive and identification data. The following descriptive and identification information shall be included on all site plans: 
a)  Applicant's name, address and telephone/fax number(s). 
b)  Title block indicating the name of the development. 
c)  Scale. 
d)  Northpoint. 
e)  Dates of submission and revisions (month, day, year). 
f)  Location map drawn to scale with northpoint. 
g)  Legal and common description of property. 
h)  The dimensions of all lots and property lines, showing the relationship of the site to abutting properties. If the site is a part of a larger parcel, the plan should indicate the boundaries of total land holding. 
i)  A schedule for completing the project, including the phasing or timing of all proposed developments. 
j)  Identification and seal of architect, engineer, land surveyor, or landscape architect who prepared plan. 
k)  Written description of proposed land use. 
l)  Zoning classification of applicant's parcel and all abutting parcels. 
m)  Proximity to driveways serving adjacent parcels. 
n)  Proximity to section corner and major thoroughfares. 
o)  Notation of any variances which have or must be secured. 
p)  Net acreage (minus rights-of-way) and total acreage, to the nearest one-tenth acre. 
4.  Site data. 
a)  Existing lot lines, building lines, structures, parking areas, and other improvements on the site and within 100 feet of the site. 
b)  Front, side, and rear setback dimensions. 
c)  Topography on the site and within 100 feet of the site at two-foot contour intervals, referenced to a U.S.G.S. benchmark. 
d)  Proposed site plan features, including buildings, roadway widths and names, and parking areas. 
e)  Dimensions and centerlines of existing and proposed roads and road rights-of-way. 
f)  Acceleration, deceleration, and passing lanes, where required. 
g)  The proposed location and design of driveways providing vehicular ingress to and egress from the site, in relation to the street giving access to the site. 
h)  The traffic circulation features and location of automobile parking areas within the site. The site plan should demonstrate features or improvements that will assure: 
(1)  Safety and convenience of both vehicular and pedestrian traffic both within the site and in relation to access streets. 
(2)  Satisfactory and harmonious relationship between the development on the site and the existing and prospective development of contiguous land and adjacent neighborhoods. 
i)  Typical cross-section of proposed roads and driveways. 
j)  Location of existing drainage courses, floodplains, lakes and streams, with elevations. 
k)  Location and dimensions of wetland areas. If deemed necessary because of site or soil conditions or because of the scope of the project, a detailed hydrology study may be required. 
l)  Location of sidewalks within the site and within the right-of-way. 
m)  Exterior lighting locations and method of shielding lights to prevent off-site glare. 
n)  Trash receptacle locations and method of screening, if applicable. 
o)  Transformer pad location and method of screening, if applicable. 
p)  Parking spaces, typical dimensions of spaces, indication of total number of spaces, drives, and method of surfacing involving state and federal barrier-free requirements. 
q)  Information needed to calculate required parking in accordance with zoning ordinance standards. 
r)  The location of lawns and landscaped areas, including required landscaped greenbelts. 
s)  Landscape plan, including location, size, type and quantity of proposed shrubs, trees and other live plant material. 
t)  Location, sizes, and types of existing trees five inches or greater in diameter, measured at one foot off the ground, before and after proposed development. 
u)  Cross-section of proposed berms. 
v)  Location and description of all easements for public right-of-way, utilities, access, shared access, and drainage. 
w)  Designation of fire lanes. 
x)  Loading/unloading area. 
y)  The location of any outdoor storage of materials and the manner by which it will be screened. 
5.  Building and structure details. 
a)  Location, height, and outside dimensions of all proposed buildings or structures. 
b)  Indication of the number of stores and number of commercial or office units contained in the building. 
c)  Building floor plans. 
d)  Total floor area (gross floor area and usable floor area). 
e)  Location, size, height, and lighting of all proposed signs. 
f)  Proposed fences and walls, including typical cross-section and height above the ground on both sides. 
g)  Building façade elevations, drawn to a scale of one inch equals four feet, or another scale approved by the zoning administrator and adequate to determine compliance with the requirements of this ordinance. Elevations of proposed buildings shall indicate type of building materials, proposed colors, roof design, projections, canopies, awnings and overhangs, screen walls and accessory buildings, and any outdoor or roof-located mechanical equipment, such as air conditioning units, heating units, and transformers. 
h)  Samples of building materials and colors are required for review and approval by the planning commission. 
Section 29.07. - Optional site plan review. 
    The site plan approval process includes a review, at the option of the applicant, of a preliminary site plan by the planning commission. This option is recommended for site plans affecting over five acres, plans affecting locations designated in the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan as having significant natural features, sites containing floodplains or within the flood hazard zone, sites containing or potentially containing MDEQ designated/regulated wetlands, special land uses, complex industrial developments, redevelopment projects, and complex commercial developments. The review of a preliminary site plan allows and encourages exhaustive review, comment, and recommendation towards the conceptual and final approval of such projects. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 9, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 29.08. - Aesthetic review. 
    In addition to the specific design requirements for residential and nonresidential reviews, the planning commission and city council shall review and approve the design, construction and overall aesthetics of all new structures, including alterations and/or additions, which are subject to site plan review. The planning commission and city council are to insure that any such structure, alteration and/or addition complies with the purposes and intentions of the respective zoning district and its overlay district, if any. The planning commission is empowered to restrict the use of unacceptable construction methods and materials of any such structure, alteration and/or addition and shall strive to fulfill the aesthetic intentions of assuring compatibility of structures located within the district. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 9, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 29.09. - As-built drawings 
(A)  All projects within the city which go through site plan and/or construction plan review shall be required to submit record drawings. The drawings will need to be reviewed and approved by the city engineer or the city building official and zoning administrator prior to final acceptance of the project by the City of Swartz Creek. 
(B)  The initial submittals shall be of two sets of black line prints providing the applicable information shown on the checklist below. The minimum scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet and shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer or surveyor licensed to practice within the State of Michigan. All record lengths and elevations must be labeled as record. 
(C)  After the record drawings have been approved by the city engineer, the applicant shall submit two mylar copies of the approved drawings. A CD shall also be provided which contains a .pdf or other acceptable version of each sheet of the plan set with the following attributes: 
1.  Locations shall be shown on the plans in state plane coordinates using the NAD83 Michigan South zone. 
2.  Individual pipe sizes and structure types should be on separate layers. 
3.  The scale shall be one inch equals 40 feet unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or the city building official and zoning administrator. 
4.  Annotation should be snapped to the mid-point of lines. Lines should be snapped to the center of structures. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 9, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 29.10. - Nonresidential design requirements. 
    The following design requirements for nonresidential buildings shall be applied during site plan review: 
A.  Exterior building design. 
1.  Buildings shall possess architectural variety, but enhance the overall cohesive community character. All buildings shall provide architectural features, details, and ornaments such as archways, colonnades, cornices, recesses, projections, wall insets, arcades, window display areas, peaked roof lines, or towers. 
2.  Building walls and roofs over 50 feet in length shall be broken up with varying building lines, windows, gables, and/or architectural accents such as pilasters, columns, dormers, or awnings. 
3.  Window area or spandrel glass shall make up at least 20 percent or more of the exterior wall area facing the principal street(s). 
4.  In addition, a portion of the on-site landscaping shall abut the walls so that the vegetation combined with the architectural features significantly reduce the visual impact of the building mass as viewed from the street. Additional landscaping requirements of this ordinance must also be satisfied. 
5.  Overhead doors shall not face a public street or Residential District. The planning commission can modify this requirement upon a determination that there is no reasonable alternative and the visual impact will be moderated through use of building materials, architectural features and landscaping beyond that required in Article 28 (Landscaping). 
6.  Additions to existing buildings must complement the current building design with regard to height, proportions, scale, materials, and spacing of openings. 
B.  Building materials. 
1.  Durable building materials which provide an attractive, quality appearance must be utilized. 
2.  New structure exteriors shall be predominantly (75 percent or more) constructed from quality materials such as earth-toned brick, native stone, and/or glass products. The planning commission may choose to allow distribution of coverage across all elevations evenly or to concentrate such coverage on more visible elevations, provided no elevation shall have less than 50 percent of its exterior constructed of such materials. Tinted/textured concrete masonry units may be used as accent materials on all sides and as a primary material on side and rear elevations. 
3.  Other materials such as smooth-faced concrete block, EIFS panels or pre-fabricated steel panels should only be used as accents and not dominate the building exterior of the structure. 
4.  Metal roofs may be allowed if deemed by the planning commission to be compatible with the overall architectural design of the building. 
C.  Building colors. 
1.  Exterior colors shall be of low reflectance, subtle, neutral, or earth tone colors. The use of high intensity colors such as neon, metallic, or fluorescent for the façade and/or roof of the building are prohibited except as approved by the planning commission for building trim. 
2.  The use of trademark colors not meeting this requirement must be approved by the planning commission. 
3.  Mechanical and service features such as gutters, ductwork, service doors, etc. that cannot be screened must be of a color that blends in with the color of the building. 
D.  Roof design. 
1.  Roofs should be designed to reduce the apparent exterior mass of a building, add visual interest, and be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. 
2.  Roofs shall have no less than two of the following features: 
a.  Parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment, such as HVAC units from public view. The average height of such parapets shall not exceed 15 percent of the height of the supporting wall and such parapets shall not at any point exceed one-third of the height of the supporting wall. Such parapets shall feature three-dimensional cornice treatment; 
b.  Overhanging eaves, extending no less than one foot past the support walls; 
c.  Sloping roofs that do not exceed the average height of the supporting walls, with an average slope greater than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every three feet of horizontal run and less than or equal to one foot of vertical rise for every one foot of horizontal run; 
d.  Three or more roof slope planes. 
e.  A specific architectural element proposed by the applicant's architect that is acceptable to the city planner and planning commission. 
E.  Customer entrances. 
1.  Each large retail establishment (15,000 square feet or more) on a site shall have clearly defined, highly visible customer entrances featuring no less than five of the following: 
a.  Canopies or porticos; 
b.  Overhangs; 
c.  Recesses/projections; 
d.  Arcades; 
e.  Raised corniced parapets over the door; 
f.  Peaked roof forms; 
g.  Arches; 
h.  Outdoor patios; 
i.  Display windows; 
j.  Architectural details such as tile work and moldings which are integrated into the building structure and design; 
k.  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscaped areas and/or places for sitting. 
l.  A specific architectural element proposed by the applicant's architect that is acceptable to the city planner and planning commission. 
2.  Where additional stores will be located in the large retail establishment, each such store may have at least one exterior customer entrance, which shall conform to the above requirements. 
F.  Community amenities. Community amenities such as patio/seating areas, water features, art work or sculpture, clock towers, pedestrian plazas with park benches, or other features located adjacent to the primary entrance to the building(s) are highly encouraged and may be calculated as part of the landscaping requirement. 
G.  Signs. Signs shall be in accordance with the city's sign ordinance. All sign bases shall be constructed of materials compatible with the architecture of the building(s) located on the premises. 
H.  Natural features. Buildings shall be sited to protect existing natural areas such as steep natural grades, trees, significant groupings of healthy vegetation (shrubs and trees), and rock outcroppings. To the extent practical, these areas shall be incorporated into the overall site plan. 
I.  Building location and orientation. New buildings in the CBD District shall have at least one principal building entrance oriented toward the front lot line. 
J.  Sidewalks. All development shall include a provision for sidewalks, per City Code, within the site and within the right-of-way to provide connectivity between adjacent sites, the public realm, parking areas, and any other on-site amenities. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 9, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ; Ord. No. 410, § 2, 3-25-13, eff. 5-10-13 ) 
Section 29.11. - Single-family dwelling design standards. 
A.  Intent. This section is intended to establish regulations for the construction of new single-family dwellings zoned R-1, R-2, & R-3 including in-fill housing. The standards herein are intended to: 
1.  Prevent grossly dissimilar dwellings which would adversely affect the value of dwellings in the surrounding area. 
2.  Prevent adverse effects on the desirability of an area to existing or prospective homeowners. 
3.  Ensure the stability of the environment. 
4.  Promote the most appropriate use of real estate. 
5.  Increase the opportunity to realize the development pattern envisioned in the Swartz Creek Community Master Plan. 
    These regulations are based on the finding that the cohesiveness and character of the city's neighborhoods are significant factors in the city's quality of life, contribute to the distinct character in the various neighborhoods and help retain property values. These regulations further ensure new housing units are harmonious with the general character of the adjacent houses and the city overall and ensure a stable housing stock. While some level of diversity is desirable, these regulations are intended to ensure the design variation of new homes is similar to the level of variation in existing homes in the immediate area, or surrounding neighborhoods with similar densities for new residential projects. The standards shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
B.  Applicability. The regulations of this section shall apply to all new single-family home construction zoned R-1, R-2, & R-3. Major home expansions where the homeowner is expanding the footprint of the home by 40 percent or more shall comply with subsections 29.09.D.9, 29.09.D.10, and 29.09.D.11, in addition to required building codes, to ensure the resulting home continues to maintain the character of the neighborhood. The standards shall not apply to minor home expansions, interior remodeling, or to residences outside of the Single-Family Zoning Districts. 
C.  Approval. Compliance with these regulations shall be determined by the building and zoning administrator at the time the building permit is reviewed and shall be based on the standards of subsection D. below. 
D.  Standards. 
1.  Each such dwelling unit shall comply with all pertinent building and fire codes. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load and strength requirements. Where there are conflicting applicable regulations, the more stringent shall apply. 
2.  All construction required herein shall be commenced only after a building permit has been obtained in accordance with the City Building Code and other building regulations. 
3.  Each such dwelling unit shall comply with the minimum standards listed throughout Appendix A for the Zoning District in which it is located, including minimum lot area, minimum lot width, minimum floor area, required setbacks and maximum building height. 
4.  Each dwelling unit shall be firmly attached to a permanent basement or crawl space foundation constructed on the site in accordance with the City Building Code. 
5.  The dwelling shall have an attached structure of equal workmanship as the dwelling unit, designed for the parking and storage of vehicles. Said structure shall be functionally and aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the surrounding area as defined in subsection 12. below. When attached to a mobile home, modular home, pre-fabricated home or pre-constructed home, said structure shall comply with all requirements of the Michigan Building Code relative to grade separation and fire restrictive requirements. 
6.  Each such dwelling unit shall contain a storage area equal to ten percent of the square footage of the dwelling or 100 square feet, whichever shall be less. This storage area shall consist of a basement, attic or in a separate detached accessory structure that complies with the standards of this section regarding accessory buildings and structures. The intent of these standards is to limit the extent of outdoor storage. 
7.  The roof shall have a minimum 4:12 pitch and with a drainage system that will collect and concentrate the discharge of storm water or snow away from the sides of the dwelling. The roof shall have wood shake, asphalt, or other acceptable shingles. A roof overhang of not less than six inches on all sides shall be provided, or alternatively with window sills or roof drainage systems concentrating roof drainage at collection points along the sides of the dwelling. 
8.  A minimum of two exterior doors shall be provided with the second one being in either the rear or side of the dwelling. All dwelling units shall be oriented toward the public right-of-way such that the façade that faces the street contains a door, windows, and other architectural features customary to the front façade of a residence. 
9.  The width across any front, side or rear elevation shall be a minimum of 20 feet and comply in all respects with the City Building Code. 
10.  In-fill housing or development on vacant lots in an existing platted subdivision shall consider the gross floor area and lot coverage of surrounding homes to ensure compatibility. The gross floor area and lot coverage of the proposed dwelling shall be at least 90 percent and no more than 135 percent of the average square footage of constructed single-family dwellings within 500 feet, up to the boundary of the existing neighborhood, of the subject dwelling unit, with measurements made from the edge of the street. 
11.  In-fill housing or development on vacant lots in an existing platted subdivision shall maintain a consistent front building line along the street. The front yard setback of the proposed dwelling shall be no less than 90 percent and no more than 135 percent of the average established front yard setback of other single-family dwelling unit within 500 feet, up to the boundary of the existing neighborhood, of the subject dwelling unit, with measurements made from the edge of the street. 
12.  Building appearance for all new single-family dwelling unit construction shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the surrounding area. 
Definitions for what constitutes the surrounding area are as follows: 
i.  For new single-family neighborhood development (in the form of a new subdivision plat or new site condominium project), the surrounding area is defined as the nearest existing neighborhoods with similar densities. 
ii.  For in-fill housing development where there are one or a few isolated sites being developed within the existing neighborhood (in the form of an existing lot of record or recent land division), surrounding area shall be defined as within 500 feet, up to the boundary of the existing neighborhood, of the subject dwelling unit; with measurements made from the edge of the lot in each direction, including the opposite side of the street. 
The determination shall be made by the building and zoning administrator and in considering similarity and compatibility with the surrounding area the following features must be considered in order to meet this requirement: 
a.  Exterior building material used on the proposed dwelling; 
b.  Roof style; 
c.  The design and position of windows; 
d.  Front entry design (presence of porches, front door location, etc.); 
e.  Garage style and design. 
If the building and zoning administrator cannot reach a determination on architectural compatibility, the application shall be forwarded to the planning commission for review and final action. 
6.  Appeal. An applicant may appeal the decision of either the building and zoning administrator or the planning commission to the zoning board of appeals. The city shall provide written notification of denial at the last address of record. A written application for an appeal hearing before the zoning board of appeals shall be filed with the office of the building and zoning administrator within 15 calendar days of the receipt of the notice of denial. 
7.  Exceptions. The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in this ordinance and pertaining to such parks. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 9, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
ARTICLE 30. - SPECIAL LAND USES 

Section 30.00. - Intent. 
    This article is intended to regulate uses which may be compatible with uses in some, but not all, locations within a particular zoning district. The purpose of the special land use standards of this article are to accomplish the following: 
A.  Provide a mechanism for public input on decisions involving more intense land uses. 
B.  Establish criteria for both new development and infill/redevelopment consistent with the city's land use goals and objectives as stated in the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan. 
C.  Regulate the use of land on the basis of impact to the city overall and adjacent properties in particular. 
D.  Promote a planned and orderly development pattern which can be served by public facilities and service in a cost-effective manner. 
E.  Ensure uses can be accommodated by the environmental capability of specific sites. 
F.  Provide site design standards to diminish negative impacts of potentially conflicting land uses. 
G.  Provide greater flexibility to integrate land uses within the city. 
    This article provides both general standards for all special land uses (section 30.02) and specific location, site or operational standards for particular special land uses (section 30.09). The process for a special land use involves a public hearing with the planning commission with final review on the use and site plan by the city council. 
Section 30.01. - Application, review and approval procedures. 
    The procedure for special land use review shall be as follows: 
A.  Application. An applicant for a special land use shall submit an application for review and pay the required fee. The application presented for consideration shall contain the following: 
1.  Name of proposed development. 
2.  Common description of the property and complete legal description (also address, if available). 
3.  Dimensions of land: width, length, acreage, and frontage. 
4.  Existing zoning classification and zoning of all adjacent properties. 
5.  Proposed use of the land. 
6.  Name, address, city and phone number of: 
a)  Firm or individual who prepared the application. 
b)  Legal owner of the property. 
c)  Applicant (including basis of representation.) 
7.  Signature of the legal owner and the applicant. 
8.  A full site plan, prepared in accordance with Article 29 of this ordinance. 
B.  Planning commission public hearing. 
1.  If the building official finds all of the information required above is in order, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing to review the request. 
2.  The planning commission shall direct the city clerk to give notice of the public hearing. 
Written notice of the public hearing shall be made as follows: 
(a)  The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. Individual addresses of properties are not required to be listed for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
(3)  State when and where the request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(b)  The notice shall be published and delivered not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This shall be the only notice required for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Where approval is being sought under this ordinance for an individual property or a rezoning affecting ten or fewer properties, notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
(3)  In addition to paragraph (2) above, notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. 
C.  The planning commission shall conduct the required public hearing. 
D.  The planning commission shall review the application in terms of the requirements of the special land use general standards listed in section 30.02 below and any specific standards of section 30.09. 
E.  The planning commission shall recommend that the city council either approve, approve with conditions (as described below in section 30.03) or deny the special land use and the accompanying site plan. 
F.  The special land use request and other pertinent information, together with the recommendation of the planning commission, shall be placed on the agenda of a city council meeting. The city council shall either approve or reject the request within 60 days, unless an extension has been agreed upon in writing by both the city council and the applicant. 
Section 30.02. - General review standards for all special land uses. 
    Prior to approving a special land use application, the planning commission and city council shall require the following general standards be satisfied for the use at the proposed location. In addition to specific standards for individual special land uses listed in section 30.09, the planning commission and city council shall require stipulation to ensure that the following are met: 
A.  The special land use will be consistent with the goals, objectives and future land use plan described in the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan. 
B.  The special land use will be consistent with the stated intent of the zoning district. 
C.  The special land use will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained to be compatible with, and not significantly alter, the existing or intended character of the general vicinity in consideration of environmental impacts, views, aesthetics, noise, vibration, glare, air quality, drainage, traffic, property values, and similar impacts. 
D.  The special land use will not significantly impact the natural environment. 
E.  The special land use can be served adequately by public facilities and services such as police and fire protection, drainage structures, water and sewage facilities, refuse disposal and schools. 
F.  The proposed use shall be of a nature that will make vehicular and pedestrian traffic no more hazardous than is normal for the district involved, taking into consideration the following: 
1.  Vehicular turning movements; 
2.  Proximity and relationship to intersections; 
3.  Adequacy of sight distances; 
4.  Location and access of off-street parking; 
5.  Provisions for pedestrian traffic. 
G.  The proposed use shall be such that the location and height of buildings or structures, and the location, nature and height of walls, fences, and landscaping will not interfere with or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent land and buildings or unreasonably affect their value. 
H.  The proposed use shall be designed, located, planned, and operated to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
Section 30.03. - Conditions of approval. 
A.  The city council may impose conditions of approval, which will help ensure the special land use meets the standards of this ordinance provided that the conditions: 
1.  Protect the health, safety, and welfare of those affected; 
2.  Are related to the valid exercise of the police power of the city; 
3.  Are necessary to meet the intent and purpose of this ordinance; 
4.  Are related to the standards established in this ordinance for the land use or activity under consideration and are necessary to ensure compliance with those standards; 
5.  Provide adequate protection to existing land uses so the proposed land use will not be detrimental or injurious to the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  Approval of a special land use, including conditions made part of the approval, is attached to the property described in the application and not to the owner of such property. A record of conditions imposed shall be made a part of the city council minutes and maintained by the building official. The conditions shall remain unchanged unless an amendment to the special land use is approved by the city council. 
C.  Appeals. There is no appeal to the zoning board of appeals of any decision by the zoning administrator, the planning commission or the city council in connection with a special land use. Such an appeal shall be to the Genesee County Circuit Court. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 10, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Section 30.04. - Validity of approval. 
A.  Building permit. The building official may issue a building permit in conformity with the particular special land use so approved. In all cases where a particular special land use has been granted as provided herein, application for a building permit must be made and received by the city no later than 120 days thereafter, or such approval shall automatically be revoked unless an extension is granted. The city council may grant an extension of the first approval for good causes shown under such terms and conditions for such a period of time not to exceed six months. 
B.  Performance guarantee. The city council shall require a performance guarantee to ensure completion of the improvements (excluding the building). The performance guarantee may take the form of a cash deposit, surety bond, certified check, or an irrevocable bank letter of credit in an amount sufficient to insure full completion of physical improvements. Site improvements that shall be covered by the performance guarantee include, but are not necessarily limited to: landscaping, open space improvements, roads, lighting, and sidewalks. 
C.  Extensions. Where actual physical construction of a substantial nature of structures authorized by a special land use approval has not commenced within one year of issuance, and a written application for extension of the approval has not been filed as provided below, the permit shall become null and void and all rights thereunder shall terminate. (Note: It is the responsibility of the applicant to request such an extension.) 
1.  Upon written application filed prior to the termination of the one-year period as provided above, the city council may authorize a single extension of the time limit for a further period of not more than one year. Such extension shall be granted only based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a reasonable likelihood of commencing construction during the one-year extension period. 
2.  Any approved special land use shall be deemed a use permitted in the district in which it is located and is not to be considered a non-conforming use. 
D.  If a use regulated as a special land use which has not previously received a special land use approval ceases operations for more than one year, the special land use approval shall become null and void, and a new special land use approval shall be required to reopen the use. 
E.  The building official shall make periodic investigations of development authorized by special land use approval to determine continued compliance with all requirements imposed by the planning commission and this ordinance. Non-compliance with the requirements and conditions approved for the special land use shall constitute grounds to terminate said approval following a public hearing. 
Section 30.05. - Inspections. 
    The building official shall make periodic investigations of developments authorized by a special land use approval to determine continued compliance with all requirements imposed by the planning commission and this ordinance. Non-compliance with the requirements and conditions approved for the special land use shall constitute grounds to terminate said approval following a public hearing. 
Section 30.06. - Revocation. 
    The revocation of a special land use may occur if its recipient fails to continuously abide by its terms and conditions. The revocation procedure is as follows: 
A.  The city council, through its designated administrators, shall notify the recipient, in writing, of any violations of city codes or provisions of the special land use. 
B.  The recipient shall have 30 days to correct all deficiencies to the satisfaction of the city council. 
C.  If after 30 days any deficiencies remain, the city council may then revoke the special land use approval, or if the conditions warrant, allow additional time. 
D.  A repeat violation may cause immediate revocation of the special land use approval. 
Section 30.07. - Amendments to special land use approvals. 
    Any person or agency who has been granted a special land use approval shall notify the building official of any proposed amendment to the approved site plan of the special land use approval. The building official shall determine whether the proposed amendment constitutes a minor or major amendment based on the determination standards for all site plans in accordance with Article 29. A major amendment to a special land use approval shall comply with the application and review procedures contained in this article. 
A.  Expansions. The expansion, change in activity, reuse or redevelopment of any use requiring a special land use approval shall require resubmittal in manner described in this article. A separate special land use approval shall be required for each use requiring special land use review on a lot, or for any expansions of a special land use which has not previously received a special land use approval. 
B.  Change in use. Change to another special land use shall require submittal of a new application for special land use and follow the review procedures contained in this article. 
C.  Increase in building. Changes increase the buildings usable floor area by more than 25 percent since the originally approved building. 
D.  Increase in parking. Parking lots are expanded by more than 25 percent since the originally approved lot. 
E.  Existing special land uses: Any expansion of a special land use that predates the special land use requirements of this ordinance and has not previously received a special land use permit shall be required to obtain a new special land use. 
F.  Minor amendment. Minor amendment to an approved special land use does not require submittal of a new application for a special land use. 
G.  Required site plan. Any changes, whether it is deemed minor and major, shall require submittal of a site plan in accordance with Article 29. 
H.  Multiple uses. For a use or building which involves more than one activity classified as a special land use, a separate special land use permit shall be required for each use requiring special land use review on a lot. 
Section 30.08. - Restrictions on resubmittal of a special land use request. 
    No application for a special land use approval which has been denied wholly or in part shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions relating to the reasons noted for the denial found to be valid by the planning commission or city council. A resubmitted application shall be considered a new application. 
Section 30.09. - Special land use specific requirements. 
    The following sections identify specific requirements which shall be complied with by individual special land uses, as determined by the planning commission and city council, in addition to the general standards of section 30.02. Some or all of the specific requirements may be waived by city council upon a determination that the requirement(s) is not necessary or relevant. 
A.  Listing: Special land uses with specific site and/or use standards are described on the following pages: 
1.  Accessory apartment in a one-family dwelling. 
2.  Accessory above ground fuel services and storage. 
3.  Principal and/or accessory use, generation or storage of hazardous materials. 
4.  Adult regulated uses and sexually oriented businesses. 
5.  Airports and related uses. 
6.  Arcades and similar uses at public commercial mechanical amusement device centers. 
7.  Auto race track (including midget auto and karting tracks), fairgrounds, horse tracks and dog tracks. 
8.  Automobile service centers and automobile repair (minor maintenance and repair). Automobile repair (major maintenance and repair). 
9.  Automobile service (gasoline) stations including those accessory to another use. 
10.  Automobile washes, automatic or self-service. 
11.  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drive-through lanes. 
12.  Bed-and-breakfast inns. 
13.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures. 
14.  Cemeteries. 
15.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship. 
16.  Commercial outdoor sales or storage and open air businesses (as permitted or accessory use). 
17.  Commercial composting centers. 
18.  Conference centers/convention facilities. 
19.  Essential public service/utility buildings and storage yards 
20.  Funeral homes or mortuary establishment. 
21.  Hospitals (general and specialty). 
22.  Gun clubs. 
23.  Kennels, commercial. 
24.  Mixed use buildings for residential and office/business purposes. 
25.  Motels and hotels including accessory convention/meeting facilities and restaurants. 
26.  Mushroom farms. 
27.  Nurseries, greenhouses, and lawn and garden centers. 
28.  Nursing and convalescent homes. 
29.  Oil, gas or brine wells. 
30.  Outdoor cafés, outdoor eating areas and open front restaurants. 
31.  Outdoor theaters. 
32.  Recreation: outdoor recreation establishments (except for golf-related uses). 
33.  Recreation: golf courses, country clubs, and par three golf courses as principal use. 
34.  Recreation: golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses. 
35.  Recreation: indoor recreation (bowling alleys, billiard halls, indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, etc.). 
36.  Recreation: private recreation facilities and swimming pool clubs. 
37.  Recycling stations. 
38.  Restaurants and other establishments with drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
39.  Riding academies and stables. 
40.  Roadside stands. 
41.  Schools: public and non-public, elementary or secondary schools. 
42.  Shopping centers. 
43.  Slaughterhouses. 
44.  Theaters (indoor), cinemas, concert halls, play houses, assembly halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
45.  Urgent medical care centers. 
46.  Veterinary offices and clinics. 
B.  List of specific requirement by use: 
1.  Accessory apartment in a one-family dwelling. These standards are intended to assist in accommodating the needs of the growing number of senior citizens in the city while providing reasonable control in recognition of the high percentage of owner occupied single-family homes in the city. The purpose of these standards is also to prevent the undesirable proliferation of permanent two-family units which would, over time, disrupt the character of one-family neighborhoods. 
a)  Accessory apartments shall be entirely within the existing structure and shall include no more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the home. 
b)  The exterior of the home shall remain unchanged, so it does not give the appearance of being divided into separate units. The addition of a separate exterior door is prohibited. The applicant shall demonstrate the home may be easily converted back to a one-family home when the accessory apartment dweller(s) leave the premises or the house is sold. 
2.  Accessory above ground fuel services and storage. Location of above ground accessory fuel services related to the marine, aviation, agriculture, mobile home parks, recreational uses, medical facilities, and industrial uses shall be permitted subject to the following: 
a)  Such uses are only allowed in the General Business District (GBD), Light Industrial (I-1) and Heavy Industrial (I-2) Zoning Districts. 
b)  Minimum lot size for above ground fuel service or storage shall be three acres. 
c)  Above ground storage tanks other than those holding water shall be located not less than 75 feet from any occupied building or any lot line and shall be mounted on a solid concrete slab to prevent overturn and spilling, according to EPA specifications. 
d)  A pollution incidence prevention plan (PIPP) shall be submitted by the applicant and approved as part of the special land use. 
3.  Principal and/or accessory use, generation or storage of hazardous materials. These standards, intended to protect groundwater and city wellheads, shall be designed to ensure the following: 
a)  Projects and related improvements shall be designed to protect the natural environment, including lakes, ponds, streams, wetlands, floodplains, groundwater, and steep slopes. 
b)  Storm water management and drainage facilities shall be designed to retain the natural retention and storage capacity of any wetland, water body, or watercourse, and shall not increase flooding or the potential for pollution of surface or groundwater, on-site or off-site. 
c)  General purpose floor drains shall be connected to a public sewer system or an on-site holding tank in accordance with state, county, and city requirements, unless a groundwater discharge permit has been obtained from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ). 
d)  Sites at which hazardous substances and polluting material are stored, used, or generated shall be designed to prevent spills and discharges of polluting materials to the air, surface of the ground, groundwater, lakes, streams, rivers or wetlands. 
e)  State and federal agency requirements for storage, spill prevention, recordkeeping, emergency response, transport and disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials shall be met. No discharges to groundwater, including direct and indirect discharges, shall be allowed without appropriate state and county permits and approvals. The applicant shall provide documentation for the following, with appropriate correspondence from the Michigan Department of Environmental Quality (MDEQ), Michigan State Police Fire Marshall, the EPA, local fire department, and other applicable local codes and ordinances: 
(1)  Description of any discharge of any type of wastewater to a storm sewer, drain, lake, stream, wetland, other surface water body or into the groundwater. 
(2)  Description of storage of any salt, oil or other potentially hazardous materials including common name, name of chemical components, location, maximum quantity expected on hand at any time, type of storage containers or base material, and anticipated procedure for use and handling. 
(3)  Description of any transportation, on-site treatment, storage or disposal of hazardous waste generated in quantities of 25 gallons or 220 pounds per month. 
(4)  Description of any secondary containment measures proposed including design, construction materials and specifications, volume and security measures. 
(5)  Name and phone number(s) of person(s) responsible for materials and available 24 hours, in case of detected spill. 
(6)  Location of existing and proposed service facilities and structures, above and below ground, including: 
(a)  Public and private groundwater supply wells on-site. 
(b)  City wells located within a 1,000-foot radius of the site. 
(c)  Septic systems and other wastewater treatment systems (the location of the drainfield and the septic tank should be clearly distinguished). 
(d)  Areas to be used for the storage, use, loading/unloading, recycling, or disposal of hazardous substances and polluting materials, including interior and exterior areas. 
(e)  Underground storage tank(s) locations. 
(f)  Location of exterior drains, dry wells, catch basins, retention/detention areas, sumps and other facilities designed to collect, store, or transport storm water or wastewater. The point of discharge for all drains and pipes should be specified on the site plan. 
(7)  Location of existing wetlands and watercourses, including lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams. 
(8)  Soil characteristics of the parcel, at least to the detail provided by the U.S. Soil Conservation Service. 
(9)  Existing topography, with a maximum contour interval of two feet indicated. 
(10)  Delineation of areas on the site which are known or suspected to be contaminated, together with a report on the status of site cleanup. 
(11)  Completion of the form title "Groundwater Protection Information for Site Plan Review". 
(12)  In addition, the city may require businesses, facilities, and uses which generate, use or store hazardous materials to submit an environmental impact assessment. 
4.  Adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses. 
a)  Purpose and intent: 
(1)  Adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses are established as a special land use in order to establish areas of the city where the constitutionally protected right of free expression is permitted subject to reasonable conditions to protect the community from adverse effects of such uses. 
(2)  Because adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses have been documented to produce adverse effects to surrounding properties and the community as a whole, including residential and commercial disinvestment in the vicinity, decreases in property values, and increases in crime, these uses are permitted only at locations where these adverse effects are minimal and will not contribute to deterioration of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(3)  Because concentrations of two or more adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses in close proximity have been documented to create inordinate increases in crime and decreases in property values in the vicinity, a requirement of separation between adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses has been established. 
(4)  Because certain uses are particularly susceptible to the adverse effects created by adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses, provisions are established that require sufficient spacing of adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses from those uses considered most susceptible to adverse effects. 
b)  Uses regulated: The following uses are regulated by this subsection. 
(1)  Adult book store. 
(2)  Sexual paraphernalia store. 
(3)  Adult model studio. 
(4)  Adult motion picture arcade. 
(5)  Adult motion picture theater or adult live stage performing theater. 
(6)  Adult outdoor motion picture theater. 
(7)  Adult personal service establishment. 
(8)  Adult cabaret. 
(9)  Adult video store. 
c)  Required spacing: The establishment of the types of adult regulated uses and sexually-oriented businesses listed in "b" above shall meet all of the following space requirements; with the distance between uses measured horizontally between the nearest point of each property line: 
(1)  At least 500 feet from any other adult regulated use or sexually-oriented business. 
(2)  At least 500 feet from all churches, convents, temples and similar religious institutions. 
(3)  At least 500 feet from all child care centers, public or nonpublic nursery school, elementary, intermediate, or secondary schools, public parks and hospitals. 
(4)  At least 500 feet from any use defined as a "care organization". 
(5)  At least 500 feet from any One-Family or Multiple-Family Residential District or use. 
(6)  At least 500 feet from any pool or billiard hall, coin-operated amusement center, indoor and outdoor recreation such as miniature golf; dance club catering primarily to teenagers, movie theaters, ice or roller skating rinks and similar uses frequented by children and teenagers. 
d)  Special site design standards: 
(1)  Maximum size of the building shall be 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Adult regulated uses shall be located within a freestanding building. A shared or common wall structure or shopping center is not considered to be a freestanding building. 
(3)  A six-foot high brick or masonry wall shall be constructed to screen the parking lot. The planning commission may permit use of landscaping in place of the wall. 
(4)  All activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building and not visible through windows or doors to adjacent properties or the public right-of-way, including public sidewalks. 
(5)  No sound shall be produced by the activities conducted within the building that are discernable at or beyond the boundaries of the adult regulated use or sexually-oriented business. 
(6)  Signage shall conform to the city's sign ordinance and in addition shall include no graphic displays and shall not include wording that depicts, describes, or relates to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined in this ordinance) and cannot be observed by pedestrians or motorists on a public right-of-way or from an adjacent land use. 
(7)  No direct vehicular access shall be taken from a street other than an arterial roadway, unless it is determined that the access will not create problems of through traffic and on-street parking for a residential neighborhood. 
e)  Waivers: Upon denial of any application for a regulated use under the above, the applicant may appeal for a waiver of the location provisions above to the zoning board of appeals consistent with the standards set forth below. The zoning board of appeals may waive the location provisions set forth above, after all of the following findings are made: 
(1)  Compliance with regulations: The proposed use will not be contrary to any other provision of these zoning regulations, or injurious to nearby properties. 
(2)  Not enlarge district: The proposed use will not enlarge or encourage the development of a "skid row" or "strip." 
(3)  Consistent with law: All applicable city, state or federal laws and regulations will be observed. 
(4)  Procedure for waiver: Prior to granting a waiver of the location restrictions set forth above, and not less than five, nor more than 15 days before the request for waivers is considered or a public hearing held pursuant to this section, the city council shall publish, in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, one notice indicating that a request for waivers to establish a regulated use has been received, and shall send by mail or personal delivery a copy of that notice to the owners of the property for which waivers are being considered, and to all waivers are being considered, and to all persons to whom any real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the premises in question, and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. 
The notice of application shall further indicate that a public hearing on the proposed regulated use may be requested by a property owner or occupant, no less than 18 years of age, of a structure located within 300 feet of the boundary of the property being considered for the regulated use. The applicant, city council, or zoning board of appeals may request a public hearing. 
(5)  Conditions of approval: Prior to the granting of approval for the establishment of any regulated use, the planning commission may impose any conditions or limitations upon the establishment, location, construction, maintenance, or operation of the regulated use as in its judgment may be necessary for the protection of the public interest. Any evidence, bond, or other performance and guarantee may be required as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith will be fulfilled. 
(6)  Minors not permitted: No person operating an adult entertainment business shall permit any person under the age of 18 to be on the premises of said business. 
5.  Airports and related uses (including landing fields and platforms, hangers, mast and other facilities for the operation of aircraft). 
a)  The plans for such facility shall be given approval by the Federal Aviation Agency prior to submittal to the planning commission and city council for their review and action. 
b)  The standards for determining obstruction to air navigation as announced in the FAA Technical Order N-18, April 26, 1950 (as amended July 30, 1952) and any other amendments thereto shall be complied with. This standard shall be applied by the class of airport as determined by FAA. 
c)  The area of the "clear zone" (see FAA definition) shall be provided for within the land area under airport ownership and in no instance shall the "clear zone" be above property zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, PUD, RM-1 or PMSHDD. 
6.  Arcades and similar devices at public commercial mechanical amusement device centers. 
a)  Any part of the lot occupied by such use shall not be located within 300 feet of any residential district or within 500 feet of the property line of any public, parochial or other private school offering courses in general education. 
b)  Access to the site shall be directly from a regional arterial or arterial street. 
c)  All activities, except for off-street parking or loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings constructed in accordance with all other applicable codes and city ordinances. 
7.  Auto race tracks (including midget auto and karting tracks, fairgrounds, horse track, and dog tracks). 
a)  Any facility shall be located on a major thoroughfare and shall be located on a parcel of land which is completely surrounded by land zoned for industrial use. 
b)  All parking shall be provided as off-street parking within the boundaries of the development and shall meet the requirements of Article 26. 
c)  All access to the parking areas shall be provided from a major thoroughfare. 
d)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. 
e)  The applicant must provide an operations plan that sets out details regarding the use, including hours of operation and any details that will potentially affect the compatibility of the use with surrounding properties and uses. 
8.  Automobile service centers and automobile repair (minor maintenance and repair). Automobile repair (major maintenance and repair). 
All principal and accessory structures shall be set back a minimum of 500 feet from a One-Family Residential District. 
a)  If the automobile service center has auto repair, there shall be a minimum lot frontage on a paved road of 200 feet. 
b)  Overhead doors shall not face a public street or residential district. The city council can modify this requirement upon determining there is no reasonable alternative and the poor visual impact will be diminished through use of landscaping beyond that required in Article 28. 
c)  Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street unless the city council determines additional driveways are necessary and will not increase potential for accidents or congestion. 
d)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
e)  All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
f)  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts, supplies or equipment, except within an area defined on the site plan approved by the city council and which extends no more than ten feet beyond the building. 
g)  The applicant shall submit a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP). The PIPP shall describe measures to prevent groundwater contamination caused by accidental gasoline spills or leakage, such as: special check valves, drain back catch basins and automatic shut off valves, as approved by the fire department. 
h)  The access management standards of Article 25 are to be met, where feasible. 
9.  Automobile service (gasoline) stations (including those accessory to another use). 
a)  The minimum lot area for automobile service stations shall be 15,000 square feet for stations having no more than two service bays and/or no more than two pump islands. There shall be added 3,000 square feet for additional service bay and 1,500 square feet for each additional pump island. At least one street lot line shall be at least 150 feet in length along one major thoroughfare. The lot shall be so shaped and the station so arranged as to provide ample space for vehicles which are required to wait. 
b)  Pump islands shall be a minimum of 40 feet from any public right-of-way or lot line. Tanks, propane, and petroleum products shall be set back at least 15 feet from any lot line. Pump islands shall be a minimum of 25 feet from any designated parking space so that on-site traffic circulation is preserved. 
c)  Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 20 feet from the right-of-way with materials consistent with the principal building. The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan. 
d)  Access driveways shall be along an arterial street. Only one driveway shall be permitted from any street unless the city council determines additional driveways are necessary and will not increase accident or congestion potential. 
e)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
f)  All repair work shall be conducted completely within an enclosed building. 
g)  There shall be no outdoor storage or display of vehicle components and parts, supplies or equipment, except within an area defined on the site plan approved by the city council and which extends no more than ten feet beyond the building. 
h)  Storage of wrecked, partially dismantled, or other derelict vehicles is prohibited. 
i)  The applicant shall submit a pollution incidence protection plan (PIPP). 
j)  The access management standards of Article 25 are to be met, where feasible. 
k)  In the event that an automobile service station use has been abandoned or terminated for a period of more than one year, all underground gasoline storage tanks shall be removed from the premises, as per state requirements. 
l)  When a fast food or carry-out restaurant is proposed as an accessory use, the parking requirements for a carry-out restaurant shall be met for the area designated for this use. Under no circumstances is a drive-through window permitted. 
10.  Automobile washes, automatic or self-service. 
a)  Only one ingress/egress driveway shall be permitted on any single street. 
b)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
c)  All washing facilities shall be within a completely enclosed building. 
d)  Vacuuming and drying may be located outside the building, but shall not be in the required front yard and shall be set back at least 50 feet from any residential district. 
e)  All cars required to wait for access to the facilities shall be provided stacking spaces fully off the street right-of-way which does not conflict with vehicle maneuvering areas to access gasoline pumps or vacuums, and off-street parking as required in Article 26. 
f)  The access management standards of Article 25 are to be met, where feasible. 
g)  A truck wash must be at least 100 feet from all property lines and entirely screened using landscaping from residential 
11.  Banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions with drive-through lanes. 
a)  Only one ingress/egress driveway or one pair of one-way driveways or one stand-alone ready teller structure, shall be permitted along any street. 
b)  Exit and required stacking lanes shall not face directly at a one-family residence zoned for residential use unless the alignment is designed or landscaped to prevent headlight glare. 
c)  The access management standards of Article 25 are to be met, where feasible. 
12.  Bed-and-breakfast inns. 
a)  No bed-and-breakfast inn shall be located closer than 300 feet to another bed-and-breakfast inn. 
b)  Meals or other services provided on the premises shall only be available to residents, employees and overnight guests of the inn. 
c)  The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast establishment is located shall be the principal residence of the operator, and said operator shall live on the premises while the establishment is active. 
d)  There shall be a maximum of six rooms for lodging. 
e)  Sufficient landscaping shall be used to screen adjacent dwellings from parking areas or any outdoor eating area. 
f)  A sketch plan showing the floor plan shall be submitted for approval. 
g)  Maximum sign size shall be 20 square feet with a maximum height of five feet. Sign materials are to be compatible with the architecture of the building. 
13.  Cellular towers, wireless communication facilities, attached wireless communication facilities, and wireless communication support structures. 
a)  A wireless communication support structure must be established within a right-of-way having an existing width of more than 204 feet. 
b)  A wireless communication support structure must be established on municipally-owned property. 
c)  Purpose and intent: It is the general purpose and intent of the City of Swartz Creek to carry out the will of the United States Congress by authorizing communication facilities needed to operate wireless communication systems. However, it is the further purpose and intent of the city to provide for such authorization in a manner which will retain the integrity of neighborhoods and the character, property values and aesthetic quality of the community at large. In fashioning and administering the provisions of this section, attempts have been made to balance these potentially competing interests. 
Recognizing the number of providers authorized to establish and operate wireless communication services and coverage, it is the further the purpose and intent of this section to: 
(1)  Facilitate adequate and efficient provision of sites for wireless communication facilities. 
(2)  Establish in predetermined districts the number, shape, and location, considered best for the establishment of wireless communication facilities, subject to applicable standards and conditions. 
(3)  Recognize that operation of a wireless communication system may require the establishment of facilities in locations not within the predetermined districts or zones. In such cases, it has been determined that it is likely that there will be greater adverse impact upon neighborhoods and areas within the community. Consequently, more stringent standards and conditions should apply to the review, approval and use of such facilities. 
(4)  Ensure that wireless communication facilities are situated in appropriate municipally-owned locations and relationships to other land uses, structures and buildings. 
(5)  Limit inappropriate physical and aesthetic overcrowding of land use activities and avoid adverse impact upon existing population, transportation systems, and other public services and facility needs. 
(6)  Promote the public health, safety and welfare. 
(7)  Provide for adequate information about plans for wireless communication facilities in order to permit the community to effectively plan for the location of such facilities. 
(8)  Minimize the adverse impacts of technological obsolescence of such facilities, including a requirement to remove unused and/or unnecessary facilities in a timely manner. 
(9)  Minimize the negative visual impact of wireless communication facilities on neighborhoods, community land marks, historic sites and buildings, natural beauty areas and public rights-of-way. This contemplates the establishment of as few structures as reasonably feasible, and the use of structures which are designed for compatibility, including the use of existing structures and the avoidance of lattice structures that are unnecessary, taking into consideration the purposes and intent of this section. 
(10)  City council finds that the presence of numerous tower structures, particularly if located within residential areas, would decrease the attractiveness and destroy the character and integrity of the community. This, in turn, would have an adverse impact upon property values. Therefore, it is necessary to minimize the adverse impact from the presence of numerous relatively tall tower structures having low architectural and other aesthetic appeal to most persons, recognizing that the absence of regulation would result in a material impediment to the maintenance and promotion of property values, and further recognizing that this economic component is an important part of the public health, safety and welfare. 
d)  Authorization: 
(1)  Subject to the standards and conditions set forth in subparagraph (e) below, wireless communication facilities shall be permitted uses in the following circumstances: 
(a)  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility within a non-residential zoning district, where the existing structure is not, in the discretion of the zoning administrator, proposed to be either materially altered or materially changed appearance. 
(b)  A proposed co-location upon an attached wireless communication facility which had been pre-approved for such co-location as part of an earlier approval by the city. 
(c)  An existing structure which will serve as an attached wireless communication facility consisting of a utility pole located within a right-of-way, where the existing pole is not proposed to be modified in a manner which, in the discretion of the planning official, would materially alter the structure and/or result in an impairment of sight lines or other safety interests. 
e)  Standards and conditions applicable to all facilities: All applications for wireless communication facilities shall be reviewed in accordance with the following standards and conditions, and, if approved, shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with such standards and conditions. In addition, if the facility is approved, it shall be constructed and maintained with any additional conditions imposed by the planning commission and city council in its discretion: 
(1)  Facilities shall not be demonstrably injurious to neighborhoods or otherwise detrimental to the public safety and welfare. 
(2)  Facilities shall be located on municipality-owned property only and designed to be harmonious with the surrounding areas. 
(3)  Wireless communication facilities shall comply with applicable federal and state standards relative to the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions. 
(4)  Applicants shall demonstrate a justification for the proposed height of the structures and an evaluation of alternative designs which might result in lower heights. 
(5)  The following additional standards shall be met: 
(a)  The maximum height of the new or modified support structure and antenna shall be the minimum height demonstrated to be necessary for reasonable communication by the applicant (and by other entities to co-locate on the structure). The accessory building contemplated to enclose such things as switching equipment shall be limited to the maximum height for accessory structures within the respective district. 
(b)  The setback of the support structure from any residential district shall be at least the height of the highest point of any structure on the premises. The setback of the support structure from any existing or proposed rights-of-way or other publicly traveled roads shall be no less than the height of the structure. 
(c)  Where the proposed new or modified support structure abuts a parcel of land zoned for a use other than residential, the minimum setback of the structure, and accessory structures, shall be in accordance with the required setbacks for main or principal buildings as provided in the schedule of regulations for the zoning district in which the support structure is located. 
(d)  There shall be unobstructed access to the support structure, for operation, maintenance, repair and inspection purposes, which may be provided through or over an easement. This access shall have a width and location determined by such factors as: the location of adjacent thoroughfares and traffic and circulation within the site; utilities needed to service the tower and any attendant facilities; the location of buildings and parking facilities; proximity to residential districts and minimizing disturbance to the natural landscape; and the type of equipment which will need to access the site. 
(e)  The division of property for the purpose of locating a wireless communication facility is prohibited unless all zoning requirements and conditions are met. 
(f)  Where an attached wireless communication facility is proposed on the roof of a building if the equipment enclosure is proposed as a roof appliance or penthouse on the building, it shall be designed, constructed and maintained to be architecturally compatible with the principal building. The equipment enclosure may be located within the principal building or may be an accessory building. If proposed as an accessory building, it shall conform to all district requirements for principal buildings, including yard setbacks. 
(g)  The planning commission shall, with respect to the color of the support structure and all accessory buildings, review and approve so as to minimize distraction, reduce visibility, maximize aesthetic appearance, and ensure compatibility with surroundings. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to maintain the wireless communication facility in a neat and orderly condition. 
(h)  The support system shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable building codes and shall include the submission of a soils report from a geotechnical engineer, licensed in the State of Michigan. This soils report shall include soil borings and statements confirming the suitability of soil conditions for the proposed use. The requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration, Federal Communication Commission, and Michigan Aeronautics Commission shall be noted. 
(i)  A maintenance plan, and any applicable maintenance agreement, shall be presented and approved as part of the site plan for the proposed facility. Such plan shall be designed to ensure the long-term, continuous maintenance to a reasonably prudent standard. 
(6)  The applicant shall demonstrate the need for the proposed facility to be located as proposed based upon the presence of one or more of the following factors: 
(a)  Proximity to an interstate or major thoroughfare. 
(b)  Areas of population concentration. 
(c)  Concentration of commercial, industrial, and/or other business centers. 
(d)  Areas where signal interference has occurred due to tall buildings, masses of trees, or other obstructions. 
(e)  Topography of the proposed facility location in relation to other facilities with which the proposed facility is to operate. 
(f)  Other specifically identified reason(s) creating the need for the facility. 
(7)  The proposal shall be reviewed in conformity with the co-location requirements of this section. 
(8)  If it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city council by an applicant that a wireless communications facility may not reasonably be established as a special land use is required to be established in an area other than municipally-owned property in order to operate a wireless communications service, then wireless communications facilities may be permitted elsewhere in the City of Swartz Creek by Special Land Use approval only subject to approval by the city council, the requirements of this section, and the following criteria and standards: 
(a)  At the time of submittal, the applicant shall demonstrate that a location within an allowable district or area cannot reasonably meet the coverage and/or capacity needs of the applicant. 
(b)  Wireless communications facilities shall be of a design such as a steeple, bell tower, or other form which is compatible with the existing character of the proposed site, neighborhood, and general area, as approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  In the R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RM-1, and PMSHDD Districts, site locations shall be permitted on a priority basis on the following sites, subject to application of all other standards contained in this section: 
(1)  Municipally-owned sites. 
(2)  Other governmentally-owned sites. 
(3)  Religious or institutional sites. 
(4)  Public parks and other large permanent open space areas when compatible. 
(5)  Public or private school sites. 
f)  Application requirements: 
(1)  A site plan prepared in accordance with Article 29 shall be submitted, showing the location, size, screening and design of all buildings and structures, including fences, and the location and size of outdoor equipment, and the location, number, and species of proposed landscaping. 
(2)  The site plan shall also include a detailed landscaping plan where the support structure is being placed at a location which is not otherwise developed, or where a developed area will be disturbed. The purpose of landscaping is to provide screening and aesthetic enhancement for the structure base, accessory buildings and enclosure. In all cases, there shall be shown on the plan fencing which is required for protection of the support structure and security from children and other persons who may otherwise access facilities. 
(3)  The application shall include a signed certification by a State of Michigan licensed professional engineer with regard to the manner in which the proposed structure will fall, which certification will be utilized, along with other criteria such as applicable regulations for the district in question, in determining the appropriate setback to be required for the structure and other facilities. 
(4)  The application shall include a description of security to be posted at the time of receiving a building permit for the facility to ensure removal of the facility when it has been abandoned or is no longer needed, as provided in paragraph (h) below. In this regard, the security shall be in the form of an agreement approved by the attorney for the community and recordable at the office of the register of deeds, establishing a promise of the applicant and owner of the property to remove the facility in a timely manner as required under this section of the ordinance, with the further provision that the applicant and owner shall be responsible for the payment of any costs and attorneys fees incurred by the community in securing removal. 
(5)  The application shall include a map showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within the city and further showing existing and known proposed wireless communication facilities within areas surrounding the borders of the city in the location, and in the area, which are relevant in terms of potential co-location or in demonstrating the need for the proposed facility. If and to the extent the information in question is on file with the community, the applicant shall be required only to update as needed. Any such information which is trade secret and/or other confidential commercial information which, if released would result in commercial disadvantage to the applicant, may be submitted with a request for confidentiality in connection with the development of governmental policy. MCL 15.243(l)(g). This section shall serve as the promise to maintain confidentiality to the extent permitted by law. The request for confidentiality must be prominently stated in order to bring it to the attention of the community. 
(6)  The name, address and phone number of the person to contact for engineering, maintenance and other notice purposes. This information shall be continuously updated during all times the facility is on the premises. 
g)  Co-location: 
(1)  Statement of policy: It is the policy of the city to minimize the overall number of newly established locations for wireless communication facilities and wireless communication support structures within the community, and encourage the use of existing structures for attached wireless communication facility purposes, consistent with the statement of purpose and intent, set forth in paragraph (c) of this section above. Each licensed provider of a wireless communication facility must, by law, be permitted to locate sufficient facilities in order to achieve the objectives promulgated by the United States Congress. However, particularly in light of the dramatic increase in the number of wireless communication facilities reasonably anticipated to occur as a result of the change of federal law and policy in and relating to the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, it is the policy of the city that all users should co-locate on attached wireless communication facility and wireless communication support structures in the interest of achieving the purposes and intent of this section, as stated above, and as stated in paragraph (c) of this section. If a provider fails or refuses to permit co-location on a facility-owned or otherwise controlled by it, where co-location is feasible, the result will be that a new and unnecessary additional structure will be compelled, in direct violation of and in direct contradiction to the basic policy, intent and purpose of the city. The provisions of this subsection are designed to carry out and encourage conformity with this policy. 
(2)  Feasibility of co-location: Co-location shall be deemed to be "feasible" for purposes of this section where all of the following are met: 
(a)  The wireless communication provider entity under consideration for co-location will undertake to pay market rent or other market compensation for co-location. 
(b)  The site on which co-location is being considered, taking into consideration reasonable modification or replacement of a facility, is able to provide structural support. 
(c)  The co-location being considered is technologically reasonable, e.g., the co-location will not result in unreasonable interference, given appropriate physical and other adjustment in relation to the structure, antennas, and the like. 
(d)  The height of the structure necessary for co-location will not be increased beyond a point deemed to be permissible by the city, taking into consideration the several standards contained in parts (e) of this section, above. 
(3)  Requirements for co-location: 
(a)  A special land use permit for the construction and use of a new wireless communication facility shall not be granted unless and until the applicant demonstrates that a feasible co-location is not available for the coverage area and capacity needs. 
(b)  All new and modified wireless communication facilities shall be designed and constructed so as to accommodate co-location. 
(c)  The policy of the community is for co-location. Thus, if a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to alter a structure so as to accommodate a proposed and otherwise feasible co-location, such facility shall thereupon and thereafter be deemed to be a non-conforming structure and use, and shall not be altered, expanded or extended in any respect. 
(d)  If a party who owns or otherwise controls a wireless communication facility shall fail or refuse to permit a feasible co-location, and this requires the construction and/or use of a new facility, the party failing or refusing to permit a feasible co-location shall be deemed to be in direct violation and contradiction of the policy, intent and purpose of the city, and, consequently such party shall take responsibility for the violation, and shall be prohibited from receiving approval for a new wireless communication support structure within the city for a period of five years from the date of the failure or refusal to permit the co-location. Such a party may seek and obtain a variance from the zoning board of appeals if and to the limited extent the applicant demonstrates entitlement to variance relief which, in this context, shall mean a demonstration that enforcement of the five-year prohibition would unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent wireless communication services, or that such enforcement would have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless communication services. 
(4)  Incentive: Review of an application for co-location, and review of an application for a permit for use of a facility permitted under paragraph (d)(l)(a), above, shall be expedited by the city. 
h)  Removal: 
(1)  A condition of every approval of a wireless communication facility shall be adequate provision for removal of all or part of the facility by users and owners upon the occurrence of one or more of the following events: 
(a)  When the facility has not been used for 180 days or more. For purposes of this section, the removal of antennas or other equipment from the facility, or the cessation of operations (transmission and/or reception of radio signals) shall be considered as the beginning of a period of nonuse. 
(b)  Six months after new technology is available at reasonable cost, as determined by the legislative body of the community, which permits the operation of the communication system without the requirement of the support structure. 
(2)  The situations in which removal of a facility is required, as set forth in paragraph (1) above, may be applied and limited to portions of a facility. 
(3)  Upon the occurrence of one or more of the events requiring removal, specified in paragraph (1) above, the property owner or persons who had used the facility shall immediately apply or secure the application for any required demolition or removal permits, and immediately proceed with and complete the demolition/removal, restoring the premises to an acceptable condition as reasonably determined by the zoning administrator. 
(4)  If the required removal of a facility or a portion thereof has not been lawfully completed within 60 days of the applicable deadline, and after at least 30 days' written notice, the city may remove or secure the removal of the facility or required portions thereof, with its actual cost and reasonable administrative charge to be drawn or collected and/or enforced from or under the security posted at the time application was made for establishing the facility. 
14.  Cemeteries. 
a)  Minimum property size shall be 20 acres. 
b)  All grave sites, buildings and structures shall be setback at least 100 feet from all property lines. 
c)  The city council shall determine that the cemetery will have a "park-like" setting. 
d)  Uses such as crematoriums, mausoleums, casket sales and monument sales shall be permitted as an accessory use to a cemetery. Setbacks and landscaping shall be compatible with adjacent uses. 
15.  Churches, temples and similar places of worship. 
a)  Minimum lot area shall be three acres for any church with a sanctuary seating capacity of over 250 persons plus an additional 15,000 square feet for each additional 100 persons of sanctuary seating capacity. 
b)  Buildings of greater than the maximum height permitted in the zoning district may be allowed provided the front, side and rear yard setbacks are increased above the minimum required by one foot for each foot of building height that exceeds the maximum permitted. The building cannot exceed 35 feet. 
c)  All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a regional arterial, arterial or collector street, as classified in the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan. The planning commission may allow secondary access onto local (residential) streets if the uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic flow are predominantly non-single-family homes. 
d)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
e)  The city council may require a traffic impact study, particularly if the church is to have services or activities during peak times on the roadway, or if there are other religious institutions in the vicinity which could create traffic conflicts. 
16.  Commercial outdoor sales and/or storage and open air businesses (as a permitted or accessory use, including sales and/or storage of: Building/lumber supply, contractors yards, flea markets, auctions, garden/landscape supplies, nurseries, stone, farm implement, automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, mobile homes, boats, jet skis, mowing equipment, construction equipment and similar materials or equipment). 
a)  Any stockpiles of soils, fertilizer or similar loosely packaged materials shall be sufficiently covered or contained to prevent dust or blowing of materials. 
b)  No outdoor storage shall be permitted in the front yard or in any required side yard or required rear yard of buildings for the district in which the commercial outdoor sales or storage use is located. 
c)  The site shall include a building of at least 500 feet of gross floor area for office use in conjunction with the approved use. 
d)  The display and storage area shall be paved with a permanent, durable and dustless surface and shall be graded and drained to dispose storm water without negatively impacting adjacent property. 
f)  All loading and truck maneuvering shall be accommodated on-site. 
g)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
17.  Commercial composting centers. 
a)  The applicant shall submit an impact assessment describing the expected odors, aesthetics, environmental impacts, vehicular and truck traffic impacts associated with the use, and any mitigation measures to be employed. 
b)  The site plan which shall clearly illustrate the layout of the composting operation, including: buildings, staging area, parking, on-site truck maneuvering (truck turning radii shall be illustrated), curbing area, landscaped buffers, sales area and fencing. 
c)  Commercial composting operations shall be at least 1,000 feet from any residential district. 
d)  All composting operations shall be at least 200 feet from the boundary of any lake, stream, drain, wetland or other surface water body. The applicant shall describe procedures for managing storm water runoff and preventing pollution of surface water bodies or groundwater. Groundwater quality monitoring devices shall be provided. 
e)  Documentation shall be provided indicating that the soils percolate and are not characterized by a high water table. 
f)  The applicant shall describe acceptable methods for control of odors. 
g)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
h)  Access shall be provided solely on a regional arterial or arterial street. 
i)  All storage areas shall be enclosed in a building. 
j)  Temporary signs shall be prohibited. 
18.  Conference centers/convention facilities. 
a)  The site shall have direct access, via lot frontage or an improved road, to at least one paved arterial roadway. 
b)  The location, geometric design and throat depth of site access points, and overall internal site circulation, shall prevent unreasonable traffic congestion on public roadways. A traffic management plan shall be submitted as part of the application. 
c)  Building height shall not exceed 35 feet but may be three stories (i.e. a permitted exception from the maximum number of stories allowed for other buildings in the district). 
d)  Minimum floor area shall be 10,000 square feet of usable conference rooms, meeting rooms, banquet rooms and pre-function space. 
e)  Minimum building and outdoor use areas shall be setback at least 100 feet from any property line of residentially zoned and/or 75 feet from any other property line. Buffer zones shall be provided as required for in Article 28. The city council may reduce the required setbacks by up to 50 percent where more extensive landscaping or existing features provide an extensive screen. 
f)  Parking setbacks shall be 40 feet in the front yard; 25 feet for side and rear yards adjacent to residential districts or uses, and ten feet elsewhere. 
g)  The proposed building(s) may provide atriums, lobbies, or other public gathering places. 
h)  The accessory uses, specialty shops, and activity centers shall be customarily incidental to the primary components of the conference center. A hotel is not considered to be an accessory use and is a principal use that may be developed in conjunction with the conference center or convention facility. 
i)  All uses, except for off-street parking or loading spaces and approved outdoor gathering places (such as courtyards, plazas, etc.) shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. Sales, display, and outdoor storage of any commodities or storage containers, vehicles or other uses shall be expressly prohibited. 
j)  In addition to other requirements, the impact assessment shall describe intended and anticipated number, type and frequency of events that may be expected at the proposed site including hours of operation, outdoor receptions and the location where they may be held. 
19.  Essential public service/utility buildings and storage yards. 
a)  Such uses may be permitted when operating requirements necessitate that the facility be located at the subject site to serve the immediate vicinity. 
b)  Electric or gas regulator equipment and apparatus shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet from all lot lines or equal to district setbacks, whichever is greater. They can not be located in the front yard setback. 
c)  The buildings or structures shall be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and shall be of brick construction, where practical. 
d)  Storage yards must be located on a minimum lot size of three acres. 
e)  A vinyl coated (black or brown/green or blue) chain link fence six feet in height shall be constructed on the boundary property lines. 
f)  All sides of the development not abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with a 20-foot wide greenbelt planting, and/or a minimum six-foot high fence or wall, so as to obscure from view all activities within the development. The greenbelt shall meet or exceed the standards set forth in Article 28. Where adjoining a residential district, a wall or evergreen hedge six feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such fence or wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. 
20.  Funeral home or mortuary establishment. 
a)  Adequate assembly (car stacking) area is provided off-street for vehicles to be used in a funeral procession, provided further that such assembly area shall be provided in addition to any required off-street parking area. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the main building of mortuary establishments. 
b)  A funeral home or mortuary establishment does not include a crematorium. 
21.  Hospitals, general and specialty. 
a)  All such hospitals shall be developed only on sites consisting of at least ten acres in area. 
b)  The minimum distance of any main or accessory building from bounding lot lines or streets shall be at least 100 feet for front, rear and side yards for all two-story structures. For every story above two, the minimum yard distance shall be increased by at least 20 feet. 
22.  Gun clubs. Gun clubs, whether operated for profit or not, shall be permitted only after review by the planning commission and approval of a temporary permit by the city council provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  All federal, state, county and city codes and ordinances in regard to firearms shall be strictly adhered to. 
b)  In no instance shall a firearm be discharged closer than 1,000 feet to an existing residence. 
c)  In no instance shall a firearm be discharged on any range in any gun club without the presence of an employee of the gun club for supervision. 
d)  A site plan for the range, whether indoor or outdoor, shall be submitted to the planning commission for review and must clearly indicate all safety provisions to assure that any missile fired within the confines of a gun club shall not carry into or over any adjacent district or area. 
e)  A minimum six-foot high fence shall be provided around the entire gun club site to assure that individuals will not unknowingly trespass on the property, particularly where firearms are being discharged. 
f)  Any other provision, which the city council deems necessary to assure the health, safety, and general welfare of the habitants of the City of Swartz Creek and adjacent communities. 
23.  Kennels, commercial. 
a)  The minimum lot size for kennels housing dogs shall be two acres. 
b)  Dog runs, and/or exercise areas shall not be located nearer than 100 feet to property lines and shall not be located in any required front, rear or side yard setback area. 
c)  Such facilities shall be subject to other conditions and requirements necessary to prevent possible nuisances (i.e., fencing, sound-proofing, sanitary requirements). 
d)  An operations/management plan shall be submitted to the city for review and approval and a temporary permit must be obtained from the building official in accordance with the requirements of Article 20. 
24.  Mixed use buildings for residential and office/business purposes. 
a)  The combined use of a building for residential and business use shall not provide more than one dwelling and not more than one business or two offices in any one building. 
b)  The combined use of a building for residential and office use shall not provide more than three units maximum within a building, and not more than one of which may be a dwelling. 
c)  The floor area for a dwelling unit in a building shall not be less than 400 square feet. 
d)  The architectural character of buildings shall be maintained. New construction for such mixed use structures shall be undertaken in character with existing structures. 
25.  Motels and hotels including accessory convention/meeting facilities and restaurants. 
a)  Access shall be provided so as not to conflict with the adjacent business uses or adversely affect traffic flow on a major thoroughfare. 
b)  Each unit shall contain not less than 250 square feet of floor area. 
c)  No guest shall establish permanent residence for more than 30 days within any calendar year. 
26.  Mushroom farms. Because of the nature of the process for growing mushrooms, mushroom growing farms shall be allowed provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  The plant structure shall be located no closer than 150 feet to any existing or proposed public right-of-way, or to any adjacent property line. 
b)  The area utilized for the dispensing of waste material shall be no closer than 300 feet to any existing or proposed public right-of-way, or to any adjacent property line. 
c)  No residential structure, either permanent or temporary, shall be placed closer than 500 feet to any mushroom growing farm (no closer than 500 feet to residential). 
27.  Nurseries, greenhouses, and lawn and garden centers. 
a)  Storage and display areas shall meet all setback requirements. 
b)  The storage of any soil, fertilizer, lumber or other loose, unprotected material shall be in the side or rear of the site, covered, and contained to prevent runoff onto adjacent properties. 
28.  Nursing and convalescent homes. 
a)  There shall be provided on the site, not less than 1,500 square feet of open space for each bed in the home. The 1,500 square feet of land area shall provide for landscape setting, off-street parking, service drives, loading space, yard requirement and accessory uses, but shall not include the area covered by main or accessory buildings. 
b)  All sites shall be located within adequate walking distance of food stores, shopping centers, restaurants and drug stores, as determined by the city council. 
c)  All dwelling units shall consist of at least 350 square feet per unit (not including kitchen and sanitary facilities). 
d)  Total area coverage of all buildings (including dwelling units and related service buildings) shall not exceed 25 percent of total site, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way. 
e)  The minimum lot size shall be not less than three acres. 
f)  The gross density of the dwelling units shall not exceed 20 units per acre, exclusive of any dedicated public right-of-way of either interior or bounding roads. 
g)  Except as provided herein, all buildings and sites shall be in compliance with RM-1 requirements in this ordinance. 
h)  No housing for the elderly shall be converted to any other use without complying with the provisions of the zoning ordinance in effect. 
i)  The city council may add any conditions it deems appropriate to ensure the compatibility of the development with the surrounding area. 
j)  All buildings permitted hereunder shall not exceed 40 feet in height. 
k)  Principal buildings shall not be closer than 40 feet to any property line. 
29.  Oil, gas or brine wells. Oil, gas or brine wells, including the drilling operations for any underground natural resource, with the exception of water, may be permitted only in I Districts when authorized by the city council if it can be clearly shown that the use will not be injurious to the surrounding area, and after public hearing, subject to the following conditions: 
a)  No buildings, or structures of a permanent nature shall be erected, except that when such building is a permitted use within the Industrial District. 
b)  No truck parking or storage shall be located within 300 feet of any residential district, or within 100 feet of any other district. 
c)  All the operation shall be screened with a wire screen or uniformly painted wood fence as provided by section 29.03E, with evergreen screen planting on any side adjacent to residentially zoned property. 
d)  After the natural resources have been removed the property shall be restored by the replacement of top soil where feasible, and all excavations shall be sloped to a gradient with not more than a 30-degree slope, and the contour shall be caused to blend as nearly as possible with the natural surroundings. 
e)  All truck operations shall be directed away from residential streets whenever possible. 
f)  The city council may require any bond as deemed necessary to insure that requirements are fulfilled and may revoke permission to operate at any time specified conditions are not maintained. 
30.  Outdoor cafés, outdoor eating areas and open front restaurant (i.e. window service). 
a)  Any outdoor eating area shall not exceed 15 percent of the gross floor area of the principal building; and shall not be located in any required front, side or rear setback area; except in the GBD District when specifically approved by the city council. 
b)  Any outdoor eating area shall be located no closer than 15 feet from any street right-of-way or any vehicular parking or maneuvering areas. Such eating areas shall be separated from all vehicular parking and maneuvering areas by means of a greenbelt, wall, or architectural feature. 
c)  The outdoor eating area shall not be located within 50 feet of any properties used or zoned for residential purposes. The area shall be completely screened from view from all residential properties by an obscuring wall or greenbelt, in compliance with this ordinance. 
d)  The outdoor eating area shall be kept clean and void of litter at all times and waste receptacles must be provided. Fences or landscaping shall be provided to control blowing debris. 
e)  All vending machines and arcades shall be located within a completely enclosed building. 
f)  Outdoor sidewalk cafés in the GBD District shall be subject to the following standards: 
1)  To allow for pedestrian circulation, a minimum of five feet of sidewalk along the curb and leading to the entrance to the establishment must be maintained free of tables and other encumbrances. If the sidewalk is not wide enough to allow for a five-foot wide clearance for circulation, the café should not be permitted. Planters, posts with ropes, or other removable enclosures should be encouraged and should be used to define the area occupied by the outdoor seating. 
2)  Pedestrian circulation and access to store entrances should not be impaired. Thus, a boundary (maximum encroachment width and length) into the public sidewalk should be established, with an accessible aisle being maintained between this line and the curb, in accordance with the provisions of the national Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Michigan barrier-free requirements. 
3)  The operators of the outdoor caféshould be responsible for a clean, litter-free, and well-kept appearance within and immediately adjacent to the area of the tables and chairs. Outdoor trash receptacles are required. Written procedures for cleaning and trash containment and removal responsibilities of the cafémust be noted on the revised plan to the satisfaction of the city. 
4)  Tables, chairs, planters, trash receptacles, and other elements of street furniture should be compatible with the architectural character of the adjacent buildings. If table umbrellas will be used, they should complement building colors. 
5)  Additional signs should not be permitted, beyond what is permitted for the existing restaurant. 
6)  The hours of operation for the outdoor seating area should be established and noted on the plan. 
7)  Preparation of food and beverages should be prohibited in this outdoor area. The sale and consumption of alcohol are governed by the Michigan Liquor Control Act and local ordinance. 
8)  Liability issues for use of the public sidewalk should be addressed and reviewed by the city attorney. 
31.  Outdoor theaters. Because outdoor theaters possess the unique characteristics of being used only after darkness and since they develop a concentration of vehicular traffic in terms of ingress and egress from their parking area, they are subject to the following conditions: 
a)  Outdoor theaters shall abut, and have all access from, a regional arterial or arterial. 
b)  All vehicles, waiting or standing to enter the facility, shall be provided off-street waiting space. No vehicle shall be permitted to wait or stand within a dedicated right-of-way. 
c)  The area shall be designed as to prevent the movie screen from being viewed from residential areas or adjacent major roadways. All lighting used to illuminate the area shall be installed and confined within, and directed onto the premises of the outdoor theater site. Landscaping shall be provided to screen automobile headlights off-site. 
d)  A traffic impact study shall be provided. 
32.  Recreation: Outdoor recreation establishments (excluding golf-related uses). 
a)  Such uses shall include, but are not limited to, the following: recreational fields, rinks or courts, including football, softball, soccer, tennis, basketball, ice skating, and similar activities, swimming pools open to the general public or operated by a private non-profit organization, archery and shooting ranges, commercial riding stables, animal racing, go-cart, automobile or motorcycle tracks, music concert pavilions and bandshells, amusement parks and uses accessory to the above uses, such as refreshment stands, retail shops selling items related to the above uses, maintenance buildings, office for management functions, spectator seating and service areas, including locker rooms and rest rooms. 
b)  The site shall be adequate to accommodate the intended use(s), parking and adequate buffer areas without significant impact on nearby properties in terms of noise, traffic, lighting glare, views, odors, trespassing, dust or blowing debris, as determined by the city council. The applicant shall provide documentation that the site area is adequate using national facility standards. 
c)  The site shall be located on a paved street which is classified as a regional arterial or arterial road. 
d)  No building or spectator seating facility shall be located within 100 feet of a property line. 
e)  The site shall be kept clear of debris. 
33.  Recreation: Golf courses, country clubs, par three golf courses as principal use. 
a)  The site shall have access directly onto a regional arterial or arterial road. 
b)  The site plan shall be designed to achieve a relationship between the arterial and any proposed service roads, entrances, driveways and parking areas which will contribute pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
c)  Development features including the principal buildings, accessory structures and fairways, shall be designed and arranged to minimize any adverse effects upon adjacent property. All principal or accessory buildings shall be not less than 200 feet from any public street right-of-way or property line abutting residentially zoned lands; provided the city council may modify this requirement where topographic conditions, existing vegetation or new landscaping will screen views. In no case shall the setback be less than 75 feet. 
d)  Operational hours for maintenance vehicles, course maintenance and/or irrigation may be restricted by the city council to protect nearby residential districts. Maintenance sheds shall not be visible from any adjacent single-family residential areas. 
e)  Any swimming pool shall meet the standards below (see "swimming pools") and comply with all applicable building codes and city ordinances. 
34.  Recreation: Golf driving ranges, miniature golf courses. 
a)  All traffic ingress and egress shall be from a regional arterial or arterial road. 
b)  Parking lots shall be set back at least 30 feet from the street right-of-way and 100 feet from any property line abutting a residential district. 
c)  Any lot line abutting a residential district shall provide a 50-foot wide, landscaped buffer strip with landscaping meeting the standards of Article 29.00. 
d)  No building shall be constructed or located closer than 200 feet from the property line of any abutting residential lot. 
e)  The site plan shall illustrate expected trajectory or ball dispersion patterns along fairways and for driving ranges where adjacent to residential uses, buildings, parking lots or public streets. 
f)  Site size shall be sufficient to retain errant balls within the site by means of landscaping, berms or a six-foot high fence. Netting shall be prohibited unless the city council determines the netting would be compatible with surrounding uses. 
g)  The city council may restrict lighting and hours of operation for a driving range in consideration of surrounding land uses and zoning. 
h)  Tee areas for a driving range shall be clearly distinguished by elevating the stations six inches to one and one-half feet above the ground, or through use of short walls or alternate distinction to separate tee stations. 
35.  Recreation: Indoor recreation such as bowling alleys, indoor golf, ice arenas, skating rinks, etc. 
a)  The principal and accessory buildings and structures shall not be located within 100 feet of any residential district or use. 
b)  All uses shall be conducted completely within a fully enclosed building. 
c)  The buildings shall be sound-proofed. 
d)  A minimum three-foot high, 20-foot wide berm landscaped with evergreen trees to create a totally obscuring screen shall be provided. 
36.  Recreation: Private recreation facilities and swimming pool clubs. 
a)  The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a regional arterial or arterial roadway as classified in the city master plan, and the site shall be so planned as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from said road. 
b)  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
c)  Off-street parking shall be provided so as to accommodate not less than one-half of the member families and/or individual members. The city council may modify the off-street parking requirements in those instances wherein it is determined that the users will be pedestrian and originate from the immediately adjacent areas. Prior to the issuance of a building permit or zoning compliance permit, bylaws of the organization shall be provided in order to establish the membership involved for computing the off-street parking requirements. In those cases wherein the proposed use or organization does not have bylaws or formal membership, the off-street parking requirements shall be determined by the city council on the basis of usage. 
d)  Swimming pools shall meet all applicable building and health codes. 
37.  Recycling stations. 
a)  Recycling stations shall be only for the collection of recyclable materials for hauling to another site for processing. A one- or two-yard dumpster may be provided for non-recyclable waste, such as twine, lids, etc. 
b)  Paved loading and stacking spaces shall be provided for at least three automobiles. 
c)  All storage of recycled materials shall be within appropriate containers, with access through doors on the sides of the container. 
d)  The city council may require a totally obscuring fence or wall around the perimeter of the recycling center. 
e)  The hours of operation and materials accepted may be regulated by the planning commission and shall be clearly posted. 
f)  Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 80 feet wide, and shall be landscaped in trees, shrubs, and grass. All such landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition. There shall be no parking or structures permitted in these yards, except required entrance drives and those walls used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
38.  Restaurants with drive-in or drive-through facilities. 
a)  Principal and accessory buildings shall be setback at least 75 feet from any adjacent public right-of-way line or property line. Location shall be along a regional arterial or arterial, as classified in the city master plan. 
b)  Only one access shall be provided onto any regional arterial or arterial. Access driveways shall be located no less than 100 feet from the centerline of the intersection of any street or 75 feet from the centerline of any other driveway. 
c)  Such restaurants constructed adjacent to other commercial developments shall have a direct vehicular access connection where possible. 
d)  A six-foot high wall which creates a completely obscuring effect shall be provided when abutting or adjacent districts are zoned residential, business or office districts. 
e)  A minimum ten-foot wide bypass lane shall be provided around the stocking spaces. 
f)  Applicant shall provide a traffic impact assessment including projected traffic generation. 
g)  In addition to parking space requirements, at least three parking spaces shall be provided in close proximity to the exit of the drive-through portion of the operation to allow for customers waiting for delivery of orders. 
h)  Overhead canopies shall be setback at least 20 feet from the right-of-way and constructed of materials consistent with the principal building. The proposed clearance of any canopy shall be noted on the site plan. The canopy shall be no higher than the principal building. 
i)  Outdoor speakers for the drive-through facility shall be located in a way that minimizes sound transmission toward neighboring property and uses. 
39.  Riding academies and stables. Facilities for horseback riding, accessory trails and stables shall be allowed by the city council after planning commission review on parcels of five acres or more provided that animal housing facilities or enclosures are located at least 250 feet from any residential structure. 
40.  Roadside stands. Because roadside stands are seasonal in character and utilized on a temporary basis, roadside stands shall be allowed in Business Districts by the city council for periods not to exceed six months provided a temporary permit is obtained from the city council and provided the following provisions are met: 
a)  The sale of farm products in a roadside stand shall not take place within the dedicated right-of-way of any thoroughfare within the city, and assurances shall be made to the city that ample off-street parking has been provided, and adequate ingress and egress provided to the stand. 
b)  No permanent structure of any type shall be erected, and upon discontinuance of the temporary use, the temporary structures shall be removed from the roadside. 
41.  Schools: Public and non-public, elementary, intermediate and/or secondary schools offering courses in general education. 
a)  All vehicular access to the site shall be onto a regional arterial, arterial or collector road, as classified in the city master plan. The city council may allow secondary access onto local (residential) streets if the uses fronting the street which would be most impacted by traffic flow are predominantly non-single-family homes. 
b)  Adequate outdoor recreation areas shall be provided. 
42.  Shopping centers. 
a)  Shopping centers of 15,001 to 30,000 square feet of gross floor area in the NBD, Neighborhood Business District and over 30,001 square feet in the GBD General Business District shall meet the standards below. For purposes of calculation, the principal building and all outbuildings including those on outlots, shall be including in calculating the gross floor area threshold for this section. 
b)  A traffic impact study shall be submitted. 
c)  The principal building with front parking shall be setback 250 feet from any public right-of-way or property line. 
d)  Such shopping centers shall have access to at least one arterial when in a Local Business District; access to at least one regional arterial when located within a General Commercial District. 
e)  The design of regional shopping centers shall ensure that vehicular circulation patterns are designed and regulated to reduce conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians on-site, and the impacts of traffic generated by the center on adjacent streets. 
f)  Internal circulation shall be designed such that no intersection includes more than four aisles or drives. 
g)  Site entrances shall be restricted to three-way movements, with unrestricted inbound movements. 
h)  Internal drives defined by the ends of aisles shall have raised curbed islands at appropriate locations to define circulation paths and control movements through the parking lot. 
i)  Loading facilities which serve the commercial establishment in the principal building shall be screened from public view. 
j)  Any building side facing a public street or residential district shall be constructed with brick, fluted block or similar decorative material. 
k)  Any outlots shall have circulation and parking designed to complement the entire site. 
l)  Parking lot landscaping shall be provided in accordance with section 29.03. 
43.  Slaughterhouse. Slaughterhouses shall be permitted in the I-1 District only, after review by the planning commission and city council approval provided the following requirements are met: 
a)  All requirements of section 20.06, Performance standards, shall be strictly adhered to. 
b)  The physical plant structure, and pens, stockyard, or cages, shall in no instance be closer than 2,000 feet to any adjacent residential district. 
c)  A fence shall be provided around the entire site to assure that individuals will not unknowingly trespass on the property, particularly the stockyard area. 
d)  The site, shall have at least on (1) continuous boundary 500 feet in length along a major thoroughfare of at least 120-foot right-of-way as indicated on the current Master Right-of-Way Plan of the Genesee County Road Commission. 
44.  Theaters (indoor), cinemas, concert halls, play houses, assembly halls, or similar places of assembly when conducted completely within enclosed buildings. 
a)  Access shall be from a regional arterial or arterial road. 
b)  A traffic impact study shall be submitted. 
c)  Wrought iron fencing may be placed along the frontage to direct pedestrians to safe crossing points, if the city council determines the need. 
d)  The subject site shall be located with access to an existing traffic signal, or placed such than installing a traffic signal will not significantly impact through traffic flow. 
e)  The principal building and parking lot shall be setback at least 50 feet from any adjacent residential district. This setback shall be landscaped with at least the amount of plant materials specified in Article 28. 
45.  Urgent medical care centers. 
a)  Access shall be from a regional arterial or arterial. 
b)  Building entrances shall not be visible to residences or schools. 
46.  Veterinary clinics. 
a)  The use shall be operated by a licensed or registered veterinarian. 
b)  The principal and all accessory buildings or structures used for the treatment or holding of animals shall be setback at least 200 feet from abutting residential districts, churches or restaurants on the same side of the street; 50 feet from the front property line and 50 feet from all other property lines. 
c)  All principal use activities shall be conducted within a totally enclosed principal building; no outdoor pet enclosures or runs are permitted. 
d)  Any indoor boarding shall be limited to that incidental to treatment or surgery. 
e)  Any veterinary clinic building or structure which is used for the treatment or holding of animals which is adjacent to a residential district shall have the following construction features: 
1)  walls are soundproofed to allow a maximum transmission of 65 dB measured at any point on the outside of the exterior wall, 
2)  doors must be solid core, 
3)  ventilation must be forced air. 
f)  Outdoor exercising is allowed when the pet is accompanied by an employee provided no animals shall be permitted outside of the buildings between 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
g)  A caretakers quarters may be permitted. 
h)  Additional landscaping and fencing requirements may be required by the planning commission. 
( Ord. No. 407, §§ 4, 5, 5-24-11 ; Ord. No. 431 , § 4, 12-12-16) 
ARTICLE 31. - ORDINANCE AMENDMENTS AND CONDITIONAL REZONING AGREEMENTS 

Section 31.00. - Initiation of amendments. 
    The city council may, from time to time, amend, modify, supplement, or revise the zoning district boundaries shown on the official zoning map or the provisions of this ordinance. Amendments to the provisions of this ordinance may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, the zoning board of appeals, the zoning administrator or by petition of one or more residents or land owners. Amendments to the official zoning map may be initiated by the city council, the planning commission, or by the owner or owners of the subject site. All proposed amendments to the provisions of this ordinance or the official zoning map shall be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and recommendation to the city council prior to action by the city council. 
Section 31.01. - Application procedure. 
    An amendment to this ordinance or the official zoning map, except those initiated by the city, shall be initiated by submission of a completed application form and fee. The following information shall accompany the application form: 
A.  A legal description and street address of the subject property, together with a map identifying the subject property in relation to surrounding properties. 
B.  The name and address of the owner of the subject site, and a statement of the applicant's interest in the subject site if not the owner in fee simple title. 
C.  The existing and proposed zoning district designation of the subject property. 
D.  The land use classification for the subject site as illustrated on the city's master plan. 
E.  In the case of an amendment to this ordinance, other than an amendment to the official zoning map, a general description of the proposed amendment and rationale for the change shall accompany the application form. 
F.  A written description of how the requested rezoning meets the amendment criteria of this article. 
Section 31.02. - Amendment procedure; public hearing and notice. 
A.  Public hearing: Upon initiation of an amendment, a work session and public hearing to consider the proposed amendment shall be scheduled before the planning commission. If an individual property or ten or fewer adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, written notice of the public hearing shall be made as follows: 
(a)  The notice shall do all of the following: 
(1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
(2)  Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used. Individual addresses of properties are not required to be listed for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties. 
(3)  State when and where the request will be considered. 
(4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
(b)  The notice shall be published and delivered not less than 15 days before the date of the public hearing as follows: 
(1)  Notice of the request shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. This shall be the only notice required for an amendment to the zoning ordinance, or the zoning map that affects 11 or more properties or an interpretation by the zoning board of appeals. 
(2)  Where approval is being sought under this ordinance for an individual property or a rezoning affecting ten or fewer properties, notice shall also be sent by mail or personal delivery to the owners of property for which approval is being considered. 
(3)  In addition to paragraph (2) above, notice shall be sent to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the property and to the occupants of all structures within 300 feet of the property regardless of whether the property or occupant is located in the zoning jurisdiction. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification under this subsection. 
(c)  If 11 or more properties are proposed for rezoning, or if an amendment is proposed to the text of the ordinance, the city shall give a notice of the proposed rezoning in the same manner as required under section 31.02 A., except for the individual property notices required by subsections (b)(2), and (b)(3) and except that no individual addresses of properties are required to be listed under section (a)(2). 
B.  Planning commission findings and recommendation: Following the public hearing, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings and recommendation to the city council. The planning commission shall consider the criteria listed in section 31.04 for a requested amendment to the official zoning map, and the criteria listed in section 31.05 for requested amendments to the standards and regulations in the text. 
C.  City council findings and action: Following receipt of the findings and recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall act on the proposed amendment. In the case of an amendment to the text of this ordinance, the city council may modify or revise the proposed amendment recommended by the planning commission prior to enactment. In the case of an amendment to the official zoning map, the city council shall approve or deny the amendment, based on its consideration of the criteria in section 31.04 or 31.05 as applicable. 
Section 31.03. - Required amendments to comply with a court decree. 
    Any amendment for the purpose of complying with a decree of a court of competent jurisdiction shall be adopted by the city council and published, without necessity of a public hearing or referral hereof to any other board or agency. 
Section 31.04. - Criteria for amendment of the official zoning map. 
    In considering any petition for an amendment to the official zoning map, the planning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria in making its findings, recommendations and decision: 
A.  Consistency with the goals, policies, and future land use map of the City of Swartz Creek Master Plan. If conditions upon which the master plan was developed (such as market factors, demographics, infrastructure, traffic and environmental issues) have changed significantly since the master plan was adopted, as determined by the city, the planning commission and council shall consider the consistency with recent development trends in the area. 
B.  Compatibility of the site's physical, geological, hydrological, and other environmental features with the host of uses permitted in the proposed zoning district. 
C.  Evidence the applicant cannot receive a reasonable return on investment through developing the property with at least one of the uses permitted under the current zoning. 
D.  The compatibility of all the potential uses allowed in the proposed zoning district with surrounding uses and zoning in terms of land suitability, impacts on the environment, density, nature of use, traffic impacts, aesthetics, infrastructure and potential influence on property values. 
E.  The capacity of the city's infrastructure and services sufficient to accommodate the uses permitted in the requested district without compromising the "health, safety, and welfare." 
F.  The apparent demand for the types of uses permitted in the requested zoning district in relation to the amount of land currently zoned and available to accommodate the demand. 
G.  The request has not previously been submitted within the past one year, unless conditions have changed or new information has been provided. 
H.  Other factors deemed appropriate by the planning commission and city council. 
Section 31.05. - Criteria for amendment to the zoning ordinance text. 
    The planning commission and city council shall consider the following criteria to determine the appropriateness of amending the text, standards and regulations of the zoning ordinance: 
A.  Documentation has been provided from city staff, or the zoning board of appeals indicating problems and conflicts in implementation of specific sections of the ordinance. 
B.  Reference materials, planning and zoning publication, information gained at seminars or experiences of other communities that demonstrate improved techniques to deal with certain zoning issues, or that the city's standards are outdated. 
C.  The city attorney recommends an amendment to respond to significant case law. 
D.  The amendment would promote implementation of the goals and objectives of the city's master plan. 
E.  Other factors deemed appropriate by the planning commission and city council. 
Section 31.06. - Restrictions on resubmittal of a rezoning request. 
    An application for an amendment to the official zoning map (i.e. A rezoning request) that has been denied shall not be reconsidered for one year, unless the applicant demonstrates that conditions have changed. 
Section 31.07. - Conditional rezoning. 
    An applicant for a rezoning may voluntarily offer a zoning agreement along with an application for rezoning. An election to file a rezoning with a zoning agreement shall be pursuant to the city and Village Zoning Act, as amended, and this article. The conditions set forth in the zoning agreement must be voluntary and equally or more restrictive than the regulations that would otherwise apply under the proposed zoning district. The zoning agreement shall be a written agreement that is approved and executed by the applicant and the city and recorded with the Genesee County Register of Deeds. When necessary, the zoning agreement shall also include and incorporate, by reference, a site plan. This plan shall not replace the requirement for a site plan as outlined in Article 29. The zoning agreement must be voluntarily offered by the applicant and the city shall not have the authority to require a petitioner for rezoning to offer such agreement and shall not have the authority to require modification to a zoning agreement without the consent of the petitioner; provided, the city shall not enter into a zoning agreement that is not found acceptable to the city council. 
A.  Scope of agreement: The zoning agreement may include limitations on the uses permitted on the property in question, specification of lower density or less intensity of development and use, or may impose more restrictive measures on the location, size, height, or other measure for buildings, structures, improvements, setbacks, landscaping, buffers, design, architecture and other features. The zoning agreement may not authorize uses or developments of greater intensity, or density or which are not permitted in the proposed zoning district; nor may a zoning agreement permit variations from height, area, setback or similar dimensional requirements that are less restrictive than the proposed zoning district. The zoning agreement may include conditions related to the use and development of the property that are necessary to: 
a)  Serve the intended use of the property such as extension of or improvements to roadways, utilities or other infrastructure serving the site; 
b)  Minimize the impact of the development on surrounding properties; and 
c)  Preserve natural features and open space. 
B.  Content of agreement: In addition to any limitations on use or development of the site, preservation of site features or improvements described in subsection A. above, the zoning agreement shall also include the following: 
a)  Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement was proposed voluntarily by the applicant and that the city relied upon the agreement and may not grant the rezoning but for the terms spelled out in the zoning agreement. 
b)  Acknowledgement that the zoning agreement and its terms and conditions are authorized by all applicable state and federal law and constitution, and that the zoning agreement is valid and was entered into on a voluntary basis. 
c)  Agreement and understanding that the property shall not be developed or used in any manner that is not consistent with the zoning agreement. 
d)  Agreement and understanding that the approval of the rezoning and the zoning agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the property owner and the city, and also their respective heirs, successors, assigns, receivers or transferees. 
e)  Agreement and understanding that, if a rezoning with a zoning agreement becomes void in accordance with this section, that no further development shall take place and no permits shall be issued unless and until a new zoning district classification for the property has been established. 
f)  Agreement and understanding that no part of the zoning agreement shall permit any activity, use, or condition that would otherwise violate any requirement or standard that is otherwise applicable in the proposed zoning district. 
g)  Any other provisions as are agreed upon by the parties. 
C.  Future rezonings: Nothing in the zoning agreement, nor any statement or other provision, shall prohibit the city from later rezoning all or any portion of the property that is the subject of the zoning agreement to another zoning classification. Any rezoning shall be conducted in compliance with this ordinance and the City and Village Zoning Act. 
D.  Compliance with agreement: Provided that all development and use of the property in question is in compliance with the zoning agreement, a use or development authorized thereunder may continue indefinitely, provided that all terms of the zoning agreement continue to be adhered to. Failure to comply with the zoning agreement at any time after approval will constitute a breach of the agreement and also a violation of this ordinance, and further use of the property may be subject to legal remedies available to the city. 
ARTICLE 32. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Section 32.00. - Enforcement. 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the zoning administrator or by such deputies of his department as the zoning administrator may delegate to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. The zoning administrator shall be appointed by the city council for such term and subject to such conditions and at such rate of compensation as said council shall determine. In the exercise of duties, the zoning administrator shall have the right to enter private premises, as provided by law. 
Section 32.01. - Duties of zoning administrator and building official. 
A.  Zoning administrator duties: The zoning administrator shall have the authority to enforce the terms of this ordinance, issue zoning compliance and other permits as stipulated herein, to ensure approved plans and permits are carried out in accordance with their approvals, and to make inspections of buildings or premises as necessary. The zoning administrator shall also document all non-conforming uses existing at the effective date of this ordinance for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of Article 19. 
B.  Building official duties: The building official shall have the authority to issue building and construction permits and certificates of occupancy to applicants, assist the zoning administrator in enforcing requirements that relate to building code and construction elements, and to make inspections of buildings or premises as necessary. 
C.  General requirements: The following general requirements apply to both positions: 
1.  Issuance of a permit shall not be refused when an application is in compliance with the requirements of this ordinance or other applicable codes. 
2.  The building official and zoning administrator do not have the authority to amend the requirements of this ordinance unless discretion is granted within the terms of a particular section. 
Section 32.02. - Plot plan. 
    The building official may require that all applications for building permits be accompanied by plans and specifications including two copies of a plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the following: 
A.  The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot. 
B.  The shape size and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected, altered or moved and of any building or other structures already on the lot. 
C.  The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it including, in residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate. 
D.  Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential to determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
Section 32.03. - Permits. 
    The following shall apply in the issuance of any building permit: 
A.  Permits not to be issued: No building permit shall be issued for the erection, alteration, or use of any building or structure as part thereof, or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Permits for new use of land: No vacant land shall be used and no existing use of land shall be changed to another type of use unless a certificate of zoning compliance is obtained for the new or different use. 
C.  Permits for new use of building: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be changed to or occupied by a different use unless a certificate of occupancy is first obtained for the new or different use. 
D.  Permits required: No building or structure, or part thereof, shall be hereafter erected, altered, moved or repaired unless a building permit shall have been first issued for such work. The terms "altered" and "repaired" shall include any changes in structural parts, stairways, type of construction, type, class or kind of occupancy, light or ventilation, means of egress and ingress, or other changes affecting or regulated by the City Building Code, Housing Law of Michigan, or this ordinance, except for minor repairs or changes not involving any of the aforesaid features. 
E.  Inspection: The building official shall be notified by the person, firm, or corporation obtaining the building permit when the foundations are completed and the building official shall inspect same within three days after notification. If in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance, the building official shall endorse each fact upon the building permit. 
Section 32.04. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    No land, building or part thereof, shall be occupied by or for any use for which a building permit is required by this ordinance unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such new use by the building official. The following shall apply in the issuance of any certificate: 
A.  Certificates not to be issued: No certificate of occupancy pursuant to the Building Code of the City of Swartz Creek shall be issued for any building, structure or part thereof or for the use of any land, which is not in accordance with all the provisions of this ordinance. 
B.  Certificates required: No building or structure, or parts thereof, which is hereafter erected or altered, shall be occupied or used or the same caused to be done, unless and until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued for such building or structure. 
C.  Certificates including zoning: Certificates of occupancy as required by the building code for new buildings or structures, or parts thereof, or for alterations to or changes of use of existing buildings or structures, shall also constitute certificates of occupancy as required by this ordinance. 
D.  Certificates for existing buildings: Certificates of occupancy may be issued for existing buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or existing uses of land if, after inspection, it is found that such buildings, structures, or parts thereof, or such use of land, are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. Certificates of occupancy may be issued for business buildings in NBD, GBD and CBD zones existing at the effective date of this ordinance which change occupancy and which do not provide sufficient parking as required in this ordinance, provided there is no decrease in the number of spaces existing at the effective date of this ordinance. 
E.  Temporary certificates: Nothing in this ordinance shall prevent the issuance of a temporary certificate of occupancy for a portion of a building or structure in process of erection or alteration, provided that such temporary certificate shall not be effective for a period of time in excess of six months, and provided further that such portion of the building, structure, or premises is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
F.  Records of certificates: A record of all certificates issued shall be kept on file in the office of the zoning administrator, and copies shall be furnished upon request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in the property involved. 
G.  Certificates for residential accessory buildings: Buildings accessory to residential dwellings shall not require separate certificates of occupancy but may be included in the certificate of occupancy for the dwelling when shown on the plot plan and when completed at the same time as such dwellings. 
H.  Applications for certificates: Application for certificates of occupancy shall be made in writing to the building official on forms furnished by the city and such certificates shall be issued within ten days after receipt of such application if it is found that the building or structure, or part thereof or the use of land is in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    If such certificate is refused for cause, the applicant therefore shall be notified of such refusal and cause thereof, within the aforesaid ten-day period. 
Section 32.05. - Final inspection. 
    The holder of every building permit for the construction, erection, alteration, repair, or moving of any building, structure, or part thereof, shall notify the building official immediately upon the completion of the work authorized by such permit, for a final inspection. 
Section 32.06. - Fees. 
    Applicants for permits required by this ordinance shall pay to the city, at the time of application for such permit, applicable fees. Fees are set by city council and contained in the city's fee schedule that is updated periodically by resolution of city council. 
Section 32.07. - Interpretation, purpose, and conflict. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, morals and general welfare of the city. It is not intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any ordinance, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued, and not in conflict with any of the provisions of this ordinance, or which shall be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings or premises and likewise not in conflict with this ordinance; nor is it intended by this ordinance to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon heights of buildings or requires larger open spaces or larger lot areas than are imposed or required by such ordinance or agreements, the provisions of this ordinance shall control. 
Section 32.08. - Violations. 
A.  Any violation of any provision of this ordinance or any permit, license or exception granted hereunder, or any lawful order of the zoning administrator, planning commission, zoning board of appeals, or the city council issued in pursuance of this ordinance shall be a municipal civil infraction. A "violation" includes any act which is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense by this ordinance and any omission or failure to act where the act is required by this ordinance. 
B.  The sanction for any violation of this ordinance which is a municipal civil infraction shall be a civil fine as provided in this article, plus any costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions, as authorized under Chapter 87 of Act 236 of the Public Acts of 1961, as amended, and other applicable laws. 
C.  The zoning administrator, building official, and police officers of the city, are the city officials authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations and municipal civil infraction notices for violations of this ordinance. 
Section 32.09. - Schedule of fines. 
A.  General: 
1.  A person, corporation or firm who, as a result of violating any provision of this ordinance, is responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall pay a civil fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. 
2.  Repeat offenses shall be subject to increased fines set forth below. As used in this section, "repeat offenses" means a second (or any subsequent) municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of this ordinance (1) committed by a person, corporation or firm within any 12-month period and (2) for which the person admits responsibility or is determined to be responsible. The increased fine for a repeat offense under this ordinance shall be as follows: 
a.  The fine for any offense which is a repeat offense shall be no less than $150.00 plus costs and other sanctions. 
b.  The fine for any offense which is a second repeat offense or any subsequent repeat offense shall be no less than $250.00 plus costs and other sanctions. 
B.  Fines for violation notices: 
1.  A person, corporation or firm who, as a result of violating any provision of this ordinance, receives a municipal civil infraction violation notice, upon a determination of responsibility thereon, shall pay a civil fine at the City of Swartz Creek Municipal Ordinance Violations Bureau as follows: 
a.  $50.00 for the first violation. 
b.  $150.00 for the second violation within a 12-month period. 
c.  $250.00 for a third violation within a 12-month period. 
d.  $500.00 for any subsequent violation within a 12-month period. 
Section 32.10. - Public nuisance per se. 
    In addition to all other remedies, including the penalties provided in this section of this ordinance, the city may commence and prosecute appropriate actions or proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction, to retain or prevent any non-compliance with or violation of any of the provisions in this ordinance, or to correct, remedy or abate such non-compliance or violation. Buildings erected, altered, razed or converted, or uses carried on in violation of any provisions of this ordinance or in violation of any regulations made under the authority of the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act (Public Act 110 of 2006), are hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and the court shall order such nuisance abated. 
Section 32.11. - Rights and remedies are cumulative. 
    The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
Section 32.12. - Forbearance not condoned. 
    Forbearance in enforcement of this ordinance shall not be deemed to condone any violation thereof. 
Section 32.13. - Fines, sanctions. 
    The owner of any building, structure or premises of part thereof, where any condition in violation of this ordinance shall exist or shall be created, and who has assisted knowingly in the commission of such violation shall be guilty of a separate offense and upon conviction thereof shall be liable for the fines and sanctions herein provided. 
Section 32.14. - Each day a separate offense. 
    A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or when a violation occurs or continues. 
Section 32.15. - Declaration of a zoning moratorium. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this zoning ordinance, the city council may, by resolution, declare a moratorium on the issuance of any permit under this ordinance, the processing of any permit application hereunder, the processing of any rezoning request, the processing of any site plan review, special land use request, or the processing of any other application made under this zoning ordinance. 
    Such a moratorium may be declared by the city council only under the following conditions: 
A.  The city council finds, based on facts appearing in the public record before it, that such a moratorium is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare and that no other action short of imposing such a moratorium can adequately protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
B.  The moratorium is for a limited period of time, not to exceed six months, but may be extended for no more than one additional six-month period upon a new and separate finding of the facts required by subsection A., above; 
C.  The moratorium is limited in its scope and area of application so as to only affect those matters and that area necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
D.  The resolution declaring the moratorium shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city; 
E.  The resolution declaring the moratorium shall specify the effective date of such moratorium which may be the date of publication or another date following such publication; and 
F.  The resolution declaring the moratorium shall be adopted by a vote of no fewer than five members of the city council. 
Section 32.16. - Registration for receipt of public hearing notices. 
A.  General: Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the zoning administrator to receive written notice of all applications for development approval or written notice of all applications for development approval within the Zoning District in which they are located. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the city council. 
B.  Requirements: The requesting party must provide the zoning administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register annually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section. 
( Ord. No. 401, § 11, 5-11-09, eff. 6-15-09 ) 
Appendix B - FRANCHISES, LICENSES AND PERMITS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the franchises of the City as adopted. Obvious misspelling have been corrected. Other changes made for clarity are indicated by brackets. It should be noted that Ord. No. 369, § 1, adopted November 25, 2002, amended the title of Appendix B to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said Ordinance, Appendix B was entitled, "Franchises." See also the Code Comparative Table 
Charter reference- Utility franchises and municipal ownership, Ch. 15. 
Cross reference- Any ordinance granting any right or franchise saved from repeal, § 1-6(2); administration, Ch. 2; utilities, Ch. 19. 

ARTICLE I. - CONSUMERS POWER COMPANY[2] 
ORDINANCE NO. 321 
An Ordinance, granting to Consumers Power Company, it[s] successors and assigns, the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services and to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and to do a local gas and/or electric business in the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan, for a period of 30 years. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK, GENESEE COUNTY, MICHIGAN, ORDAINS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 321, adopted Sept. 26, 1996, superceded Art. I of App. B in its entirety. Formerly, Art. I of App. B pertained to same subject matter and derived from §§ 1-10 of Ord. No. 49, enacted on March 16, 1996. 

Section No. 1. - Grant, term. 
    The City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan, hereby grants to the Consumers Power Company a Michigan corporation, its successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "Grantee," the right, power and authority to lay, maintain and operate gas mains, pipes and services, and to construct, maintain and commercially use electric lines consisting of towers, masts, poles, crossarms, guys, braces, feeders, transmission and distribution wires, transformers and other electrical appliances on, along, across and under the highways, streets, alleys, bridges, waterways, and other public places, and to do a local gas and/or electric business in the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan for a period of 30 years. 
Section No. 2. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, said Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
Section No. 3. - Conditions. 
    No street, alley, bridge, highway, waterway or other public place used by said Grantee shall be obstructed longer than necessary during the work of construction or repair, and shall be restored to the same order and condition as when said work was commenced. All of the Grantee's structures and equipment shall be so placed on either side of the highways as not to unnecessarily interfere with the use thereof for highway purposes. All of Grantee's wires carrying electricity shall be securely fastened so as not to endanger or injure persons or property in said highways. The Grantee shall have the right to trim trees if necessary in the conducting of such business, subject, however, to the supervision of the highway authorities. 
Section No. 4. - Hold harmless. 
    Said Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless for all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the negligent construction and maintenance of the structures and equipment hereby authorized. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
Section No. 5. - Franchise not exclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. The right to do a gas business and the right to do an electric business hereunder are several, and such rights may be separately exercised, owned and transferred. Either manufactured or natural gas may be furnished hereunder. 
Section No. 6. - Extensions. 
    Said Grantee shall from time to time extend its gas and electric systems to and within said City, and shall furnish gas or electricity to applicants residing therein in accordance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
Section No. 7. - Rates. 
    The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for gas and/or electricity furnished therein, the rates as approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to which Commission or its successors authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate gas and electric rates and rules regulating such service in said City, are hereby granted. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either said City acting by its City Council, or by said Grantee. 
Section No. 8. - Rights of the City. 
    As provided in Section 15.1 of the City Charter for the City of Swartz Creek, this franchise shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require continuous and uninterrupted service to the public in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the Grantee to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the City by the City and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor: Provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the Grantee, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor. 
    The rights of the City enumerated herein shall not be exercised or construed in a manner which conflicts with the express terms and conditions of this franchise nor with the rules and regulations set forth by the Michigan Public Service Commission governing the provision of electric or gas service by Grantee. 
Section No. 9. - Vacation of rights-of-way and relocation of facilities. 
    The City has the right to vacate any public right-of-way within the City as well as any right to use same possessed by the Grantee, and/or the City may require the Grantee to relocate its lines and facilities at said Grantee's own expense when such vacation and/or relocation is made necessary to secure the public health and welfare or is otherwise required by the City in the exercise of a governmental function. 
Section No. 10. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days' written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
Section No. 11. - Michigan Public Service Commission, jurisdiction. 
    Said Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service, both gas and electric, not herein fixed, be and remain subject to reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to gas or electric service in said City. 
Section No. 12. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on October 14, 1996; however, it shall cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this ordinance shall constitute a contract between said City and said Grantee. 
ARTICLE II. - COMCAST CABLEVISION CORPORATION 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 227 
An Ordinance authorizing the construction and operation of a community antenna television system in the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan, and to prescribe the terms and conditions under which said service shall be provided, and the repeal of Ordinances No. 154 and No. 184 in their entirety. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
ORDAINS: 

Section No. 1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms phrases, words, and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(A)  "City" is the City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan. 
(B)  "Council" is the City Council. 
(C)  "System" is a system of coaxial cables or other electrical conductors and transmission equipment used or to be used primarily to receive television or radio signals directly or indirectly off-the-air and other related services and transmit them to subscribers for a fee. 
(D)  "Company" is Comcast Cablevision Corporation, a Michigan Corporation. 
(E)  "Public access channel" means any channel on which any member of the general public may cablecast, without charge. 
(F)  "Community access programming" means a composite of public, educational, municipal, religious or other locally produced programming to be made available on the public access channel space, without charge. 
(G)  "Basic service" means the total of all the following as delivered to any commercial, residential, or agency subscriber: 
(a)  The retransmission of all broadcast video channel signals provided for herein; 
(b)  The public, educational, local government, arts and sports, hospital, religious, social services, and leased access channel signals; 
(c)  The local origination channels; 
(d)  Such other cablecast signals as are required to be carried by the FCC, the State of Michigan, or the City, aside from any additional services; and 
(e)  The total number of channels providing the services included within "basic service" as provided herein shall not be less than 26. 
(H)  "Premium services" means the delivery to subscribers, over the cable system, of television signals for a fee or charge to subscribers over and above the charge for basic services, on a per program, per channel, or other subscription basis. 
(I)  "Non-exclusive franchise" shall mean that nothing contained with [within] the provisions of this Ordinance shall bestow upon Company the right to provide the services herein provided for to the exclusion of any other company who may request of City, or who may be solicited by City, to provide such services. 
Section No. 2. - Grant of non-exclusive franchise. 
    The City hereby grants to Company the non-exclusive franchise, right, privilege, authority and easement for a period of ten years from the effective date hereof unless sooner terminated pursuant to the provisions of this Ordinance to construct, erect, suspend, install, renew, maintain and otherwise own and operate throughout the City in, upon, along, across, above, over, and under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public places as now laid out or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, a system of poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, ducts, trenches, conductors, amplifying equipment, manholes, fittings, and any and all other fixtures, appliances and appurtenances necessary for the installation, ownership, maintenance and operation in the City of a cable television system either separately or in conjunction with any other public utility maintaining the same in the City. 
Section No. 3. - Compliance with applicable law and ordinances. 
    The Company shall at all times during the life of this Ordinance be subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the City and to such reasonable regulation by the City as this Ordinance shall hereafter provide. The Company shall comply with all law, statutes, codes, ordinances, rules, or regulations applicable to its business including those of the Federal Communications Commission, and will comply with all applicable equal employment opportunity laws, rules and regulations. The City Manager is herewith designated the official in charge of cable television franchise matters in the City. 
Section No. 4. - Effective date and term. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect and be in full force after final passage and publication hereof, as provided by law, and said Ordinance shall continue in full force and effect for a term of 12 years upon the terms and conditions set forth herein. This Ordinance may be renewed for a subsequent ten-year term on such terms as the City and the Company may agree. Renewal may be granted at a public meeting following a public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 325, § 1, 2-24-97) 
Section No. 5. - Territorial area involved. 
    This Ordinance is related to the present and future territorial limits of the City. 
Section No. 6. - Liability and indemnification. 
(A)  The Company shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the City, its agents and employees, from all and any claims for personal injuries or property damages, or death to persons, including payments made under any Workmen's Compensation Law, and any other claims and costs, including attorney's fees, expenses of investigation and litigation of claims and suits thereon, which may arise out of or to be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence of, use of, or removal of System, or said attachments on poles within the City or by any act or failure to act of the Company, its agents or employees. The Company shall carry insurance to protect the City from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly, from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage and to that end the City shall be named as co-insured on such policies and shall be non-cancellable without notice to City. 
(B)  The Company shall maintain throughout the term of this Ordinance liability insurance insuring the City and Company in an amount as may be determined by the City; provided, however, said liability insurance shall not be less than $1 million combined single limit. 
(C)  Resident company and agent 
All insurance policies and bonds as are required of the Company in this Ordinance shall be written by a company or companies authorized and qualified to do business in the State of Michigan and written through an insurance agent doing business within the State. Certificates of all coverage required shall be promptly filed by the Company with the City. 
Section No. 7. - Service standards and requirements. 
(A)  The Company shall maintain its service in accordance with the best-accepted standards of the industry, so as to provide its subscribers with the highest possible level of quality and reliability. 
(B)  The System shall meet all applicable FCC radiation specifications as provided for in Paragraph 76.605(a)(12) of the Commission's rules. Conformance to said standards will ensure noninterference with any other type of communications system operating in or near the City. 
(C)  Whenever it shall be necessary to shut-off or interrupt service for the purpose of making repairs, adjustments or installations, the Company shall do so at such time as will cause the least amount of inconvenience to its subscribers and unless such interruption is unforeseen and immediately necessary, shall give reasonable notice thereof to its subscribers. 
(D)  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the Company shall promptly remove its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. 
(E)  If for any reason, service, other than "premium service" as herein defined, is interrupted for a period of 12 consecutive hours, the Company, shall, upon request of a subscriber, credit the account of said subscriber on a pro-rata basis for the period of interrupted service. 
If for any reason, premium service is interrupted, the Company shall, upon request of a subscriber, credit the account of said subscriber on a pro-rata basis for the period of interrupted service. 
Section No. 8. - Safety requirements. 
(A)  The Company shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failure and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries, or nuisance to the public. 
(B)  The Company shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures, and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code and local ordinances which are applicable. 
(C)  All structures and all lines, equipment, and connections, in or over, under and/or upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys, and public ways or places of the City wherever situated or located, shall be kept and maintained at all times in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair. 
Section No. 9. - New developments. 
    It shall be the policy of the parties to discuss the amending of this Ordinance upon application by either party in order to provide additional services which the City may require and/or for Company to respond to changes in Federal Communications Commission regulations or to take advantage of changes in the industry. 
Section No. 10. - Erection, removal and common use of poles. 
    Poles or other wireholding structures may not be erected on public land without prior approval of the City with regard to location, height, type and any pertinent aspects. 
Section No. 11. - Conditions on street occupancy. 
(A)  All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the City shall be located so as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys, and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners whose land may adjoin any of the said streets, alleys, or other public ways and places. The City reserves unto itself the right to determine allowable interference. 
(B)  In case of disturbance of any streets, sidewalks, alley, public way or paved area, the Company, shall at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore such street, sidewalk, alley, public way, or paved area in as good a condition as before the work involving such disturbance was done. Provided, however, in emergency situations the Company shall cause immediate repairs to be made and/or shall otherwise provide for the protection of all persons who may come into contact with such disturbances. In the event the Company fails to comply with the section, the City may make such corrections itself and charge the cost of same to the Company. 
(C)  Any poles or other fixtures placed in any public way by the Company shall be placed in such manner so as not to interfere with the usual travel on such public way and shall be placed only after receiving written approval of the City. 
(D)  The Company shall not place any fixtures or equipment where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone lines, water or sewer service. 
(E)  The Company shall have the authority, under the supervision of the City, to trim trees overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and public ways and places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wire and cable of the Company. 
(F)  The Company shall, at the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the City temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of the building. The expense of such temporary removal, raising and lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Company shall be given not less than 72 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(G)  In the event that at any time during the period of this Ordinance the City shall elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley, or other public way, the Company upon reasonable notice, by the City shall remove, relay, and relocate its equipment at its own expense. The Company shall be required to install or reinstall all lines used by it underground at such times as other utilities install or reinstall underground. 
(H)  Nothing in this Ordinance shall grant to the Company any right of property in City owned property, nor shall the City be compelled to maintain any of its property any longer than, or in any fashion other than in the City's judgment its own business or need may require. 
(I)  The City shall not be liable for any damage occurring to the property of the Company caused by employees of the City in the performance of their duties, except in cases of negligence, nor shall the City be held liable for the interruption of service by actions of the City employees in the performance of their duties, except in cases of negligence, nor shall the City be held liable for the failure of the Company to perform normal services due to acts of God. 
Section No. 12. - System line extension. 
    The Company shall extend the System beyond the System's original line maps when potential customers are available. 
Section No. 13. - Rights reserved to City. 
(A)  Nothing contained within this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit City from enacting or enforcing any consumer protection law to the extent not otherwise inconsistent with this Ordinance or the provisions of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as amended. 
(B)  The City shall have the right, during the life of this Ordinance, to install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the Company, any wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police alarm system, or traffic control system, on the condition that such wire and pole fixtures do not interfere with the operation of the System. 
(C)  The City shall have the right to inspect maps, plans, and other materials relating to the physical plant of the Company at any time during the normal business hours, upon reasonable notice. 
Section No. 14. - Approval of rates. 
(A)  No increase in the Subscriber rates being charged by Company as of the effective date of this Ordinance shall be made by Company without the prior approval by the City Council. Company shall submit, in writing, its requested increase and City shall act upon said requested increase within 60 days thereafter. Any requested rate increase approved by City Council shall become effective 90 days from and after the date of the original request. 
(B)  Company's written request shall contain Company's economic justification for such rate increase. 
(C)  This provision shall remain effective for such period of time as approval of rates shall remain within the authority of City. 
Section No. 15. - Community access channels. 
    The Company shall set aside two channels on the System for the non-exclusive use of City residents. It is understood that the Company shall be entitled to program such channels in its discretion, during any period that the channels are not otherwise being programmed; provided further, however, that City retains the right to submit a program or programs and Company, in such instance, shall provide an additional public access station, in the event such is not then available, for that purpose. 
Section No. 16. - Access facilities. 
    The Company shall make available to the City on a non-exclusive shared basis one studio and one mobile production vehicle for the production and presentation of cablecast programs of particular interest to the citizens of the City. Such facility shall be adequately staffed by the Company's trained personnel. The Company will, upon request of the City, train City officials and community representatives in the proper techniques of cablecasting and local access programming. 
Section No. 17. - Emergency override. 
    The System shall be engineered to provide an audio alert system to allow authorized City officials to automatically override the audio portion of all channels and report emergency information. In the case of an emergency or disaster or threatened emergency or disaster, the Company shall, upon request of the City, make its facilities immediately available to the City for appropriate announcements regarding the existence of an emergency or disaster or threatened emergency [or] disaster. 
Section No. 18. - Service to municipal and educational facilities. 
    The Company shall provide, upon request, to each school building and to each municipal building, in areas serviced by cable, one drop of basic service without charge for installation or monthly service charge. 
Section No. 19. - Franchise fee. 
    The Company shall pay to the City a fee of $1,000.00 per year, or three percent of the gross subscriber revenues, whichever shall be greater. Such payments by Company to the City shall be in lieu of any other license, tax or similar inspection fee. For purposes of this section, "tax" shall not include property taxes. Payment is to be made on January 30th and on that date each year thereafter. Commencing on January 1, 1993 the Company shall pay to the City a fee of $1,000.00 per year or four percent of the gross subscriber revenues whichever shall be greater, such payment shall be made on January 30th of each year thereafter and continue to the time of renewal of the franchise. With a ten-year renewal, the City may at its sole option, require the Company to pay the City five percent of gross subscriber revenues beginning January 1, 1998. For purposes of definition, gross subscriber revenues shall mean: (1) any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the Company from subscribers in payment of regularly furnished services of the cable television system in the transmission of broadcast television radio signals and original cablecast programming of Company; (2) any and all compensation and other consideration received directly or indirectly by the Company from subscribers in payment for receipt of signals other than broadcast television radio or original cable programming of the Company, whether for pay television, facsimile transmission, return or response communication and whether or not transmitted and encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected subscribers, or in payment for installation, disconnection or reconnection fees; (3) any income, compensation or other consideration received by the Company derived from any form of advertising; and (4) any income, compensation or other consideration received for lease or rental of any services in connection therewith such as studio and equipment rental and production costs or any signal permitted or designated by the FCC to be leased or rented. Gross revenue shall not include any taxes collected by the Company on behalf of the City or other taxing authority nor shall it include security deposits or other escrowed monies, or revenue earned from investment of Company funds. 
Section No. 20. - Change of ownership. 
    The Company may, with the approval of the City, sell, assign or transfer its System or any right under this Ordinance to another. Written notice of such sale, assignment or transfer shall be given to City not less than 30 days prior thereto and shall be conditioned upon the vendee, assignee, or transferee filing with City an instrument duly executed, reciting the fact of such sale, assignment or transfer, and containing an acceptance of the terms of this Ordinance and agreeing to perform all requirements thereof. Such sale, assignment, or transfer shall not be effective unless approved by the City, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
Section No. 21. - Forfeiture of Ordinance. 
    If the Company shall fail to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or shall default in any of its undertakings or obligations hereunder and shall fail within a reasonable period after receipt of notice from the City to correct such default or non-compliance, then the City shall have the right to revoke any or all rights and privileges granted hereunder, provided, however, that default or non-compliance resulting from factors beyond the reasonable control of the Company shall not be sufficient grounds for revocation. 
    A "reasonable period" as used herein shall depend upon the severity of default and the period of time needed to correct the default then in existence. 
Section No. 22. - Company office. 
    The Company shall maintain a business office at 3008 Airpark Drive, South, Flint, MI 48507, or at a suitable location in the area so that cable television maintenance service shall be available within 24 hours to subscribers upon telephone request during reasonable business hours. Individual subscribers complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters shall be acted upon by the Company as soon as possible, but in no more than three business days from their receipt. 
    It shall be the obligation of the Company to furnish to City, on a quarterly basis, a compilation of all complaints received, indicating the address of the complainant, the nature of the complaint and the time within which the complaint was acted upon and the action taken. 
Section No. 23. - Protection of local television retailers and servicemen. 
    The Company agrees that it will not engage in the business of sales or repair of television sets owned by its subscribers, nor will it be responsible for the operating condition of said television sets. 
Section No. 24. - Privacy. 
    The Company shall not permit any part of its System to be used by any person or governmental agency for electronic eavesdropping or surveillance or for any monitory [monitoring] purpose which constitutes an invasion of the right to privacy of any subscriber or user of such system; unless such eavesdropping, surveillance or monitoring is performed pursuant to existing State and Federal laws by a governmental law enforcement agency. In any event, the Company shall not allow such use without an order from a Court of Competent Jurisdiction. Company shall not permit the transmission of any signal, oral, visual, or digital, including "polling" the channel selection, from any subscriber's premises without first obtaining the permission of the subscriber. This provision is not intended to prohibit the use of transmission of signals useful only for the control or measurement of System performance or used only for billing subscribers, or detecting theft of service. Company shall not permit the installation of any special terminal equipment in any subscriber's premises that will permit transmission from subscriber's premises of two-way services utilizing oral, visual, or digital signals without first obtaining the written permission of the subscriber. Company, or any of its agents or employees, shall not, without the specific authorization of the subscriber involved, sell or otherwise make available to any party any list which identifies the names, addresses, telephone numbers, identities or the viewing habits of individual subscribers, except as required for billing purposes. 
Section No. 25. - Equivalent benefits. 
(A)  The number of programmed channels of the system shall at all times be at least as great or greater than the number of programmed channels on any other system the Company operates in Genesee County and shall be made available to the City customers; provided that this section shall not operate to decrease the number of channels required by this Ordinance. 
(B)  If, after the effective date of this Ordinance, the Company provides greater services to any City, Township, Village or Municipality in Genesee County, then and in that event, the Company shall be required to grant the same service to the City. 
(C)  If, after the effective date of this Ordinance, the Company provides greater remuneration to any City, Township, Village or Municipality in Genesee County, then and in that event, the Company shall promptly notify the City of such greater remuneration along with all pertinent information regarding said greater remuneration. The Company shall grant the same remuneration to the City upon written notice that the City desires such greater remuneration. This Ordinance shall be considered to have been amended to that extent without further action by the City. 
Section No. 26. - Records and reports. 
    A certified statement of revenue from an independent certified public accounting firm shall accompany each yearly franchise fee check. 
    The City herewith retains the right to inspect and/or audit the books and records of Company and upon request to do so by City, Company shall fully cooperate by making such books and records available. 
Section No. 27. - Construction scheduling. 
    Company having committed to a new construction program within City shall complete said program within 14 months of the effective date of this Ordinance. 
Section No. 28. - Enforcement or compliance. 
    Failure to enforce or insist upon compliance with any of the terms or conditions of this Ordinance shall not constitute a general waiver or relinquishment of any such terms or conditions, but the same shall be and remain at all times in full force and effect. 
Section No. 29. - Severability. 
    In the event that any section or part of the Ordinance shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the remaining sections or portions of this Ordinance. 
Section No. 30. - Repeal of Ordinance No. 154 and Ordinance No. 184. 
    Ordinance No. 154 and Ordinance No. 184 are hereby repealed in their entirety. 
Section No. 31. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall become effective the 15th day of April, 1987. 
ARTICLE III. - ENGAGE ENERGY US, L.P. 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 328 
An Ordinance granting to Engage Energy US, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek for a period of five years; to charge for such electricity and electrical services; and to hold the City of Swartz Creek harmless from all claims arising from the granting of said franchise and the operations of the franchisee thereunder. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK ORDAINS: 

Section No. 1. - Grant. 
(A)  The City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan ("Grantor"), hereby grants to Engage Energy US, L.P., a Delaware limited partnership, its successors and assigns, ("Grantee"), the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek, and to do local electrical business as an electrical power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the City of Swartz Creek. 
(B)  The Grantor further grants to the Grantee the right, power, and authority to construct and/or maintain electrical equipment in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where such equipment is located entirely upon the customer's property; or 
(2)  Where such construction is necessary to connect the Grantee's customers to facilities owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
Section No. 2. - Term. 
    This franchise shall continue, unless revoked, for a term of five years. 
Section No. 3. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
Section No. 4. - Conditions. 
    As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity and electrical services, the Grantee will not impair, obstruct or attempt to control any street, alley, bridge, highway, waterway or other public place. The Grantee shall at all times utilize the existing transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor, the terms and conditions of which as may be applicable are incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise provided in Section 1(B). 
Section No. 5. - Hold harmless. 
    The Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the operations of the Grantee hereunder. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
Section No. 6. - Franchise not inclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. 
Section No. 7. - Franchise fee. 
    The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor a franchise fee in the amount of $1,000.00. Said franchise fee shall be paid to the Grantor within 30 days from the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Section No. 8. - Rates. 
    The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for electricity furnished therein at the rate approved by Grantee and its customer(s) and as may be approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to the extent such Commission or its successors has the authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and rules regulating such service in the City. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either the Grantor, acting by its City Council, or by the Grantee. 
Section No. 9. - Rights of the City. 
    As provided in Section 15.1 of the City Charter for the City of Swartz Creek, this franchise shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require service in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the Grantee to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the City by the City and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor: Provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the Grantee, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor. 
    The rights of the City enumerated herein shall not be exercised or construed in a manner which conflicts with the express terms and conditions of this franchise nor with the rules and regulations set forth by the Michigan Public Service Commission governing the provision of electric or gas service by Grantee. 
Section No. 10. - Vacation of rights-of-way and relocation of facilities. 
    The City has the right to vacate any public right-of-way within the City as well as any right to use same possessed by the Grantee, and/or the City may require the Grantee to relocate its lines and facilities at said Grantee's own expense when such vacation and/or relocation is made necessary to secure the public health and welfare or is otherwise required by the City in the exercise of a governmental function. 
Section No. 11. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
Section No. 12. - City of Swartz Creek jurisdiction. 
    The Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Grantor now in effect or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by the Grantee of any or its existing or future rights under state or federal law or a limitation upon the existing or future powers of the City pursuant to its charter or state or federal law. 
Section No. 13. - Michigan Public Service Commission. 
(A)  Jurisdiction. The Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to electric service in the City, to the extent such Commission (or its successors) has such jurisdiction. 
(B)  Filing. The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with copies of all documents which the Grantee sends to the Michigan Public Service Commission and copies of all orders, decisions, or correspondence the Grantee receives from the Michigan Public Service Commission. The Grantee shall permit the Grantor to inspect and examine all records the Grantee is required to maintain or file under the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, relating to service under this Ordinance. 
Section No. 14. - Underground relocation. 
    If the Grantee has its facilities on above ground utility poles and the owner of said poles relocates its facilities to an underground conduit, the Grantee shall relocate its facilities in the same underground conduit. 
Section No. 15. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on November 17, 1997. It shall, however, cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract between said City and said Grantee. 
ARTICLE IV. - NORDIC ELECTRIC L.L.C. 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 331 
An Ordinance granting to Nordic Electric L.L.C., the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek for a period of five years; to charge for such electricity and electrical services; and to hold the City of Swartz Creek harmless from all claims arising from the granting of said franchise and the operations of the franchisee thereunder. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK ORDAINS: 

Section No. 1. - Grant. 
(A)  The City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan ("Grantor"), hereby grants to Nordic Electric L.L.C., its successors and assigns, ("Grantee"), the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek, and to do local electrical business as an electrical power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the City of Swartz Creek. 
(B)  The Grantor further grants to the Grantee the right, power, and authority to construct and/or maintain electrical equipment in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where such equipment is located entirely upon the customer's property; or 
(2)  Where such construction is necessary to connect the Grantee's customers to facilities owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
Section No. 2. - Term. 
    This franchise shall continue, unless revoked, for a term of five years. 
Section No. 3. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
Section No. 4. - Conditions. 
    As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity and electrical services, the Grantee will not impair, obstruct or attempt to control any street, alley, bridge, highway, waterway or other public place. The Grantee shall at all times utilize the existing transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor, the terms and conditions of which as may be applicable are incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise provided in Section 1(B). 
Section No. 5. - Hold harmless. 
    The Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the operations of the Grantee hereunder. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
Section No. 6. - Franchise not inclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. 
Section No. 7. - Franchise fee. 
    The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor a franchise fee in the amount of $1,000.00. Said franchise fee shall be paid to the Grantor within 30 days from the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Section No. 8. - Rates. 
    The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for electricity furnished therein at the rate approved by Grantee and its customer(s) and as may be approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to the extent such Commission or its successors has the authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and rules regulating such service in the City. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either the Grantor, acting by its City Council, or by the Grantee. 
Section No. 9. - Rights of the City. 
    As provided in Section 15.1 of the City Charter for the City of Swartz Creek, this franchise shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require service in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the Grantee to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the City by the City and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor: Provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the Grantee, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor. 
    The rights of the City enumerated herein shall not be exercised or construed in a manner which conflicts with the express terms and conditions of this franchise nor with the rules and regulations set forth by the Michigan Public Service Commission governing the provision of electric or gas service by Grantee. 
Section No. 10. - Vacation of rights-of-way and relocation of facilities. 
    The City has the right to vacate any public right-of-way within the City as well as any right to use same possessed by the Grantee, and/or the City may require the Grantee to relocate its lines and facilities at said Grantee's own expense when such vacation and/or relocation is made necessary to secure the public health and welfare or is otherwise required by the City in the exercise of a governmental function. 
Section No. 11. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
Section No. 12. - City of Swartz Creek jurisdiction. 
    The Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Grantor now in effect or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by the Grantee of any or its existing or future rights under state or federal law or a limitation upon the existing or future powers of the City pursuant to its charter or state or federal law. 
Section No. 13. - Michigan Public Service Commission. 
(A)  Jurisdiction. The Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to electric service in the City, to the extent such Commission (or its successors) has such jurisdiction. 
(B)  Filing. The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with copies of all documents which the Grantee sends to the Michigan Public Service Commission and copies of all orders, decisions, or correspondence the Grantee receives from the Michigan Public Service Commission. The Grantee shall permit the Grantor to inspect and examine all records the Grantee is required to maintain or file under the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, relating to service under this Ordinance. 
Section No. 14. - Underground relocation. 
    If the Grantee has its facilities on above ground utility poles and the owner of said poles relocates its facilities to an underground conduit, the Grantee shall relocate its facilities in the same underground conduit. 
Section No. 15. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on March 30, 1998. It shall, however, cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract between said City and said Grantee. 
ARTICLE V. - R. HADLER AND COMPANY, INC. 
CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK 
SWARTZ CREEK, MICHIGAN 
ORDINANCE NO. 332 
An Ordinance granting to R. Hadler and Company, Inc., the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek for a period of five years; to charge for such electricity and electrical services; and to hold the City of Swartz Creek harmless from all claims arising from the granting of said franchise and the operations of the franchisee thereunder. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK ORDAINS: 

Section No. 1. - Grant. 
(A)  The City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan ("Grantor"), hereby grants to R. Hadler and Company, Inc., its successors and assigns, ("Grantee"), the right, power and authority to market and/or supply electricity and electrical services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future electrical transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek, and to do local electrical business as an electrical power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity in the City of Swartz Creek. 
(B)  The Grantor further grants to the Grantee the right, power, and authority to construct and/or maintain electrical equipment in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where such equipment is located entirely upon the customer's property; or 
(2)  Where such construction is necessary to connect the Grantee's customers to facilities owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
Section No. 2. - Term. 
    This franchise shall continue, unless revoked, for a term of five years. 
Section No. 3. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
Section No. 4. - Conditions. 
    As an electric power marketer and third-party supplier of electricity and electrical services, the Grantee will not impair, obstruct or attempt to control any street, alley, bridge, highway, waterway or other public place. The Grantee shall at all times utilize the existing transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor, the terms and conditions of which as may be applicable are incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise provided in Section 1(B). 
Section No. 5. - Hold harmless. 
    The Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reason of the operations of the Grantee hereunder. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
Section No. 6. - Franchise not inclusive. 
    The rights, power and authority herein granted are not exclusive. 
Section No. 7. - Franchise fee. 
    The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor a franchise fee in the amount of $1,000.00. Said franchise fee shall be paid to the Grantor within 30 days from the adoption of this Ordinance. 
Section No. 8. - Rates. 
    The Grantee shall be entitled to charge the inhabitants of said City for electricity furnished therein at the rate approved by Grantee and its customer(s) and as may be approved by the Michigan Public Service Commission, to the extent such Commission or its successors has the authority and jurisdiction to fix and regulate electric rates and rules regulating such service in the City. Such rates and rules shall be subject to review and change at any time upon petition therefor being made by either the Grantor, acting by its City Council, or by the Grantee. 
Section No. 9. - Rights of the City. 
    As provided in Section 15.1 of the City Charter for the City of Swartz Creek, this franchise shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require service in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conducive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the Grantee to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the City by the City and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practicable and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor: Provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the Grantee, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor. 
    The rights of the City enumerated herein shall not be exercised or construed in a manner which conflicts with the express terms and conditions of this franchise nor with the rules and regulations set forth by the Michigan Public Service Commission governing the provision of electric or gas service by Grantee. 
Section No. 10. - Vacation of rights-of-way and relocation of facilities. 
    The City has the right to vacate any public right-of-way within the City as well as any right to use same possessed by the Grantee, and/or the City may require the Grantee to relocate its lines and facilities at said Grantee's own expense when such vacation and/or relocation is made necessary to secure the public health and welfare or is otherwise required by the City in the exercise of a governmental function. 
Section No. 11. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
Section No. 12. - City of Swartz Creek jurisdiction. 
    The Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Grantor now in effect or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by the Grantee of any or its existing or future rights under state or federal law or a limitation upon the existing or future powers of the City pursuant to its charter or state or federal law. 
Section No. 13. - Michigan Public Service Commission. 
(A)  Jurisdiction. The Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission or its successors, applicable to electric service in the City, to the extent such Commission (or its successors) has such jurisdiction. 
(B)  Filing. The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with copies of all documents which the Grantee sends to the Michigan Public Service Commission and copies of all orders, decisions, or correspondence the Grantee receives from the Michigan Public Service Commission. The Grantee shall permit the Grantor to inspect and examine all records the Grantee is required to maintain or file under the rules and regulations of the Michigan Public Service Commission, relating to service under this Ordinance. 
Section No. 14. - Underground relocation. 
    If the Grantee has its facilities on above ground utility poles and the owner of said poles relocates its facilities to an underground conduit, the Grantee shall relocate its facilities in the same underground conduit. 
Section No. 15. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on March 30, 1998. It shall, however, cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract between said City and said Grantee. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 369, § 2, adopted November 25, 2002, amended the Code by adding provisions designated as App. B, Art. VI, to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 1. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of this Ordinance are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the City qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
Section 2. - Conflict. 
    Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
Section 3. - Terms defined. 
    The terms used in this Ordinance shall have the following meanings: 
    Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
    City means the City of Swartz Creek. 
    City Council means the City Council of the City of Swartz Creek or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the City Council. 
    City Manager means the City Manager or his or her designee. 
    Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this Ordinance to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities. 
    All other terms used in this Ordinance shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
    Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
    MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "Commission" in the Act. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
    Public right-of-way means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
    Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of Title III of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
    Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of Part I of the Communications Act of 1934, Chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this Ordinance only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(a)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(c)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
Section 4. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the City for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this Ordinance. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the City Clerk, one copy with the City Manager, and one copy with the City Attorney. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time non-refundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The City Manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the City Manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the City Manager. If the City and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the City, the City or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the City under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the City to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this Ordinance. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the City as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the City an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the Authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
Section 5. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the City Manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the City Manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under Section 4 of this Ordinance for access to a public right-of-way within the City. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the City Manager shall notify the MPSC when the City Manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The City Manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the City Manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the City Manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on Subsection (c) above, the City Manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
Section 6. - Construction/engineering permit. 
    A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the City without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit as required under Chapter 15 of this Code, as amended, for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
Section 7. - Conduit or utility poles. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this Ordinance does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
Section 8. - Route maps. 
    Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the City, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the City. The route maps should be in paper format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
Section 9. - Repair of damage. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the City, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
Section 10. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
    In addition to the non-refundable application fee paid to the City set forth in Subsection 4(d) above, a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the City's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the Authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
Section 11. - Modification of existing fees. 
    In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the City hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the Authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the City also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the City's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The City shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this chapter, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the City's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the City, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
Section 12. - Savings clause. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under Section 11 above shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
Section 13. - Use of funds. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the City from the Authority shall be used by the City solely for rights-of-way related purposes. In conformance with that requirement, all funds received by the City from the Authority shall be deposited into the Major Street Fund and/or the Local Street Fund maintained by the City under Act No. 51 of the Public Acts of 1951. 
Section 14. - Annual report. 
    Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the City Manager shall file an annual report with the Authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the Authority. 
Section 15. - Cable television operators. 
    Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the City shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
Section 16. - Existing rights. 
    Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this chapter shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the City may have under a permit issued by the City or under a contract between the City and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
Section 17. - Compliance. 
    The City hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this Ordinance is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The City shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in Section 4(c) of this Ordinance; 
(b)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with Section 4(f) of this Ordinance; 
(c)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with Section 4(g) of this Ordinance; 
(d)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the City, in accordance with Section 5(a) of this Ordinance; 
(e)  Notifying the MPSC when the City has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with Section 5(a) of this Ordinance; 
(f)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with Section 5(a) of this Ordinance; 
(g)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in Section 5(b) of this Ordinance; 
(h)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with Section 5(c) of this Ordinance; 
(i)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with Section 5(d) of this Ordinance; 
(j)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with Section 6 of this Ordinance; 
(k)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the City's right-of-way fees with a copy of this Ordinance, in accordance with Section 11 of this Ordinance; 
(l)  Submitting an annual report to the Authority, in accordance with Section 14 of this Ordinance; and 
(m)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with Section 15 of this Ordinance. 
Section 18. - Reservation of police powers. 
    Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this Ordinance shall not limit the City's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the City's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
Section 19. - Severability. 
    The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this Ordinance is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this Ordinance. 
Section 20. - Authorized City officials. 
    The City Manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized City official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this Ordinance as provided by the City Code of Ordinances. 
Section 21. - Municipal civil infraction. 
    A person who violates any provision of this Ordinance or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to Article II of Chapter 1 of this Code. Nothing in this Section 21 shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the City in the event of a violation by a person of this Ordinance or a permit. 
ARTICLE VII. - FIBER LINK, INC[4] 
ORDINANCE NO. 365 
An Ordinance granting to Fiber Link, Inc. the right, power and authority to supply fiber optic services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future utility lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek for a period of five years; to charge for those services; and to hold the City of Swartz Creek harmless from all claims arising from the granting of the franchise and the operations of the franchisees under this Franchise Agreement. 
THE CITY OF SWARTZ CREEK ORDAINS: 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 365, §§ 1-14, adopted April 8, 2002, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion herein as App. B, Art. VII, §§ 1-14, was the discretion of the editor. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Section 1. - Grant. 
(A)  The City of Swartz Creek, Genesee County, Michigan ("Grantor"), hereby grants to Fiber Link, Inc., its successors and assigns, ("Grantee"), the right, power and authority to market and/or supply fiber optic services to customers within the City of Swartz Creek through and over existing and/or future utility lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
(B)  The Grantor further grants to the Grantee the right, power, and authority to construct and/or maintain fiber optic equipment in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where such equipment is located entirely upon the customer's property; 
(2)  Where such construction is necessary to connect the Grantee's customers to facilities owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor and located within the corporate limits of the City of Swartz Creek. 
Section 2. - Term. 
    This franchise shall continue, unless revoked, for a term of five years. 
Section 3. - Consideration. 
    In consideration of the rights, power and authority hereby granted, the Grantee shall faithfully perform all things required by the terms hereof. 
Section 4. - Conditions. 
    The Grantee will not impair, obstruct or attempt to control any street, alley, bridge, highway, waterway or other public place. The Grantee shall at all times utilize the existing transmission lines and equipment owned and operated by an authorized public utility under a franchise with the Grantor, the terms and conditions of which as may be applicable are incorporated herein by reference, except as otherwise provided in Section 1(B). 
Section 5. - Hold harmless. 
    The Grantee shall at all times keep and save the City free and harmless from all loss, costs and expense to which it may be subject by reasons of the operations of the Grantee hereunder. In case any action is commenced against the City on account of the permission herein granted, said Grantee shall, upon notice, defend the City and save it free and harmless from all loss, cost and damage arising out of such negligent construction and maintenance. 
Section 6. - Franchise not inclusive. 
    The rights, powers and authority herein granted are not exclusive. 
Section 7. - Franchise fee. 
    The Grantee shall pay to the Grantor a franchise fee in the amount of $500.00. Said franchise fee shall be paid to the Grantor within 30 days from the adoption of this ordinance. 
Section 8. - Rights of the City. 
    As provided in Section 15.1 of the City Charter for the City of Swartz Creek, this franchise shall be subject to the right of the City: 
(1)  To repeal the same for misuse, or non-use, or for failure to comply with the provisions thereof; 
(2)  To require proper and adequate extension of plant and service maintenance thereof at the highest practical standard of efficiency; 
(3)  To establish reasonable standards of service and quality of products, and prevent unjust discrimination in service or rates; 
(4)  To require service in accordance with the terms of the franchise throughout the entire period thereof; 
(5)  To impose such other regulations as may be determined by the Council to be conductive to the safety, welfare, and accommodation of the public; 
(6)  To require the Grantee to permit joint use of its property and appurtenances located in the streets, alleys, and public places of the City by the City and other utilities insofar as such joint use may be reasonably practical and upon payment of reasonable rental therefor: Provided, that, in the absence of agreement, upon application by the Grantee, the Council shall provide for arbitration of the terms and conditions of such joint use and the compensation to be paid therefor. 
    The rights of the City enumerated herein shall not be exercised or construed in a manner which conflicts with the express terms and conditions of this franchise nor with the rules and regulations set forth by any state or federal body or board governing the provision of telecommunications services by Grantee. 
Section 9. - Vacation of rights-of-way and relocation of facilities. 
    The City has the right to vacate any public right-of-way within the City as well as any right to use same possessed by the Grantee, and/or the City may require the Grantee to relocate its lines and facilities at said Grantee's own expense when such vacation and/or relocation is made necessary to secure the public health and welfare or is otherwise required by the City in the exercise of a governmental function. 
Section 10. - Revocation. 
    The franchise granted by this Ordinance is subject to revocation upon 60 days written notice by the party desiring such revocation. 
Section 11. - City of Swartz Creek jurisdiction. 
    The Grantee shall be and remain subject to all ordinances, rules and regulations of the Grantor now in effect or which might subsequently be adopted for the regulation of land uses or for the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the public; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver by the Grantee of any or its existing or future rights under state or federal law or a limitation upon the existing or future powers of the City pursuant to its charter or state or federal law. 
Section 12. - State or federal regulatory agencies. 
(A)  Jurisdiction. The Grantee shall, as to all other conditions and elements of service not herein fixed, be subject to the reasonable rules and regulations of any state or federal body or board governing the provision of telecommunications services, to the extent such state or federal body or board (or its successors) has such jurisdiction. 
(B)  Filing. The Grantee shall provide the Grantor with copies of all documents which the Grantee sends to any state or federal body or board governing the provision of telecommunications services and copies of all orders, decisions, or correspondence to the Grantee receives from any state or federal body or board governing the provision of telecommunications services. The Grantee shall permit the Grantor to inspect and examine all records the Grantee is required to maintain or file under the rules and regulations of any state or federal body or board governing the provision of telecommunications services, relating to service under this Ordinance. 
Section 13. - Underground relocation. 
    If the Grantee has its facilities on above ground utility poles and the owner of said poles relocates its facilities to an underground conduit, the Grantee shall relocate its facilities in the same underground conduit. 
Section 14. - Effective date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect on April 28, 2002. It shall, however, cease and be of no effect after 30 days from its adoption unless within said period the Grantee shall accept the same in writing filed with the City Clerk. Upon acceptance and publication hereof, this Ordinance shall constitute a contract between said City and said Grantee. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DISTRIBUTED ANTENNA SYSTEMS AND SMALL CELL NETWORKS 

Section 1. - Franchise Required. 
    No person, entity or legal body shall install or operate any telecommunication facilities or related equipment for the provision of commercial mobile radio service carriers pursuant to a distributed antenna system or small cell network without a franchise agreement substantially in the form approved by Resolution No. ___, or subsequent replacement resolution, which rates established therein are hereby incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 438 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
Section 2. - Interpretation of this Article and Franchise Agreement. 
    It is the intent of the City Council in adopting this provision that all provisions in this Article and in the franchise agreement required by this article be construed to protect the peace, health, safety and welfare of the residents of Swartz Creek as well as the aesthetics of the City of Swartz Creek. Only reasonably inconspicuous telecommunication facilities and related equipment are to be permitted in the city right-of-way pursuant to the terms of any franchise agreement. The franchisee shall at all times take the required measures to use the most inconspicuous equipment reasonably feasible at the time of installation. Franchisee shall also remove and/or replace existing equipment in the future when less conspicuous equipment becomes reasonably feasible or when and if the number of antennas for the system is no longer reasonably necessary and reduction of the number of antennas becomes reasonably feasible. 
    Any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this Article shall remain in effect only to the extent the rates and regulations and other material provisions established in the franchise agreement and this Article remain in full force and effect. To the extent state or federal law makes unlawful and/or unenforceable any material provision of the franchise agreement required by this Article or any provision of this Article, the unlawful provisions are not severable and the franchise agreement shall terminate and be of no force and effect. To the extent authorized by law, under such circumstance, franchisee shall remove all such facilities placed in the city right-of-way pursuant to the franchise agreement unless the parties agree on a new franchise agreement that is compliant with the then-existing law. 
(Ord. No. 438 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
Section 3. - Franchise Nonexclusive and Revocable. 
    In accordance with the City Charter, any franchise authorized by this article shall be nonexclusive and shall be revocable at the will of the Council. 
(Ord. No. 438 , § 1, 12-3-18) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city used in the Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section Section 
this Code 5 3-14-60 1-3 13-21-13-23 8 4-11-60 1-3 12-1 17 10-24-60 1 18-23 3 18-23 19 2-13-61 1-22 14-1-14-22 21 8-28-61 1 10-161 2(a) 10-164 2(b) 10-162 2(c) 10-165 22 8-28-61 1, 2 9-1, 9-2 3(A)-(D) 9-3-9-6 4(A)-(D) 9-7 4(E) 9-8 28 11-12-62 12-1 33 7-8-63 1-5 10-326-10-330 38 12-30-63 1-4 15-101-15-104 5-9 15-76-15-80 10 15-105 11, 12 15-81, 15-82 39 9-14-64 1-3 6-46-6-48 49 3-16-66 1-10 App. B, Art. I 50 6-27-66 2-16 15-41-15-55 66 1-13-69 1-8 11-21-11-28 70 3-10-69 1-6 18-66-18-71 76 4-28-69 1-8 19-81-19-88 8.1 19-88 9-12 19-89-19-92 12.1-12.3 19-93-19-95 12.4, 12.5 19-97, 19-98 13 19-99 13.1, 13.2 19-100, 19-101 14 19-102 14.1, 14.2 19-103, 19-104 15-20 19-105-19-110 20.1 19-111 21-27 19-112-19-118 27.1, 27.2 19-119, 19-120 28-31 19-121-19-124 31.2, 31.3 19-125, 19-126 32.2, 32.3 19-127, 19-128 33 19-129 33.1 19-130 34.1 19-131 80 6-23-69 2 16-2 82 10-27-69 1-17 19-21-19-37 85 6-1-70 1-4 10-261-10-264 7, 8 10-265 87 11-2-70 1-4 13-1 90 4-12-71 1-6 7-1-7-6 8, 9 7-7, 7-8 97 6-5-72 1 13-1 98 6-26-72 19-93, 19-94 19-96 19-123 100 1-8-73 1 8-1 103 4-23-73 19-28 104 5-29-73 1-7 11-46-11-52 106 8-13-73 11-22, 11-23 109 8-26-74 3-11 2-401-2-409 110 9-3-74 19-121, 19-122 111 9-3-74 19-26 19-29, 19-30 113 10-21-74 App. A(note) 115 12-9-74 1 4-21 4 4-22 118 1-13-75 19-93 122 6-23-75 1, 2 2-274, 2-275 3 2-276, 2-277 4 2-275 5 2-278-2-280 123 6-23-75 1 8-1 129 9-13-76 1-3 10-306-10-308 130 3-4-77 1 10-163 138 1-23-78 App. A, § 1602 139 1-23-78 19-93 142 2-27-78 App. A, § 300 143 2-27-78 App. A, Art. XXIV (Dec. of Leg. Intent) App. A, §§ 2400-2402 146 4-3-78 App. A, Art. IX (Leg. Intent) App. A, Art. X (Leg. Intent) App. A, Art. XI (Leg. Intent) App. A, §§ 900-902 App. A, §§ 1000-1002 App. A, §§ 1100-1102 147 5-1-78 App. A, §§ 700-703 149 6-26-79 I 3-21 II-IV 3-22 V 3-23 VII, VIII 3-24 IX 3-25 X 3-26 150 3-26-79 1-7 19-56-19-62 153 8-6-79 App. A, § 1615 155 10-1-79 App. A, § 2500 App. A, §§ 2500.2-2500.10 App. A, §§ 2501-2504 158 1-14-80 1-4 6-21-6-24 6 6-25 160 2-4-80 1, 2 10-116, 10-117 161 2-4-80 1 10-137 162 2-4-80 1, 2 10-97 163 2-4-80 2 10-330 164 2-4-80 1 10-51 165  2- 4-80 1-3 10-26 166  2- 4-80 2(a) 10-164 2(b) 10-162 2(c) 10-165 168  5-12-80 App. A, § 1610 170  9- 8-80 2-8 17-21-17-27 175  3- 9-81 1-7 20-21-20-27 179  6- 8-81 1, 2 18-21, 18-22 4 18-23 180  7-27-81 II App. A, Art. II IV App. A, §§ 400, 401 V App. A, §§ 500, 501 VI App. A, §§ 600, 601 181  9- 8-81 1-3 2-21 186  4-26-82 App. A, Art. XXVIII (Dec. of Leg. Intent) App. A, 
§§ 2800-2802 187  4-26-82 App. A, Art. XXVI (Dec. of Leg. Intent) App. A, 
§§ 2600-2602 188 10-12-82 App. A, Art. XXVII (Dec. of Leg. Intent) App. A, 
§§ 2700-2702 191  1-10-83 1-3 17-1 192  3-28-83 1 18-23 193  4-11-83 1 18-23 194  4-25-83 2 19-28 195  7-11-83 1, 2 19-38 196  8-22-83 1 App. A, § 1904 197  9-12-83 1-5 18-91-18-95 199  9-26-83 1 App. A, § 1607 206  9-24-84 1 App. A, § 2603 213  7-22-85 1 18-23 214  9- 9-86 1 5-1 2.1-2.6 5-2-5-7 3.1, 3.2 5-8, 5-9 4.1 5-31 4.2, 4.3 5-32 4.4-4.9 5-33-5-38 5.1-5.11 5-61-5-71 217  3-10-86 1-3 10-211-10-213 218  3-10-86 1, 2 15-21, 15-22 219  5-27-86 App. A, § 1615 224 11-24-86 2 19-94 225 11-24-86 2, 3 19-96 226  2-23-87 2 19-28 227  4-15-87 1-31 App. B, Art. II 228  5-11-87 1 App. A, Art. XXVIII (Dec. of Leg. Intent) App. A, 
§§ 2800-2802 229  5-11-87 1 App. A, § 300 230  5-11-87 2 App. A, § 1610 231  6- 8-87 2 19-94 232  6- 8-87 2 19-96 238 10-26-87 1, 2 19-28 239 11-23-87 1-10 Ch. 3, Art. II, Div. 2(note) 241 12-14-87 1-7 Adopting Ordinance 243  1-11-88 1 App. A, § 1610, 2. 245  1-11-88 1 App. A, 
§§ 300, 1500 3 App. A, Art. XXIX, §§ 2900, 2901 249  5- 9-88 1 App. A, §§ 300, 1500(A) 2 App. A, Art. XXX, §§ 3000-3002 250  5- 9-88 1 App. A, §§ 300, 1500       Rpld App. A, Art. XXIX, §§ 2900, 2901 251  5- 9-88 1, 2 App. A, § 1500 footnote (b) 252  5- 9-88 1 App. A, § 1610 253  5- 9-88 1, 2 App. A, Art. II 254  5- 9-88 1 App. A, § 1500(A) 2       Rpld App. A, Art. XXVII, §§ 2700-2702       Added App. A, Art. XXVII, §§ 2700-2705 255  6-27-88 1 15-53(a) 259 12-27-88 2 19-94 3, 4 19-96, 19-97 262  6-12-89 1 10-140(a) 263  7-10-89 1 App. A, Art. IX, § 901C. 2 App. A, Art. X, § 1001F 3 App. A, Art. XI, § 1101J. 264  1- 8-90 1       Rpld 19-94, 19-96 2 19-94 3 19-96 265  1- 8-90 1       Rpld 10-265 2       Added 10-265 266  2-12-90 1 2-21 270  7-23-90 1 16-2(4) 2 16-3 271  8-13-90 1 19-26 272  8-27-90 1 2-22 273  9-10-90 1 App. A, § 900(C), (D) 2       Rpld App. A, § 901(B), (C) 3 App. A, § 1000(C), (F) 4       Rpld App. A, § 1001(F) 5 App. A, § 1100(A), (C) 6       Rpld App. A, § 1101(J) 7 App. A, § 1619 275 10- 9-90 1 App. A, § 701 2 App. A, § 702(A) 3 App. A, § 702(B)(4)d 276 10- 9-90 1       Added App. A, § 400(B)       Rltd App. A, § 400(B), (C)       as App. A, § 400(C), (D) 2       Rpld App. A, § 401(C) 277  1-14-91 2 19-28 278  1-28-91 1 19-26 280  3-25-91 1       Added 2-403(C)(2)       Rnmd 2-403(C)(2), (3)       as 2-403(C)(3), (4) 281  3-25-91 1 App. A, § 401(C) 2 App. A, § 501(C) 282  7- 8-91 1 12-2 283  8-26-91 1 12-2 285 12-23-91 1 18-23(5.15, 5.15a, 5.15b, 5.15c, 5.15d, 5.15f, 5.15g) 286  2-24-92 1 18-23(5.15b) 287  4-13-92 1 App. A, § 401 2 App. A, § 501 288  6- 8-92 1 18-23(5.82) 289  9-28-92 1 18-71 290  1-11-93 1       Rpld App. A, §§ 800-813 2       Added App. A, §§ 800-805 3 App. A, Art. II 4 App. A, § 300 5 App. A, § 1609(2)(e) 291  3-22-93 1 10-330 292  3-22-93 1       Added 18-23(5.16b) 296  7-26-93 1       Added 20-31, 20-32 297  8-23-93 1, 2       Added 18-1, 18-2 299  1-10-94 1, 2 19-28 300  1-10-94 2 App. A, § 801(B)(1), § 802(C), (D)(4) 301  5- 9-94 1 App. A, § 1904 303 10-24-94 1 18-23 (5.15, 5.15a, 5.15c) 305 12-12-94 1 19-29 2       Rnmd 19-30-19-38       as 19-31-19-39       Rnmd 19-56-19-62       as 19-57-19-63 3       Added 19-30 4       Rnmd 19-95-19-131       as 19-96-19-132 5       Added 19-95 307 1 19-27-19-31, 
19-37, 19-85, 
19-94, 19-95, 
19-97, 19-104, 
19-122, 19-123 2       Rpld 19-132 308  3-13-95 1 18-23 (5.15) 310 11-13-95 1       Added 2-601-2-603 313 11-13-95 1 2-404 314 11-13-95 1 Art. I (tit.) 2       Added 1-21-1-25 315 11-13-95 1 App. A, § 1809 2       Added App. A, § 1819 316 12- 4-95 1       Added 2-501-2-505 320  6-10-96 1       Added App. A, § 900 J. 321  9-26-96 1-12 App. B, Art. I 323 11-12-96 1 App. A, § 1700 324  1-13-97 1 App. A, § 1809 2 App. A, § 1819 325  2-24-97 1 App. B, Art. II, § 4 326  4-14-97 1       Dltd App. A, § 900 J. 328 10-27-97 1-15       Added App. B, Art. III 329 12-15-97 1       Added 2-23 330  1-12-98       Rpld App. A 331  3- 9-98 1-15       Added App. B, Art. IV 332  3- 9-98 1-15       Added App. B, Art. V 334  2-22-99 1 10-326(b) 2 10-330 335-B  3-22-99 1       Added 12-3 336  4-12-99 1       Added 10-142 337  4-12-99 1       Added 10-143 338  4-12-99 1 10-57 339  4-12-99 1       Added 10-217 340  4-12-99 1       Added 10-242 341  4-12-99 1       Added 10-119 344  9-13-99 1       Added 10-309 345  9-13-99 1       Added 18-23(5.62a) 2 18-23(5.15) 3       Added 18-23(5.15h) 346  9-13-99 1 10-238 347 11- 8-99 1       Rpld 9-6(1)(a) 2       Added 10-172 348 11- 8-99 1       Added 10-173 349 11- 8-99 1       Added 10-174 350 12- 3-99 1 19-30 2 19-95(a) 351  2-14-00 1       Rpld 2-401-2-409 2       Added 2-401-2-407 352  2-28-00 1       Added 10-218 357  7-10-00 1 11-26 358  7-10-00 1       Rpld 18-21-18-23 2       Added 18-21, 18-22 5       Added 18-23 359  7-10-00 1       Added 10-58 360  7-10-00 1 10-330 361 11-13-00 19-94 362  7- 9-01 1 19-28 2 19-30 3 19-31 363 10- 9-01 1 19-57-19-60 364  3-11-02 1 20-21-20-26 365  4- 8-02 1-14 App. B, Art. VII, §§ 1-14 366  4-22-02 1 10-58 367  7- 8-02 1 17-1 368  7-22-02 1 App. A, § 21.20 368A 12- 2-02 1 App. A, § 21.20 369 11-25-02 1 App. B(tit.) 2       Added Added App. B, Art. VI, §§ 1-21 370  3-10-02 1       Rpld 9-5 2 10-76 371  2-10-03 1 App. A, § 27.09 373  6-23-03 1 19-28 2 19-30 374  8-11-03 1 App. A, § 2.01 2 App. A, § 19.15 375  1-12-04 1 18-21 376  2-23-04 1       Added 15-401-15-409 377  3-22-04 1       Added 10-243 378  6-14-04 1 19-93 379 12-13-04 1 19-94 380  1-10-05 1 6-22 385  2-14-05 1 10-26 386  2-14-05 1       Added 10-175 387  2-14-05 1       Added 10-219 388  2-14-05 1 10-236 389  2-14-05 1       Added 10-244 390  2-14-05 1       Added 10-305 391  5-23-05 1 17-1 392 12-19-05 1 Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 1(tit.) 2       Added 6-31-6-40 393  2-13-06 1 10-326 2 10-328 3 10-329 4 10-330 394  2-27-06 1 10-243 395  8-15-06 1 App. A, §§ 1.00-1.07, 2.00-2.13, 3.00-3.04, 4.00-4.04, 5.00-5.04, 6.00-6.04, 7.00-7.04, 8.00-8.04, 10.00-10.05, 11.00-11.16, 12.00-12.05, 13.00-13.04, 14.00-14.04, 15.00-15.04, 16.00-16.04, 17.00-17.04, 18.00-18.11, 19.00-19.07, 20.00-20.09, 22.00-22.08, 23.00-23.12, 25.00-25.08, 26.00-26.06, 27.00-27.06, 28.00-28.08, 29.00-29.09, 30.00-30.09, 31.00-31.07, 32.00-32.15 396  8-14-06 App. A, Art. 21(note) 397  1-22-07 1       Added App. A, §§ 21.00-21.14 399  2-25-08 1-8 Adopting ordinance. p. vii 400  5-11-09 1 3-1 401  5-11-09 1 App. A, § 1.03 2       Added App. A, § 19.08 3 App. A, § 20.00 4       Rpld 4-23       Added App. A, § 20.10 5       Added App. A, §§ 20.11, 20.12 6 App. A, §§ 21.00-21.14 7 App. A, § 22.01 8 App. A, § 22.02 9       Amd App. A, §§ 29.07-29.09       Added App. A, §§ 29.10, 29.11 10 App. A, § 30.03 11       Added App. A, § 32.16 402  7-27-09 1       Added 1-26 403  7-27-09 1 Ch. 4, Art. II(tit.) 2       Added 4-23-4-26 406  2- 8-10 1       Rpld Art. II, Div. 1 
19-21-19-39 2       Added Art. II, Div. 1, 
19-21-19-32 407  5-24-11 1 App. A., § 2.07 2 App. A, § 14.02 R.1. 3 App. A, § 17.02 L.1. 4 App. A, § 30.09 (A)23.1, 23.2 5 App. A, § 30.09 (B)23.1 408  7-11-11 1       Rpld 19-81-19-132 2       Added 19-101.1, 19-101.2, 19-102.1-19-102.5, 19-103.1-19-103.5, 19-104.1-19-104.4, 19-105.1-19-105.17, 19-106.1-19-106.6, 19-107.1-19-107.16, 19-108.1-19-108.10, 19-109.1-19-109.10, 19-110.1-19-110.9, 19-111.1, 19-111.2, 19-112.1-19-112.4, 19-113.1, 19-114.1, 19-115.1, 19-115.2, 19-116.1-19-116.8, 19-117.1-19-117.14 19-118.1-19-118.6 Div. 19, Div. 20, 19-121.1-19-121.4, 19-222.1-19-122.4, 19-123.1 409  4-23-12 1 18-21 2 18-23 410  3-25-13 1       Rpld App. A, § 21.07 2 App. A, § 29.10 B. 411  3-24-14 1 13-22 2 13-23 412  3-10-14 1       Rpld 15-21, 15-22 2       Added 15-21 413  3-10-14 1       Added Art. III, 
4-31-4-33 414  4-28-14 1 12-1-12-10 415 11-10-14 1       Rpld Art. IV, 
15-401-15-409       Added 21-101-21-104, 21-201-21-208, 21-301-21-306, 21-401-21-404, 21-501-21-504, 21-601-21-607, 21-701-21-704, 21-801-21-807, 21-901-21-905 416 11-20-14 1       Added Art. IV, 
15-401-15-421 417 11-24-14 1       Rpld Art. III, 
11-46-11-52 2       Added Art. III, 
11-46, 11-47 418 11-24-14 1 18-71 419  1-26-15 1       Rpld 15-21(d) 2       Added 15-21(d) 420  6-22-15 1       Added 8-21-8-25 2       Rpld 10-192 421  7-13-15 1       Added 4-41-4-55 422 10-12-15 1 App. A, § 20.10 424 12- 7-15 1 6-22 425 12- 7-15 1 6-31-6-40 426 12-14-15 1 18-71 428  3-14-16 1 19-31(g) 429  3-14-16 1 19-102.4 430  8-22-16 1 3-1       Added 3-2 431 12-12-16 1 App. A, § 2.07 2       Rpld App. A, § 14.02 R.1. 3       Rpld App. A, § 17.02 L.1. 4       Rpld App. A, § 30.09 A.23.1, 23.2, B.23.1 433  8-13-18 1       Added 18-72 434 10- 8-18 1 App. A, § 2.08 2 App. A, § 2.09 3 App. A, § 13.01 4       Rpld App. A, § 13.02 E. 5 App. A, § 13.03 6       Added App. A, § 14.01 X. 7 App. A, § 26.02 A.1. 8       Added App. A, § 26.03 H. 9 App. A, § 26.04 10       Added App. A, § 20.00 G. 435 11-26-18 1 15-42(a) 2 15-104(a) 3 18-71 436 12- 3-18 1       Added 2-402(c) 437 12- 3-18 1       Added 2-631 438 12- 3-18 1       Added App. B, §§ 1-3  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - STATE CONSTITUTION 
This table shows the location within Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the State Constitution. 
Article Section Section 
this Code VII 22 Char.(note) Char., § 2.10 Char., Ch. 6(note) Char., § 2.10 24, 25 Char., Ch. 15(note) XI 1 Char., § 4.10 XVI 2 Char., § 4.3  
STATUTORY REFERENCE TABLE - MICHIGAN COMPILED LAWS 
    This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Michigan Compiled Laws. 
MCL Section 
this Code 8.3 et seq. 1-2 8.4 1-3 8.4a 1-3 8.6 1-2 15-231 et seq. Ch. 2 15.231 et seq. Char. § 2.1 Char. § 2.4 15.231-15.246 App. B, Art. VI, § 4 App. B, Art. VI, § 17 15.243(l)(g) App. A, § 30.09 15.261 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. II Ch. 2, Art. V Char. § 5.5 15.321 et seq. Char. § 13.4 15.341 et seq. Ch. 2 Ch. 2, Art. II-Ch. 2, Art. V 28.421 et seq. 5-69 Ch. 10, Art. VI, Div. 2 28.451 et seq. 8-24 29.1 et seq. Ch. 8 29.41 et seq. Ch. 8 35.441 Ch. 12 46.171 et seq. 19-101.2 46.401 et seq. Char. Ch. 2 Char. Ch. 14 117.1 et seq. Char. §§ 1.1-15.8 Char. Schedule § 14 117.3(1) Char. § 2.1 117.3(i) Char. § 9.6 Char. § 9.9 Char. § 9.12 Char. § 9.21 117.3(a) Char. § 4.1, 
Char. § 4.2 Char. § 5.1 Char. § 6.1 Char. § 9.7 117.3(b) Char. § 12.6 117.3(c) Char. Ch. 12 Char. § 12.3 117.3(d) Char. § 4.4 Char. § 5.3 117.3(e) Char. § 1.4 117.3(f) Char. § 9.2 117.3(g) Char. § 9.1 117.3(h) Char. § 8.5 117.3(j) Char. § 3.1 117.3(k) Char. Ch. 6 Char. § 6.3 117.3(l) Char. § 2.4 117.3(l), 117.3(m) Char. § 5.5 117.4i 1-8 Char. § 2.8 117.4i(3)-117.4i(5) Char. § 3.1 117.4i(6) Char. § 6.7 117.4i(7), 117.4i(8) Char. § 7.16, 
Char. § 7.17 117.4i(10) Char. § 6.4 117.4a Char. Ch. 10 Ch. 14 117.4a(1) Char. § 8.10, 
Char. § 8.11 117.4a(2) Char. § 8.10 117.4b Char. Ch. 10 Ch. 14 114.1B 19-114.B. 117.4c Char. Ch. 15 117.4d Char. Ch. 10 Char. § 10.1 117.4e(2) Char. § 3.1 117.4f Char. Ch. 15 117.4h(1)-117.4h(4) Char. § 3.1 117.4j(3) Char. § 3.1 117.5 Char. Ch. 10 Ch. 14 117.5(f) Char. § 13.3 117.5b 1-1 Char. § 6.3 117.5c Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 Char. § 5.3 117.5c(a) 2-274, 2-275 117.5c(a)-117.5c(d) 2-277-2-280 117.6 et seq. Char. Ch. 1 117.21 et seq. Char. § 2.10 117.32 Char. § 4.2 Char. § 11.4 123.51 et seq. Ch. 11 123.161 et seq. Char. § 15.4 125.31 et seq. Char. § 7.13 Ch. 13 125.32 Ch. 13, Art. II 125.71 et seq. Ch. 6 6-46 125.581 et seq. Char. § 7.14 125.601 et seq. Ch. 6 125.651 et seq. Ch. 6 125.901 et seq. Ch. 6 125.1401 et seq. Ch. 17, Art. II 17-21, 17-22 125.1415a(5) 17-25 125.1501 et seq. Ch. 4 4-21 125.1601 et seq. Ch. 6 125.1651 et seq. Ch. 6 6-21 6-23, 6-24 6-31 125.1665(2) 6-40 125.1665(3) 6-39 125.3101 et seq. 21-104(dd) 125.3801 et seq. 13-22 13-22 128.1 Ch. 5 129.12 Char. § 8.12 131.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 8 Char. § 8.10 141.101 et seq. 19-123 141.121 19-24(j) 19-31 168.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 12 Char. § 12.4 168.21 et seq. Char. § 12.10 168.491 et seq. Char. § 12.3 168.544a Char. § 12.6, 
Char. § 12.7 168.631 Char. § 12.2 168.639 Char. § 12.2 168.851, 168.852 Char. § 12.12 168.861 et seq. Char. § 12.11 211.1 et seq. Char. Ch. 9 Char. § 9.2 Char. § 9.21 4-54 Ch. 17 211.2 Char. § 9.4 211.7 et seq. Char. § 9.3 211.10 et seq. Char. § 9.4 211.24 et seq. Char. § 9.6 211.30a Char. § 9.11 211.43b Char. § 8.12 211.44 et seq. Char. § 9.16 211.47 Char. § 9.20 211.53 Char. § 10.4 211.501 Char. § 10.5 211.691 et seq. Char. § 9.5 211.741 et seq. 14-3 14-11 213.21-213.41 App. A, § 19.06 247.61 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 247.62 App. A, § 20.10(C)9. 247.241 et seq. Ch. 20 Ch. 18 257.1-257.923 18-21 257.328 18-2 257.605, 257.606 Ch. 18 257.606(1), (a) Ch. 18, Art. III 257.610 Ch. 18 257.626 18-91 257.626b 18-92 257.961 Ch. 18, Art. IV 280.1 et seq. 21-104(i) 287.261 et seq. Ch. 3, Art. II 287.290 Ch. 3 324.3101 et seq. 19-101.1(a)(1) . 19-110.6 324.11101 et seq. 19-101.2 19-108.6 19-114.1.B. 324.11701 et seq. 19-101.2 324.3101 et seq. 19-110.6.A. 19-101.1.A.1. 19-101.1.A.1. 333.2850 5-32 333.5111 Ch. 3, Art. II 333.7101 et seq. 10-241 335.301-335.367 10-174 336.11 et seq. Ch. 9 397.201 et seq. Char. § 7.12 400.271 et seq. Ch. 12 423.9f 10-163 436.1 et seq. 5-68 Ch. 10, Art. X 436.33 10-328 436.33a 10-330 436.33b 10-330 436.33b(3) 10-329 436.34 10-327 445.111 et seq. Ch. 12 445.371 et seq. Ch. 12 484.2102 App. B, Art. VI, § 3 484.2251 App. B, Art. VI, § 4 500.3101-500.3179 18-1, 18-2 560.101 et seq. Ch. 16 App. A, § 23.10 560.259 Ch. 16 560:101 et seq. 16-3 598.2 10-56 600.5813 Char. § 10.4 600.8395 18-66 600.8701 et seq. 1-26(a) 600.9921 Char. § 4.1 Char. Ch. 11 Char. § 12.1 691.201 et seq. Ch. 9 691.1401 et seq. Char. § 8.9 712A.1 et seq. 1-8 722.752, 722.753 10-307, 10-308 750.49 et seq. Ch. 3 750.81 et seq. 10-51 750.92 10-2 750.103 10-164 750.115 10-98 750.131 10-140 750.132-750.134 10-140 750.145 10-56 750.161 10-55 750.167 5-67 10-165 750.167(1)(a) 10-55 750.167(1)(b) 10-237 750.167(1)(c) 10-5 750.167(1)(d), (j) 10-239 750.167(1)(e) 10-167 750.167(1)(f) 10-164 750.167(1)(h) 10-3 750.167(1)(l) 10-168 750.169 et seq. 10-166 750.170 10-263, 10-264 750.183 et seq. 10-31-10-33 750.200 et seq. Ch. 8 750.215 10-28 750.217 10-27 750.218 10-141 750.222 et seq. 5-69 Ch. 10, Art. VI, Div. 2 750.224d 10-217 750.233 10-215 750.237 10-214 750.240 10-29 750.240 et seq. Ch. 8 750.243a 10-192 750.267 et seq. 10-4 750.291 et seq. 10-139 750.301 et seq. 10-238 750.335a 10-236 750.337 10-164 750.356 et seq. Ch. 10, Art. IV, Div. 4 10-137 750.377 et seq. 5-62-5-64 Ch. 10, Art. IV, Div. 3 10-261, 10-262 750.377a 10-116 750.380 10-117 750.390 10-54 750.394 10-191 750.411a 10-30 750.416 10-118 750.448 et seq. 10-237 750.459 10-240 750.479 10-26 750.493d 9-8 750.535 10-138 750.540e 10-53 750.546 et seq. 5-70 Ch. 10, Art. IV, Div. 2 750.552 10-97 752.21 10-6 752.541, 752.542 10-170, 10-171 752.543 10-169 752.901 10-76 752.901 et seq. 5-71 752.a863 10-216 764.9a et seq. Char. § 6.6 764.15a 10-58 767.39 10-1 801.116, 801.117 10-33  
