CODE OF ORDINANCES SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN 
____________ 
Published in 2003 by Order of the Township Board 
____________ 
 
OFFICIALS 
of 
SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP, MICHIGAN 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
George L. Olson 
Supervisor 
____________ 
Timothy J. Braun 
Clerk 
____________ 
William J. McQuillan 
Treasurer 
____________ 
Barbara Ewend 
Mark A. Schaeff 
Steven G. Gerhardt 
Richard T. Neiderquill 
Township Trustees 
____________ 
Ronald Lee 
Township Manager 
____________ 
Mark T. Mahlberg 
Township Attorney 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Timothy J. Braun 
Supervisor 
____________ 
Shirley M. Wazny 
Clerk 
____________ 
Steven G. Gerhardt 
Treasurer 
____________ 
Florence P. Connolly 
Lori L. Gorney 
James S. Kelly 
Jon R. Howell 
Township Trustees 
____________ 
Rob Grose 
Township Manager 
____________ 
Mark T. Mahlberg 
Township Attorney 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code, as supplemented through October 27, 1996, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the board of trustees. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1986 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Index 
The index has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and William B. Eddy, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to township staff for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the township readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the township's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. 2003. 
ORDINANCE NO. 642 
SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP 
SAGINAW COUNTY, MICHIGAN 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF SAGINAW; PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL BECOME EFFECTIVE. 
THE CHARTER TOWNSHIP OF SAGINAW, SAGINAW COUNTY, ORDAINS: 
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of Chapters 1 through 82, each inclusive, is adopted. 
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before October 14, 2002, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in Section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Except as otherwise provided, as to violations that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense and as to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. The penalty provided by this Section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such forfeiture is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the Township may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Township Board to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after October 14, 2002, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
Section 7. This Ordinance shall be published in the Township Times, a newspaper of general circulation within Saginaw Charter Township on May 14, 2003 and shall be effective immediately upon publication. 
Passed and adopted by the Saginaw Charter Township Board this 12 th day of May, 2003. 
	/s/   
      BY: George L. Olson, Supervisor 
 	 
	/s/   
      Timothy J. Braun, Clerk 
 	 
 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan." and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Saginaw Charter Township Code." 
State Law reference— Authority to codify ordinances, MCL 42.1, 42.20, 41.186.  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
The following definitions and rules of construction shall apply to this Code and to all ordinances and resolutions unless the context requires otherwise: 
Generally. When provisions conflict, the specific shall prevail over the general. All provisions shall be liberally construed so that the intent of the township board may be effectuated. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words, technical phrases and words and phrases that have acquired peculiar and appropriate meanings in law shall be construed according to such meanings. 
Code. The term "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any period or a fixed or final day is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period or day is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. 
Conjunctions. In a provision involving two or more items, conditions, provisions or events, which items, conditions, provisions or events are connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either…or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows: 
(1)  "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply. 
(2)  "Or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  "Either…or" indicates that the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events apply singly but not in combination. 
County. The term "county" means Saginaw County, Michigan. 
Delegation of authority. A provision that authorizes or requires a township officer or township employee to perform an act or make a decision authorizes such officer or employee to act or make a decision through subordinates. 
Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
Includes, including. The terms "includes" and "including" are terms of enlargement and not of limitation or exclusive enumeration, and the use of the terms does not create a presumption that components not expressed are excluded. 
Joint authority. A grant of authority to three or more persons as a public body confers the authority on a majority of the number of members as fixed by statute or ordinance. 
Manager, superintendent. The terms "manager" and "superintendent" are synonymous when referring to an official of the township. 
May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive and not mandatory. 
May not. The term "may not" states a prohibition. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
Oath, affirmation, sworn, affirmed. The term "oath" includes an affirmation in all cases where an affirmation may be substituted for an oath. In similar cases, the term "sworn" includes the term "affirmed." 
Officers, departments, etc. References to officers, departments, board, commissions or employees are to township officers, township departments, township boards, township commissions and township employees. 
Owner. The term "owner," as applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such property. With respect to special assessments, however, the owner shall be considered to be the person who appears on the assessment roll for the purpose of giving notice and billing. 
Person. The term "person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association, club, joint venture, estate, trust, governmental unit, and any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the individuals constituting such group or unit. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" means any property other than real property. 
Premises. The term "premises," as applied to real property, includes land and structures. 
Property. The term "property" means real and personal property. 
Public acts. References to public acts are references to the Public Acts of Michigan. (For example, a reference to Public Act No. 246 of 1945 is a reference to Act No. 246 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1945.) Any reference to a public act, whether by act number or by short title is a reference to such act as amended. 
Real property, real estate, land, lands. The term "real property" includes land, tenements and hereditaments. 
Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway, and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature, subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The term "state" means the State of Michigan. 
Street, highway or alley. The term "street" or "highway" means the entire width subject to an easement for a public right-of-way or owned in fee by the township, county or state, or every way or place, of whatever nature, whenever any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of public travel. The term "alley" means any such way or place providing a secondary means of ingress and egress from property. 
Swear. The term "swear" includes affirm. 
Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses. The future tense includes the present tense. 
Township. The term "township" means the Charter Township of Saginaw, Michigan or Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. 
Township board. The term "township board" means the township board of Saginaw Charter Township, Michigan. 
Week. The term "week" means seven consecutive days. 
Written. The term "written" includes any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures. 
Year. The term "year" means 12 consecutive months. 
State Law reference— Definitions and rules of construction applicable to state statutes, MCL 8.3 et seq.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes; references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and are not titles of such sections, or of any part of the section, nor unless expressly so provided shall they be so deemed when any such section, including the catchline, is amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parenthesis after sections in this Code have no legal effect and only indicate legislative history. Editor's notes, cross references and state law references that appear in this Code after sections or subsections or that otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of the code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  Unless specified otherwise, all references to chapters or sections are to chapters or sections of this Code. 
State Law reference— Catchlines in state statutes, MCL 8.4b.  
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  Unless specifically provided otherwise, the repeal of a repealing ordinance does not revive any repealed ordinance. 
(b)  The repeal or amendment of an ordinance does not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor does such repeal or amendment affect any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the amendment or repeal. 
State Law reference— Effect of repeal of state statutes, MCL 8.4 et seq.  
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of the Code and printed for inclusion in the Code. Portions of this Code repealed by subsequent ordinances may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. 
(b)  Amendments to provisions of this Code may be made with the following language: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Saginaw Charter Township Code is hereby amended to read as follows: …." 
(c)  If a new section, subdivision, division, article or chapter is to be added to the Code, the following language may be used: "Section (chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) of the Saginaw Charter Township Code is hereby created to read as follows: …." 
(d)  All provisions desired to repealed should be repealed specially by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as appropriate, or by setting out the repealed provisions in full in the repealing ordinance. 
State Law reference— Ordinance adoption procedures, MCL 42.20, 46.22.  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the township. A supplement to this Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in this Code. The pages of the supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into this Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete. The new pages shall be so prepared that when they have been inserted, this Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of this Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from this Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts or ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as necessary to do so in order to embody them into a unified code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Arrange the material into appropriate organizational units. 
(2)  Supply appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be included in this Code and make changes in any such catchlines, headings and titles or in any such catchlines, headings and titles already in this Code. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions and sections to be added to this Code. 
(4)  Where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing numbers assigned to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections. 
(5)  Change the words "this ordinance" or similar words to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," "this subdivision," "this section" or "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of this Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into this Code). 
(6)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of the ordinances inserted into this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-02.06)  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" means any of the following: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense, a municipal civil infraction, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is prohibited or is made or declared unlawful, an offense, a municipal civil infraction, a violation or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a township officer or township employee to perform an official duty unless it is specifically provided that the failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance, violations of this Code (including the zoning ordinance) are municipal civil infractions. Provisions of this Code declared to be a misdemeanor are not municipal civil infractions. The following provisions apply to municipal civil infraction. 
(1)  A person who violates any provision of this Code (including the zoning ordinance) that is a municipal civil infraction is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and is subject to a civil fine in accordance with the following schedule, with time periods determined from the date of the violation: 
Violation Within Three-Year Period 	Minimum 
Fine 	Maximum 
Fine 
First 	$ 50.00 	$500.00 
Second 	 125.00 	 500.00 
Third 	 250.00 	 500.00 
Fourth or subsequent 	 400.00 	 500.00 
 
(2)  Additionally, the person responsible for a municipal civil infraction shall pay costs. Such costs may include all direct or indirect expenses that the township has occurred in connection with the violation. In no case, however, shall costs of less than $9.00 or more than $500.00 be ordered. 
(d)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, however, that a violation of this Code that is a misdemeanor shall be punishable by imprisonment for not more than 93 days or a fine of not more than $500.00, or both, if the violation substantially corresponds to a violation of state law that is a misdemeanor for which the maximum period of imprisonment is 93 days. A person convicted of a misdemeanor violation of this Code is responsible for costs of prosecution. 
(e)  Except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance: 
(1)  As to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day that the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(2)  As to other violations, each violation constitutes a separate offense. 
(f)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent suspension or revocation of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(g)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent injunctive relief or civil or quasi-judicial enforcement. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1-01.03—1-01.05; Ord. No. 600, § 2-10.02, 9-27-1999) 
State Law reference— Penalty for ordinance violations, MCL 42.21.  
Sec. 1-8. - Severability. 
If any provision of this Code or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid or unconstitutional, the invalidity or unconstitutionality does not affect other provisions or application of this Code that can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this Code are severable. 
(Code 1986, § 1-01.07) 
State Law reference— Severability of state statutes, MCL 8.5.  
Sec. 1-9. - Provisions deemed continuation of existing ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as legislation previously adopted by the township relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions as to state statutes, MCL 8.3u.  
Sec. 1-10. - Code does not affect prior offenses or rights. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects any offense or act committed or done, any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code does not authorize any use or the continuation of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any township ordinance on the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-11. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code affects the validity of any ordinance or portion of an ordinance listed below. Such ordinances or portions of ordinances continue in full force and effect to the same extent as if published at length in this Code. 
(1)  Annexing property into the township or describing the corporate limits. 
(2)  Deannexing property or excluding property from the township. 
(3)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(4)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(5)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(6)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(7)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(8)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(9)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(10)  Dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(11)  Establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk. 
(12)  Dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision. 
(13)  Levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes. 
(14)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance, pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, the basic zoning ordinance, ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map and ordinances promulgating zoning text amendments. 
(15)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is temporary, although general in effect. 
(16)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance that is special, although permanent in effect. 
(17)  Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance the purpose of which has been accomplished. 
(Code 1986, § 1-01.02)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance making or approving any appropriation or budget saved from repeal, § 1-11(5); administration and operation of emergency services, § 26-33; administration and enforcement of floodplains, § 34-56 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 54; taxation, ch. 66; administration of bicycle regulations, § 74-32; utilities, ch. 78; administration and enforcement of sewers and sewage disposal, § 78-221 et seq.; administration of zoning regulations, app. A, § 2301 et seq. 
State Law reference— Charter townships, MCL 42.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TOWNSHIP BOARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Township board generally, MCL 42.5, 42.7 et seq. 
 
Secs. 2-31—2-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code saved from repeal, § 1-11(6); chief of the fire department, § 30-33; department personnel, § 30-34. 
 
Sec. 2-61. - Ordinance enforcement officer. 
(a)  Established. The office of township ordinance enforcement officer is hereby established. 
(b)  Appointment. The township board is hereby authorized to appoint by motion/resolution any person or persons to the office of ordinance enforcement officer for such term or terms as may be designated in such motion/resolution and for such compensation as the township board may determine. The township board may further, by motion/resolution, remove any person from such office, in the discretion of the township board. 
(c)  Authority. The ordinance enforcement officer is hereby authorized to enforce all ordinances of the township, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, and whether such ordinances specifically designate a different enforcing official or do not designate any particular enforcing officer. Where a particular officer is so designated in any ordinance that officer's authority shall continue in full force and effect and shall not be diminished or impaired by the terms of this section, and the authority of the ordinance enforcement officer shall be in addition and supplementary to the authority granted to such other specific officer. An ordinance enforcement officer shall in the performance of the officer's duties be subordinate and responsible to the township manager or such other person as the township board may from time to time designate. 
(d)  Duties. The ordinance enforcement officer's duties shall include the following: investigation of ordinance violations, issuing and serving ordinance violation notices, issuing and serving appearance tickets as authorized under section 9c of the Code of Criminal Procedure (MCL 764.9c), issuing and serving municipal ordinance violation notices and municipal civil infraction citations as authorized under chapter 87 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961, appearance in court or other judicial or quasi-judicial proceedings to assist in the prosecution of ordinance violators, and such other ordinance enforcing duties as may be delegated by the township board, township supervisor, or assigned by the township attorney. 
(Ord. No. 601, §§ 2-12.01—2-12.04, 9-27-1999)  
Secs. 2-62—2-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-91. - Annuity or pension program established. 
(a)  Plan created. The township hereby creates and establishes an annuity or pension plan and program for the pensioning of its officers and employees. 
(b)  Contract authorized. For such purposes, the township also hereby authorizes the township supervisor and the township clerk to contract, in the name of the township board, with any company authorized to transact such business within the state for annuities or pensions. 
(Code 1986, § 2-03.02)  
Sec. 2-92. - Coverage. 
(a)  Officers and employees. The annuity or pension plans created, established and contracted for under this article shall cover each person within the following class of officers and employees: 
(1)  Board members. All members of the township board. 
(2)  Regular township employees. All township employees who are employed for 32 or more hours per week on a regular basis. 
(b)  Effective dates. 
(1)  Current employees. Each employee who is employed on the effective date of the annuity or pension plan shall be eligible for coverage on that day provided he then meets the following requirements; otherwise, to be eligible on the first policy anniversary on which he meets them: 
a.  The employee has completed at least four months of continuous employment; 
b.  The employee's age (nearest birthday) is at least 18 years. 
(2)  New employees. Every employee who becomes subsequently employed shall be eligible when he meets the following requirements: 
a.  On the first policy anniversary on which he completed at least four months of continuous employment; or if a member of the Police Officers Association of Michigan or Command Officers Association of Michigan, on their date of employment. 
b.  The employee's age (nearest birthday) is at least 18 years. 
(c)  Self-exclusion. Any person desiring not to be so covered shall give written notice to the township clerk that he desires not to be covered, and 
(1)  Notice prior to effective date. If the notice is received before the person has become covered under the contract, he shall not be covered thereunder. 
(2)  Notice after effective date. If the notice is received after the individual has become covered, his coverage under the contract shall cease as provided for in the contract. 
(Code 1986, §§ 2-03.03.01, 2-03.03.02, 2-03.03.04; Ord. No. 607, 1-28-2000)  
Sec. 2-93. - Normal retirement date. 
An employee's normal retirement date shall be the policy anniversary of the annuity or pension plan nearest his birthday. 
(Code 1986, § 2-03.03.03)  
Sec. 2-94. - Premium contributions. 
(a)  Township portion. The township shall monthly contribute a percentage of that portion of the premium or charges arising under such annuity or pension contract for each person within the class of officers and employees enumerated in section 2-92. 
(1)  Variable percentage subject to agreement. Such percentage may vary between classes of employees and shall be subject to any labor-management agreement entered into between the township and a class of employees. 
(2)  Established by board resolution. The township, by resolution, may hereafter establish the percentage contribution of the township. 
(3)  Allocated to appropriate funds. Such contributions shall be allocated to the various appropriate funds of the township as determined by the township board. 
(b)  Employee portion. Each person within such class of officers and employees shall be responsible for the remainder of the premium or charges and the township clerk is hereby authorized to deduct the premium or charges from each person's pay, salary or compensation and apply the pay, salary or compensation to such person's responsibility. 
(Code 1986, § 2-03.04)  
Secs. 2-95—2-110. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ANNUITY OR PENSION PLAN[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Retirement systems, MCL 42.1, 41.110b. 
 
Sec. 2-111. - Ratification of existing pension plans. 
All existing pension plans are ratified and confirmed. 
(Code 1986, § 2-03.05)  
Secs. 2-112—2-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GROUP INSURANCE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Insurance coverage, MCL 41.110b. 
 
Sec. 2-131. - Group insurance plans established. 
(a)  Plans created. The township hereby creates and establishes: 
(1)  A group insurance plan covering health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expenses for its officers and employees and their dependents; and 
(2)  A group life and accident insurance plan for its officers and employees. 
(b)  Contracts authorized. For such purposes the township board hereby authorizes the township supervisor and the township clerk to contract, in the name of the township, subject to approval of the township board, with any company or companies authorized to transact such business within the state for such group insurance policies. 
(Code 1986, § 2-04.02)  
Sec. 2-132. - Group insurance contracts. 
(a)  Types. Insurance for township officers and employees is of two types described as follows: 
(1)  Group health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense insurance. 
(2)  Group life and accident insurance. 
(b)  Contracted separately. The two types of group insurance described above shall be contracted separately. 
(Code 1986, §§ 2-04.03.01, 2-04.03.02)  
Sec. 2-133. - Coverage. 
(a)  Township board and permanent employees. Both plans created, established and contracted for under this division shall cover all members of the township board and all permanent employees who are employed for more than 30 hours per week on a regular basis. 
(b)  Dependents. In addition, the group health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense insurance plan shall also cover dependents of members of the township board and employees who are enrolled in this plan. 
(c)  Self-exclusion. Any person desiring not to be so covered shall give written notice to the township clerk that he desires not to be insured or covered, and 
(1)  Notice prior to effective date. If the notice is received before the person has become insured or covered under the contract, he shall not be covered thereunder. 
(2)  Notice after effective date. If the notice is received after the individual has become insured or covered, his coverage under the contract shall cease as provided for in the contract. 
(Code 1986, §§ 2-04.03.03, 2-04.04.02)  
Sec. 2-134. - Premium contributions. 
The township shall monthly contribute 100 percentum of the premium and any related charges arising under group insurance contracts described in section 2-132. Such township contribution shall be secured from the general fund of the township which may be reimbursed from other funds in the same proportion as wages are paid from the same funds. 
(Code 1986, § 2-04.04.01)  
Sec. 2-135. - Ratification of existing insurance plans. 
The township hereby ratifies and confirms the validity of any life, health, hospitalization, medical and surgical service and expense or life and accident insurance in existence on the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived. 
(Code 1986, § 2-04.05)  
Secs. 2-136—2-160. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENTS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department, § 30-31 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-161—2-175. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to establish and regulate police force, MCL 42.12. 
 
Sec. 2-176. - Created and established. 
There is hereby created and established the township police department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-09.02)  
Sec. 2-177. - Powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
(a)  Police services. The township police department shall perform all of the duties and responsibilities of a municipal police department as permitted under the statutes of the state. 
(b)  Other additional lawfully imposed. The township police department shall also have such other additional powers, duties, and responsibilities as may be lawfully imposed upon it by any administrative directive, resolution of the township board, rule, Code provision or other provision of law. 
(c)  Enforce Code provisions and laws. The township police department shall have full power and authority to enforce all township Code provisions and state laws pertaining to the proper execution and administration of all township Code provisions, state laws, and adopted codes pertaining to the duties and responsibilities described in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2-09.03)  
Sec. 2-178. - Chief of the police department. 
(a)  Administrative head of police department. The duties and responsibilities of the township police department shall be directed and administered by a chief of the police department. 
(b)  Department members subject to his orders. Every employee or member of the township police department shall be subject to the orders at any time of the chief of the police department. 
(c)  Appointment. The chief of the police department shall be appointed by the township manager, with the consent of the township board. 
(d)  Qualifications. The chief of the police department shall possess a broad range of knowledge and experience in the operations of a municipal police department, subject to the other requirements and qualifications shown on the police chief's job description. 
(e)  Designation of acting chief. The police chief may designate an acting chief in his absence, subject to the approval of the township manager. 
(f)  Establish rules and regulations. The chief of the police department shall from time to time make and establish such rules and regulations as are necessary for the governing and operation of the police department, and for the care and management of the motor vehicles, equipment, property and buildings pertaining thereto as shall be necessary for the proper and efficient operation and maintenance of the police department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-09.04)  
Sec. 2-179. - Department personnel. 
(a)  Composition. The township police department shall be composed of such other personnel, full-time or part-time, as may be required and determined by the township board for the proper and efficient operation and maintenance of the police department. 
(b)  Appointing authority. The personnel of the department shall be appointed by the township manager, upon recommendation of the police chief. 
(c)  Qualifications required. Any of the police department's personnel engaged in police work shall: 
(1)  Meet the minimum employment standards as required under Public Act No. 203 of 1965 (MCL 28.601 et seq.); and 
(2)  In all other respects be qualified under the laws of the state to engage in police work. 
(d)  Duties. 
(1)  Deputized by county sheriff. All personnel engaged in police work shall be deputized, whenever possible, by the county sheriff; and 
(2)  Cooperate with other police agencies. All personnel engage in police work shall cooperate with the county sheriff's department, the state police, and any other duly constituted police agency for the purpose of prevention and discovery of crimes and the apprehension of criminals. 
(Code 1986, § 2-09.05) 
State Law reference— Minimum employment standards, MCL 28.609.  
Secs. 2-180—2-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement saved from repeal, § 1-11(4); taxation, ch. 66. 
State Law reference— Revised Municipal Finance Act, MCL 141.2101 et seq.; Uniform Budgeting and Accounting Act, MCL 141.421 et seq.; budgets generally, MCL 42.24 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Fiscal year established. 
The fiscal year of the township shall extend from April 1 of each year until March 31 of the following year. 
(Code 1986, § 1-05.02) 
State Law reference— Fiscal year, MCL 42.25.  
Secs. 2-212—2-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL CIVIL INFRACTIONS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal civil infractions, MCL 600.8701 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-241. - Failure to appear; penalty. 
A person served with a municipal civil infraction citation who fails to appear within the time specified in the citation or at the time specified in the citation or at the time scheduled for a hearing or appearance is guilty of a misdemeanor. Failure to appear will also result in the entry of a default judgment on the civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 600, § 2-10.03, 9-27-1999) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 600.8723, 600.8727(9).  
Secs. 2-242—2-260. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL ORDINANCE VIOLATION NOTICES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal ordinance violation notices, MCL 600.8707(6). 
 
Sec. 2-261. - Availability of other enforcement options. 
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to require the township to initiate its municipal civil infraction ordinance enforcement activity through the issuance of an ordinance violation notice. As to each ordinance violation designated as a municipal civil infraction the township may, at its sole discretion, proceed directly with the issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation or take such other enforcement action as is authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 602, §§ 2-11.07, 2-11.08, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 2-262. - Municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Establishment. The municipal ordinance violations bureau is hereby established pursuant to section 8396 of the Revised Judicature Act of 1961 (MCL 600.8396) for the purpose of accepting admissions of responsibility for ordinance violations designated as municipal civil infractions, and to collect and retain civil fines/costs for such violations as prescribed in this division. 
(b)  Location. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall be located at the township hall/office or such other location in the township as may be designated by the township board. 
(c)  Personnel. All personnel of the municipal ordinance violations bureau shall be township employees. The township board may by resolution designate a municipal ordinance violations bureau clerk with the duties prescribed in this division and as otherwise may be delegated by the township board. 
(d)  Authority. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall only have authority to accept admissions of responsibility (without explanation) for municipal civil infractions for which a municipal ordinance violations notice (as compared to a citation) has been issued and served, and to collect and retain the scheduled civil fines/costs for such violations specified pursuant to this division or other applicable ordinance. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall not accept payment of fines/costs form any person who denies having committed the alleged violation or who admits responsibility only with explanation. The municipal ordinance violations bureau shall not determine or attempt to determine the truth or falsity of any fact or matter relating to an alleged ordinance violation. 
(e)  Records and accounting. The municipal ordinance violations bureau clerk or other designated township official/employee shall retain a copy of all municipal ordinance violation notices, and shall account to the township board once a month or at such other intervals as the township board may require concerning the number of admissions and denials of responsibility for ordinance violations within the jurisdiction of the municipal ordinance violations bureau and the amount of fines/costs collected shall be delivered to the township treasurer at such intervals as the treasurer shall require, and shall be deposited in the general fund of the township. 
(Ord. No. 602, §§ 2-11.02, 2-11.03, 2-11.06, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 2-263. - Ordinance violation notice requirements admission/denial of responsibility. 
(a)  Ordinance violation notice requirements. Municipal civil infraction violation notices shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as provided by law. A municipal ordinance violation notice shall include, at a minimum, all of the following: 
(1)  The violation; 
(2)  The time within which the person must contact the municipal ordinance violations bureau for purposes of admitting or denying responsibility for the violation; 
(3)  The amount of the scheduled fines/costs for the violation; 
(4)  The methods by which the violation may be admitted or denied; 
(5)  The consequences of failing to pay the required fines/costs or contact the municipal ordinance violations bureau within the required time; 
(6)  The address and telephone number of the municipal ordinance violations bureau; 
(7)  The days and hours that the municipal ordinance violations bureau is open. 
(b)  Denial of responsibility. Where a person fails to admit responsibility (without explanation) for a violation within the jurisdiction of the municipal ordinance violations bureau and pay the required civil fines/costs within the designated time period, the municipal ordinance violations bureau clerk or other designated township employee shall advise the complainant to issue and file a municipal civil infraction citation for such violation with the court having jurisdiction of the matter. The citation filed with the court shall consist of a sworn complaint containing, at a minimum, the allegations stated in the municipal ordinance violation notice and shall fairly inform the alleged violator how to respond to the citation. A copy of the citation may be served by first class mail upon the alleged violator at the alleged violator's last known address. The citation shall thereafter be processed in the manner required by law. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 2-11.04, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 2-264. - Schedule of civil fines/costs payable to municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(a)  Unless a different schedule of civil fines is provided for by an applicable ordinance, the civil fines payable to the municipal ordinance violations bureau upon admissions of responsibility by persons served with municipal ordinance violation notices shall be as, from time to time, established by resolution not, in any one case, to exceed a fine of $500.00. 
(b)  In addition, to the above-prescribed civil fines, costs in this amount of $10.00 may be assessed by the municipal ordinance violations bureau if the fine and costs are paid within ten days of the date of service of the municipal ordinance violation notice. Otherwise, costs of $20.00 may be assessed by the municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(Ord. No. 602, § 2-11.05, 9-27-1999; Ord. No. 706, 5-11-2009)  
Secs. 2-265—2-290. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[11] 
Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Cross reference— Construction board of appeals established, § 14-32; cablecasting commission, § 70-32; board of zoning appeals, app. A, § 2304. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-291—2-305. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LOCAL OFFICIALS COMPENSATION COMMISSION[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
State Law reference— Local officials compensation commission, MCL 42.6a. 
 
Sec. 2-306. - Established. 
A local officials compensation commission is created. 
(Code 1986, § 2-05.01)  
Sec. 2-307. - Membership. 
(a)  The local officials compensation commission shall consist of five members who are registered electors of the township, to be appointed by the township supervisor subject to confirmation by a majority of the members elected and serving on the township board. 
(b)  An officer or employee of any government agency or unit or member of the immediate family of such an officer or employee shall not be eligible to be appointed to the local officials compensation commission. 
(c)  The terms of office of members of the local officials compensation commission shall be five years. 
(d)  Members of the local officials compensation commission shall be appointed before October 1 of the year of appointment. 
(e)  The members of the local officials compensation commission shall receive no compensation, but shall be entitled to actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(f)  Vacancies in the membership of the local officials compensation commission shall be filled for the remainder of an unexpired term. 
(Code 1986, § 2-05.02.01—2-05.02.05, 2-05.02.07)  
Sec. 2-308. - Officers. 
The local officials compensation commission shall elect a chair from among its members. 
(Code 1986, § 2-05.02.06)  
Sec. 2-309. - Proceedings. 
(a)  Session days defined. The term "session days" means any calendar day on which the local officials compensation commission meets and a quorum is present. 
(b)  Total sessions. The local officials compensation commission shall meet for not more than 15 session days in 1975 and every odd numbered year thereafter and shall make its determination within 45 calendar days of its first meeting. 
(c)  Quorum required. Any majority of the members of the local officials compensation commission constitutes a quorum for conducting the business of the commission. 
(d)  Majority concurrence required. The local officials compensation commission shall take no action or make determinations without a concurrence of a majority of the members appointed and serving on the commission. 
(Code 1986, § 2-05.03)  
Sec. 2-310. - Salary determinations. 
(a)  Become effective unless rejected. The local officials compensation commission shall determine the salaries of the township elected officials which determination shall be the salaries unless the township board by resolution adopted by two-thirds of the members elected to and serving on the township board rejects the determinations. 
(b)  Effective date. The determination of the local officials compensation commission shall be effective 30 days following their filing with the township clerk unless rejected by the township board. 
(c)  Rejection. In case of rejection, the existing salary shall prevail. 
(d)  Expense allowances. Any expense allowance or reimbursement paid to elected officials in addition to salary shall be for expenses incurred in the course of township business and accounted for to the township. 
(Code 1986, § 2-05.04)  
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; public intoxication, § 38-155; public consumption of alcohol, § 38-184. 
State Law reference— Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998, MCL 436.1101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Nonlimitation. 
This chapter shall not operate in limitation of any power or authority vested in the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.06.03)  
Sec. 6-2. - Waivers or variances. 
In cases of unusual circumstances or unnecessary hardships, the township board may grant a variance or waive the specific provisions of this chapter as it deems necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.06.02)  
Sec. 6-3. - Inspections. 
(a)  Authority. Inspectors shall have the right to inspect any place in the township where alcoholic liquor is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed or transported or where the inspector suspects the alcoholic liquor is being thus manufactured, sold, offered for sale, kept for sale, possessed, or transported. 
(b)  Identification. All inspectors shall carry appropriate identification and shall present such identification when requested. 
(c)  Reports. Whenever possible, all inspection reports shall be made on liquor law enforcement inspection forms furnished by the state liquor control commission or on similar forms otherwise obtained by the township liquor control enforcement department. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.05)  
Sec. 6-4. - Compliance with liquor control act. 
All alcoholic liquor traffic, including among other things, the manufacture, sale, offer for sale, storage for sale, possession and/or transportation thereof within the township, shall comply with the provisions of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1101 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.02)  
Sec. 6-5. - Alcohol offenses. 
Sections 701—915 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1701—436.1915) relating to minors and intoxicated persons are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 2(d), 4-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Adoption of statutes by reference, MCL 42.23.  
Secs. 6-6—6-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE APPROVAL, TRANSFER OR REVOCATION RECOMMENDATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— License approval, transfer, etc., recommendations, MCL 436.1501. 
 
Sec. 6-31. - Definition. 
In this article the term "license" means a state license to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises, or any other liquor license for which local approval is required. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 6-32. - Applications. 
(a)  All applications for licenses and for the transfer of licenses shall comply with the following provisions: 
(1)  With site plan review provisions. All applications for a license or a transfer of an existing license shall comply with the provisions of site plan review as provided by the township planning commission. 
(2)  Accompanied by documents or assurances. The application shall be accompanied by all necessary documents evidencing compliance or provide assurances for future compliance with all requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  Applications for license to sell beer and wine or spirits shall be made to the township board in writing signed by the applicant, if an individual, or by a duly authorized agent thereof, if a partnership or corporation, verified by oath or affidavit, and shall contain the following statements and information: 
(1)  The name, age, and address of the applicant in the case of an individual; or in the case of a co-partnership, the persons entitled to share in the profits thereof; in the case of a corporation, the objects for which organized, the names and addresses of the officers and directors, and, if a majority interest in the stock of such corporation is owned by one person or his nominee, the name and address of such person. 
(2)  The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and, if a naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization. 
(3)  The character of business of the applicant, and, in the case of a corporation, the object for which it was formed. 
(4)  The length of time such applicant has been in business of that character, or, in the case of a corporation, the date when its charter was issued. 
(5)  The location and description of the premises or place of business which is to be operated under such license. 
(6)  A statement whether applicant has made application for a similar or other license on premises other than described in this application, and the disposition of such application. 
(7)  A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in this chapter or the laws of the state. 
(8)  A statement that the applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state or of the United States or any ordinances of the township in the conduct of its business. 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by building and plat plans showing the entire structure where the license is to be utilized. The plans shall demonstrate adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities and where appropriate, adequate plans for screening, and noise control. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-01.03.01, 7-01.03.02)  
Sec. 6-33. - Criteria for application consideration. 
The township board shall consider among other factors, the following criteria when considering new applications for a new on premises liquor license or transfers of location of existing on premises liquor licenses: 
(1)  Need for class C liquor license in area requested; 
(2)  Residency of business and resident applicants; 
(3)  Anticipated increase in township's real and personal property tax base; 
(4)  New jobs added to local economy; 
(5)  Attractiveness of buildings, furnishings, landscaping, etc.; 
(6)  Anticipated positive impact in area requested; 
(7)  Past conformance to local/state laws and regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.03)  
Sec. 6-34. - Tentative approval. 
The township board may issue a tentative approval upon a determination that all requirements of this chapter plus any modification deemed necessary as provided above will be complied with. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.04)  
Sec. 6-35. - Final recommendation. 
(a)  After investigation. Tentative approval shall result in the final recommendations to the township board of issuance of a liquor license if and when the township police, township code enforcement officer, township building department, township manager, township director of public services, and township fire chief have finalized their reviews and presented their recommendations. 
(b)  Forwarded to liquor control commission. A copy of the resolution granting the township's final approval or disapproval shall be sent to the state liquor control commission for final action. 
(c)  Lapse of tentative approval. Tentative approval lapses if final approval is not achieved within six months of the date of tentative approval unless extended by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.05)  
Sec. 6-36. - Basis for disapproval. 
Approval of a license shall not be recommended for: 
(1)  A person whose license, under this chapter, has been revoked for cause; 
(2)  A person who, at the time of application or renewal of any license issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first application; 
(3)  A co-partnership, unless all of the members of such co-partnership shall qualify to obtain a license; 
(4)  A corporation, if any officer, manager, or director thereof, or a stock owner or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license hereunder for any reason; 
(5)  A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent unless such manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required of the license; 
(6)  A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor; 
(7)  A person who does not own the premises for which a license is sought or does not have a lease therefor for the full period for which the license is issued; 
(8)  Any law enforcing public official or any member of the township board, and no such official shall be interested in any way either directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic liquor; 
(9)  For premises where there exists a violation of the applicable construction or fire codes, applicable zoning regulations, or applicable public health regulations; 
(10)  For any premises unless the sale of beer, wine, or spirits is shown to be incidental and subordinate to other permitted business uses upon the site, such as, but not limited to, food sales, motel operations, or recreational activities; 
(11)  For premises where it is determined by a majority of the township board that the premises do not or will not reasonably soon after commencement of operations have adequate off-street parking, lighting, refuse disposal facilities, screening, noise, or nuisance control. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.06)  
Sec. 6-37. - Application fees. 
(a)  Preliminary request. All applicants shall make a preliminary request for a license. Request for a new liquor license shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $100.00. 
(b)  Final application. Upon receipt of recommendations by all the departments listed in subsection 6-35(a), the applicant may file a final application. This application shall be accompanied by a $750.00 fee for a class C resort-type, hotel, or any other license for consumption on premises or a $175.00 fee for a SDM and SDD license. 
(c)  Reimbursement for expenses. The township treasurer shall give a receipt evidencing payment of such an amount as required, which sum shall be deemed to reimburse the township for all expenses related to the review and processing of such application. 
(d)  Nonrefundable. All fees collected are nonrefundable. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.07)  
Sec. 6-38. - Annual review. 
The township supervisor shall cause an annual review of each license. 
(1)  Conducted by township departments. The annual review will be conducted by the department heads of each department listed in subsection 6-35(a), to review each license prior to February 15 of each year. 
(2)  Results transmitted to township board. This review with recommendations shall be transmitted to the township board no later than February 28 of each year for their consideration. 
(3)  Compliance. All applicants and licenses shall comply with all statutes, township Code provisions, and rules and regulations of the liquor control commission as regulated by law including the state, county and township. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.08)  
Sec. 6-39. - Objections to renewal or revocation. 
(a)  Hearing. Before filing an objection to renewal or request for revocation of a license with the state liquor control commission, the township board shall serve the license holder, by first class mail, mailed not less than ten days prior to hearing with notice of a hearing, which notice shall contain the following: 
(1)  Notice of proposed action; 
(2)  Reasons for the proposed action; 
(3)  Date, time and place of hearing; 
(4)  A statement that the licensee may present evidence and testimony and confront adverse witnesses. 
(b)  Criteria. The township board shall recommend nonrenewal or revocation of a license upon a determination by it that based upon a preponderance of the evidence presented at hearing either of the following exist: 
(1)  Violation of any part of the restrictions on licenses set forth in section 6-36; or 
(2)  Maintenance of a nuisance upon the premises. 
(c)  Township board determination in writing. Following hearing, the township board shall submit to the license holder and the liquor control commission a written statement of its findings and determination. 
(Code 1986, § 7-01.03.09)  
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26. 
State Law reference— Crimes relating to animals, MCL 750.49 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 10-1—10-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOG CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Dog Law of 1919, MCL 287.261 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dog pound means the facilities as provided by the county. 
Dog warden means the county dog warden and/or his agents or employees. 
Owner means, when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, every person having a right of property in such dog, and every person who permits such dog to remain on or about any premises occupied by him. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 10-32. - Violations. 
Any person who has knowledge of facts that constitute a violation of this article may upon sworn complaint to any district court judge, request that a summons be issued to show cause why such dog should not be impounded by the dog warden. The judge may upon such hearing either order the dog impounded by the dog warden or confined to the premises of the owner. If the owner disobeys such an order, he shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.08)  
Sec. 10-33. - Impoundment. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the dog warden or any police officer to seize and impound any dog found anywhere in the township contrary to the provisions of the article. Any dog seized by other than the dog warden shall forthwith be delivered to him for disposition. 
(b)  No dog so impounded shall be released to its owner or other authorized person without payment of the fee as provided for its care and maintenance and without procuring a license as provided in this article. 
(c)  The dog warden may, within 72 hours after impounding any dog: 
(1)  Destroy such animal; or 
(2)  If it is deemed valuable, sell it to the highest bidder at public auction to be held at noon next succeeding such 72 hours. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.06)  
Sec. 10-34. - License. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, maintain, keep or harbor any dog within the township limits without first obtaining a license therefor as provided for by the Dog Law of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.), and the regulations or orders of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.04) 
State Law reference— Dog licenses, MCL 287.262 et seq.  
Sec. 10-35. - Running at large. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any dog to run at large upon the public streets, walks, parks, or other public places within the township unless such dog shall be attached to a leash of sufficient strength to retain such dog in such manner as to be kept under the control of the person accompanying it. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person having the possession, care, custody or control thereof, to permit any dog to stray beyond his premises unless under reasonable control of some person or when engaged in lawful hunting, accompanied by his owner or custodian. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any female dog to permit such dog off the premises of the owner or custodian when in heat unless the dog is under control and attached to a leash. 
(Code 1986, §§ 8-06.05.01, 8-06.05.03, 8-06.05.06)  
Sec. 10-36. - Vicious dogs. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit a vicious, fierce or dangerous dog to go unconfined and unrestricted on such person's premises, or to run at large. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.05.05) 
State Law reference— Dangerous animals, MCL 287.321 et seq.; dogs attacking or biting persons, MCL 287.286a et seq.  
Sec. 10-37. - Disturbing the peace or environment. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, harbor or keep any dog which shall cause annoyance or disturbance to persons by frequent and habitual barking, howling or yelping, or to maintain a dog pen or dog run which shall emit offensive odors. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.05.04) 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26.  
Sec. 10-38. - Urination and defecation. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person having the possession, care, custody and control thereof, to permit any dog to urinate and/or defecate upon any land other than his premises. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.05.02)  
Sec. 10-39. - Damages to livestock and poultry. 
The determination and payment of damages done by dogs to livestock and poultry shall remain as so provided by the Dog Law of 1919 (MCL 287.261 et seq.) and the regulations or orders of the board of commissioners of the county. 
(Code 1986, § 8-06.07) 
State Law reference— Damage to livestock or poultry, MCL 287.78 et seq.  
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; building materials, § 26-36; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30; floods, ch. 34; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 644, adopted Aug. 11, 2003, repealed § 14-1, which pertained to swimming pools and derived from Code 1986, § 5-03.02.  
Sec. 14-2. - Open excavations. 
Any person who shall dig, or cause to be dug, an excavation or a partially constructed basement for any building or structure, or who shall cause a basement or other excavation to be uncovered, shall cover, fill or safely fence the excavation: 
(1)  Within a period of 90 days after such excavation has been commenced or uncovered; or 
(2)  Within such greater or lesser time as the building inspector shall determine to be reasonable under the particular circumstances. 
(Code 1986, § 5-04.02)  
Secs. 14-3—14-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— State construction code, MCL 125.1501 et seq. 
 
Sec. 14-31. - Permit fee. 
The fees that shall be paid to the township for permits issued pursuant to the state construction code shall be as established by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 623, §§ 5-01.02—5-01.05, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 14-32. - Construction board of appeals established. 
A construction board of appeals consisting of five members is created. 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-291 et seq. 
State Law reference— Construction board of appeals, MCL 125.1514.  
Secs. 14-33—14-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE 
 
Sec. 14-61. - Adoption. 
That a certain document on file in the office of the Community Development Department of Saginaw Charter Township, being marked and designated as the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of Saginaw Charter Township, in the State of Michigan for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office of Saginaw Charter Township are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 14-62 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 624, § 5-03.01, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 658, § 1, 2-9-2004; Ord. No. 702, § 1, 8-11-2008; Ord. No. 725, § 1, 1-23-2012; Ord. No. 741 , § 1, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 746, § 1, 5-23-2016 )  
Sec. 14-62. - Revisions. 
The following sections of the 2015 IPMC are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1. Title shall read as follows: 
These regulations shall be known as the International Property Maintenance Code of Saginaw Charter Township, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Section 102.3. Application of other codes shall read as follows: 
Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the following Saginaw Charter Township Codes*. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
*International Building Code = MI Building Code 
*International Fuel Gas Code = International Fuel Gas Code 
*International Mechanical Code = MI Mechanical Code 
*International Plumbing Code = MI Plumbing Code 
*International Residential Code = MI Residential Code 
*International Zoning Code = Saginaw Township Zoning Ordinance 
*International Existing Building Code = MI Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings 
*NFPA 70 - National Electrical Code = MI Electrical Code 
*International Fire Code = International Fire Code as amended and adopted 
Section 103.2. Appointment shall read as follows: 
The Director of Community Development shall be appointed as the Code official. 
Section 103.3. Deputies shall read as follows: 
In accordance with the prescribed procedures of this jurisdiction and with the concurrence of the appointing authority, all management and field staff of the Community Development Department, Fire Department and Police Department, and Department of Public Services are appointed deputies of the Code Official. 
Section 103.5. Fees shall read as follows: 
The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be as indicated in the Rates and Fees Resolution as from time to time amended and adopted by the Saginaw Charter Township Board. 
Section 104.5. Notices and orders shall read as follows: 
The code official, or his or her designee, shall issue all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code. 
Section 106.2. Notice of Violation shall read as follows: 
The code official or his or her designee, shall serve a notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 107. 
Section 107.2(5). Form shall read as follows: 
5.  Inform the property owner of the right to appeal for actions pursuant to Sections 108, 109 or 110. 
Section 107.3. Method of Service is amended to add: 
4.  Or such Notice shall be served in accordance with MCL 600.8707. 
Section 110.1. General shall read as follows: 
The code official shall order the owner of any premises upon which is located any structure, which in the code official judgment after review is so deteriorated or dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such structure; if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary, or to board up and hold for future repair or to demolish and remove at the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any structure for a period of more than six (6) months, the code official shall order the owner to demolish and remove such structure, or board up until future repair. Boarding the building up for future repair shall not extend beyond six (6) months, unless approved by the building official. 
Section 110.3. Failure to comply shall read as follows: 
If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the code official shall cause the structure to be demolished and all materials, personal items, junk, debris, and miscellaneous items removed, either through available public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition, removal and necessary property restoration, including reasonable administrative costs, shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure is located, and the owner; and shall be a lien upon such real estate. 
Section 110.4. Salvage materials shall read as follows: 
When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials including other unlawful property on the premises at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted to the property's owner with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of expense and the amount deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report shall so state with any remaining balance owed placed on the property as a lien. 
Section 111.1. Application for appeal shall read as follows: 
Any person directly affected by a decision of the code official or a notice and order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to the construction board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed within 20 days after the day the decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted there under have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means. Violations of other sections of this code shall not be subject to an appeal but shall be afforded the procedural rights set for in Section 111.7. 
Section 111.2. Membership of the board shall be amended to read as follows: 
The board of appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the jurisdiction. The code official shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority. 
Section 111.2.1. Alternate members is hereby deleted. 
Section 111.2.2. Chairman shall read as follows: 
The board shall select one of its members to serve as chairman. 
Section 111.3. Notice of meeting shall read as follows: 
The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 30 days of the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings. 
Section 112.4. Failure to comply shall read as follows: 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not more than Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00). 
Section 302.1. Sanitation shall read as follows: 
All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition. 
Upon failure of the owner or occupant to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and remove and dispose of any materials, items, equipment, junk, debris, garbage, brush, yard waste, miscellaneous items, and/or rubbish in violation thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. In the event that the owner fails to pay the cost upon being billed, the cost shall be added to the general tax roll of the property and shall be collected in the same manner as general property taxes. 
Section 302.4. Weeds shall read as follows: 
All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth approaching or in excess of eight inches (8"). Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and gardens. The Township shall have the right to place a lien upon properties for any costs incurred to assure compliance to this section which shall be enforceable in the manner provided by the general laws of the State of Michigan for the enforcement of tax liens. This section shall not apply to those parcels under the jurisdiction of the Township's Department of Public Services and their administration of any noxious weed regulations. 
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after receiving a notice of violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with Section 106.3 and as prescribed by Saginaw Charter Township. Upon failure to comply with the notice of violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property. In the event that the owner fails to pay the cost upon being billed, the cost shall be added to the general tax roll of the property and shall be collected in the same manner as general property taxes. 
Section 302.7. Accessory structures shall read as follows: 
All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences, walls, mailboxes, clotheslines, flagpoles, satellite dishes, poles, play equipment, and other detached appurtenances shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair. 
Section 302.8. Motor Vehicles shall read as follows: 
Except as provided for in other regulations, no visually apparent inoperable motor vehicle or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth and with the approval of the Saginaw Township Fire Department and Building Department. 
Exception #1: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided that such work is performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes when such operations are in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance and with approval of the Zoning Administrator. 
Section 303.2. Enclosures shall read as follows: 
Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 24 inches (610 mm) in depth and installed after July 31, 2002 shall be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier in accordance with the MI Residential Code or MI Building Code as it applies. All other pools shall be reasonably protected by a fence or barrier in accordance with Section 301.2. 
Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. 
Section 304.3. Premises identification shall read as follows: 
Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. 
Section 304.7. Roofs and drainage shall read as follows: 
The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters, and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from obstruction and/or plant growth. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a public nuisance. 
Section 304.14. Insect screens shall read as follows: 
During the period from May 1 st to September 1 st , every door, window and other outside opening required for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens that are free from tears or holes and every screen door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good working condition. 
Exception. Screens shall not be required where other approved means, such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed. 
Section 304.18.1. Doors shall read as follows: 
Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with an approved locking device. Such device shall be designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort. 
Section 308.3.1. Garbage facilities shall read as follows: 
The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit; or an approved leak proof, covered, outside garbage container. 
Section 506.3. Grease interceptors shall read as follows: 
Where it has been determined that a grease interceptor is not being maintained and serviced as intended by this code and the manufacturer's instructions, an approved interceptor monitoring system shall be provided or a maintenance program shall be established with documentation submitted to the Director of Public Services for their review and subsequent enforcement as needed. 
Section 602.3. Heat supply shall read as follows: 
Every owner and operator of any building who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply heat during the period from September 1 st to June 1 st to maintain a temperature of not less than 68°F (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms. 
Exceptions: 
1.  When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in Appendix D of the Michigan Plumbing Code. 
2.  In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30°F (-1°C) a minimum temperature of 65°F (18°C) shall be maintained. 
Section 602.4. Occupiable work spaces shall read as follows: 
Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September 1 st to June 1 st to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F (18°C) during the period the spaces are occupied. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling or special temperature conditions. 
2.  Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous physical activities. 
Section 606 Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters is hereby deleted. 
Section 704.1.2 Fire department connection shall read as follows: 
Where the fire department connection is not visible to approaching fire apparatus, the fire department connection shall be indicated by an approved sign mounted on the street front or on the side of the building. The Fire Department may approve a horn strobe instead of a sign as a way of designating the Fire department connection. 
(Ord. No. 624, § 5-03.02, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 658, § 2, 2-9-2004; Ord. No. 702, § 2, 8-11-2008; Ord. No. 725, § 2, 1-23-2012; Ord. No. 741 , § 2, 1-26-2015; Ord. No. 746, § 2, 5-23-2016 ) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, MCL 41.21.  
Secs. 14-63—14-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SUPPLY CROSS CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 14-91. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cross connection means a connection or arrangement of piping or appurtenances through which water of questionable quality, wastes or other contaminants can enter the public water supply system. 
(Code 1986, § 5-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 14-92. - Water supply cross connection rules adopted by reference. 
The township adopts by reference the Water Supply Cross Connection Rules of the Michigan Department of Public Health being R 325.11401—325.11407 of the Michigan Administrative Code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-07.03.01)  
Sec. 14-93. - Protection of potable water supply. 
The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified by this article and by the state plumbing code. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
WATER UNSAFE 
FOR DRINKING 
(Code 1986, § 5-07.03.02)  
Sec. 14-94. - Supplementary to state plumbing code. 
This article does not supersede the state plumbing code but is supplementary thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 5-07.03.03)  
Sec. 14-95. - Inspections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the township water department to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply is deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the water superintendent and as approved by the state. 
(b)  The representative of the township water department shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time, any property served by a connection to the public water supply system of the township for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections. 
(c)  On request, the owner, leasees or occupants of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency, any pertinent information regarding the piping system or systems on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Code 1986, §§ 5-07.04.01—5-07.04.05(A))  
Sec. 14-96. - Violations. 
(a)  The water superintendent shall: 
(1)  Discontinue water service after reasonable notice to any property wherein any connection in violation of this article exists; and 
(2)  Take such other precautionary measures deemed necessary to eliminate any danger of contamination of the public water supply system. 
(b)  Water service to such property shall not be restored until the cross connection has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, §§ 5-07.04.05(B), 5-07.04.06)  
Chapter 18 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6; emergency services, ch. 22; peddlers, charitable solicitors and temporary businesses, ch. 46; temporary businesses, § 46-151 et seq.; B-1 commercial (office-business), app. A, § 1501 et seq.; B-2 commercial (neighborhood), app. A, § 1601 et seq.; B-3 commercial (community-wide), app. A, § 1701 et seq.; B-3A commercial (highway service), app. A, § 1801 et seq.; B-4 commercial (general intensive), app. A, § 1901 et seq.; M-1 science and industry, app. A, § 2001 et seq.; M-2 manufacturing, app. A, § 2101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 18-1—18-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS LICENSES 
 
Sec. 18-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means any trade, occupation, profession, work, commerce or other activity owned or operated for profit by any person within the township excluding, however, political, charitable or religious establishments. 
Licensing agent means the township clerk or such other township official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-32. - Other licensing provisions. 
Specific licensing ordinances shall remain in effect and, for the particular business affected, shall take precedence over this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.05.03)  
Sec. 18-33. - Requirement established. 
No person may commence or continue a business within the township without having first obtained a township license therefor as provided in this article and without maintaining such license in current effect during any business operation or activity. 
(a)  Prohibition of marihuana establishments. 
(1)  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.1 of the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), marihuana establishments, as defined by the Act, are completely prohibited within the boundaries of Saginaw Charter Township. 
(2)  Any applicant for a state or local license to establish a marijuana establishment, as defined by the Act, within the boundaries of Saginaw Charter Township shall be deemed to be not in compliance with this subsection and section 38-187 or with the Code of Ordinances amended by this subsection and section 38-187. 
(3)  Any person who violates, disobeys neglects or refuses to comply with this subsection, or who causes, allows or consents to any of the same shall be responsible for a civil infraction punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 in the discretion of the court. In addition, any such person or persons shall pay costs which may include all expenses, direct and indirect, which the township incurs in connection with the civil infraction. A violation of this subsection is deemed to be a nuisance per se and the township may seek injunctive relief against the person or persons deemed to be in violation thereof. Each day during which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.01; Ord. No. 759, § 1, 2-11-2019 )  
Sec. 18-34. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Political, charitable, or religious organizations. No license shall be required of any political, charitable or religious establishment situated within the township. 
(b)  Federal or state agencies. The provisions of this article are not applicable to any agency of the United States of America, the state, or any political subdivisions thereof. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-05.05.01, 3-05.05.02)  
Sec. 18-35. - Application. 
No license to commence or continue a business shall be issued until the owner or operator thereof shall have first submitted an application to the licensing agent of the township on a form provided by the licensing agent for such purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.02)  
Sec. 18-36. - Fee. 
A fee in the amount established by resolution shall accompany the original license application and all renewals. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.03)  
Sec. 18-37. - Issuance. 
(a)  Restrictions. No license shall be issued until stormwater fees, all hookup fees, connection fees, or other charges required by the township Code shall be paid in full or as permitted by Code provisions. 
(b)  Compliance with all laws. No license shall be issued unless the applicant has complied with all township, county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(c)  Legal under existing law. No license shall be issued by the licensing agent where the existing or proposed business would be illegal under any law or ordinance of the United States of America, the state, the county having jurisdiction thereof, or the township. 
(d)  Issuance after review. Upon the filing of a properly completed application and upon payment of the fee and after reviewing by the zoning administrator and fire department, the licensing agent shall issue a license to the person to commence or continue the business designated in such application if the business complies with the terms of this article. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-05.03.04, 3-05.03.05)  
Sec. 18-38. - Duration; renewals; late fees. 
The license issued under this article shall be effective until January 15 of every year. Licenses not renewed within 30 days of the January due date shall, in addition to the required fee, pay a late fee in the amount established by resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.07; Ord. No. 704, 10-13-2008)  
Sec. 18-39. - Transfer. 
No license may be transferred by the holder to any other person except upon prior approval of the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.08)  
Sec. 18-40. - Display. 
The license shall be prominently displayed to public view. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.06)  
Sec. 18-41. - Inspection. 
The licensing agent shall have the right of inspection of the business premises to assure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.03.09)  
Sec. 18-42. - Revocation and/or suspension. 
(a)  In the event of any noncompliance with the provisions of this article after a license has been issued, the license may be revoked by order of the licensing agent until the noncompliance has been corrected as determined by the licensing agent. 
(b)  The licensee may appeal all revocations to the township board, which, for cause shown, may uphold the revocation, or reinstate the license after giving the licensee reasonable notice and after holding a hearing, at which licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  In the event of revocation, the license fee shall not be refunded. 
(Code 1986, § 3-05.04)  
Secs. 18-43—18-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CARNIVALS AND OUTDOOR AMUSEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Carnival-Amusement Safety Act of 1966, MCL 408.651 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Carnival means amusement activities, rides, merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, booths for the conduct of games of skill, sideshows, and food dispensing facilities directly connected with the foregoing activities. 
Outdoor amusements means all other amusement activities such as miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges, permanent amusement parks with carnival-type activities, and similar outdoor recreational activities. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 18-72. - License. 
It shall be unlawful to conduct or operate within the township any carnival, circus, or outdoor amusement which is open to the public without first securing a license therefor 22 days prior to operation. The applicant shall secure a business license from the township clerk as required by article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.03.01)  
Sec. 18-73. - State permits. 
(a)  Overall operation. In addition to other requirements set forth in this article, the applicant shall furnish a currently effective permit to operate from the state. 
(b)  Ride operation. No ride shall be placed in operation for public use until the ride has a current permit to operate from the state. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.03.02)  
Sec. 18-74. - Certificate of insurance. 
(a)  No license shall be issued for conducting a carnival or outdoor amusement until the applicant therefor has placed on file with the township clerk a certificate of insurance indicating that there is in effect public liability insurance covering any damages arising out of the use and operation of any and all devices and facilities operated in connection with such carnival or amusement. 
(b)  Such insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $300,000.00 for each person and $500,000.00 for each accident. 
(c)  Such insurance shall also name the township as an additional insured. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.03.03)  
Sec. 18-75. - Zoning; duration. 
Carnivals and outdoor amusements are allowed only in those areas commercially zoned for not more than ten days. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.03.04) 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A.  
Sec. 18-76. - License. 
(a)  Except for that one exception, to be used only in exceptional circumstances and for very short periods of time, no outdoor amusement or carnival shall be located within 300 feet of any residential use, including motels, hotels, and any structure being used for the overnight sleeping of persons, other than a retail business for the sale of merchandise with attached living quarters. 
(b)  The township board, for good cause shown, and after making a finding of facts to be recorded in the minutes of the meetings, may waive the requirements of this section as to location of a carnival or outdoor amusement distance from adjoining residential uses. Any such waiver shall set forth the period of time for which it applies. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-07.05.01, 3-07.06)  
Sec. 18-77. - Lights. 
All lights on the carnival or amusement site shall be shaded so as not to shine directly onto any adjoining or nearby residential use and not to create any traffic dangers by shining into the eyes of motorists on adjacent or nearby roads. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.05.03)  
Sec. 18-78. - Site maintenance. 
(a)  Clean and free of debris. The applicant for a license under this article shall maintain order and keep the site clean and free of papers, trash, and other debris. 
(b)  Trash containers provided. Trash containers in adequate number shall be placed in convenient locations for the use of the public. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.05.04)  
Sec. 18-79. - Equipment safeguards. 
Adequate safeguards shall be placed to protect both operators and the general public from inadvertently coming into contact with moving parts, belts, motor gears, electrical switches, and other possible or potential hazards, meeting standards required by the state. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.05.05)  
Sec. 18-80. - Rights retained. 
(a)  Nothing contained in this article shall in any way abrogate or restrict the right of any private individual to maintain an action for nuisance or other damage or injunction against an amusement or carnival. 
(b)  Nothing in this article restricts the right of the township board to revoke the permit for violation of the provisions of this article or to seek an injunction if an amusement or carnival becomes a nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 3-07.07)  
Secs. 18-81—18-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, MCL 446.201 et seq.; secondhand dealers, MCL 445.401 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-111. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Business means all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises, trades, privileges, establishments, and all other kinds of activities and matters, together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premises in the township, or anywhere else within its jurisdiction. 
License or licensee means, respectively, the words "permit," or "permittee," or the holder for any use or period of time of any similar privilege, wherever relevant to any provision of this article or other law or ordinance. 
Pawnbroker means any person, corporation, or member or members of a co-partnership or firm, who loans money on deposit or pledge of personal property, or other valuable thing, other than securities or printed evidence of indebtedness, or who deals in the purchasing of personal property or other valuable thing on condition of selling the personal property or other valuable thing back again at a stipulated price. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.203. 
Premises means all lands, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. 
Secondhand dealers shall mean any person, corporation or member or members of a co-partnership, LLC or other business organization whose business, in whole or in part, is that of purchasing or exchanging for monetary consideration secondhand personal property of any kind or description. It does not include antique shops, consignment stores, charitable entities or used book, record dealers. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.02, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Secs. 18-112—18-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 18-131. - Appeal. 
(a)  Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the township manager or other appropriate clearing officer or body shall have a right to appeal the decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall contain a complete statement of the grounds for the appeal. It must be filed with the township clerk, together with an appeal fee of $10.00 within 14 days after notice of such denial, suspension, or revocation is mailed to the person's last known address. The appeal upon denial includes the denial of a new license. 
(b)  Within ten days of the receipt of the appeal by the township clerk, the clerk shall schedule an appeal hearing. Unless waived by the parties, the township clerk shall mail by first class mail a written notice of the time and location of the appeal hearing at least five days prior to the hearing. The appeal hearing shall be an informal hearing held before a panel consisting of: 
(1)  The township manager or his designee; 
(2)  The chief of police or his designee; and 
(3)  The township clerk or his designee. 
(c)  The factual record made in the hearings, or license application record in case of denial, shall constitute the basic record for the appeal. The appeal panel may, but need not, allow the presentation of additional evidence by a majority vote. Argument as to relevant factual and legal issues shall be permitted. The decision of the appeal panel shall be reached by majority vote and mailed to the parties within seven days of the conclusion of the hearing. The decision of the appeal panel shall be final and conclusive. 
(d)  A party dissatisfied by any decision or order of the appeal panel under this article may appeal the decision or order to a court of competent jurisdiction by filing a petition within 20 days from the date of the mailing of the decision of the appeal panel. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.05.05, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-132. - Renewal. 
Unless otherwise provided in this Code, an application for renewal of a license shall be considered in the same manner as an original application. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.06, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-133. - Exhibition of license. 
Any license issued under this article shall be exhibited at all times in some conspicuous place in such place of business and shall be produced for examination when applying for a renewal thereof or when requested to do so by any township police officer or by any person representing the issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.07, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-134. - Suspension, revocation, denial of renewal of licenses. 
(a)  The term "cause" as used in this section shall include: 
(1)  The doing or omitting of any act or permitting any condition to exist in connection with a secondhand merchant or pawnbroker business for which a license is granted under the provisions of this article, or any premises or facilities used in connection therewith, which act, omission or condition is contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; is unlawful or fraudulent; is unauthorized or beyond the scope of the license granted; or is forbidden by the provisions of this article or any duly established ordinance, rule or regulation of the township applicable to the secondhand merchant or pawnbroker business for which the license has been granted. 
(2)  The arrest and conviction of the licensee or permittee for any crime involving moral turpitude. 
(3)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the application of the license. 
(4)  Fraud, misrepresentation or any false statement made in the operation of a business. 
(5)  Failure or inability of an applicant to meet and satisfy the requirements and provisions of this article. 
(6)  Violation of any state or federal statute, local ordinance or duly adopted federal, state or local rule or regulation relating to the operation the business for which the license was issued or registration given. 
(b)  Whenever the township manager shall have evidence to warrant the suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a license he shall send a notice to the licensee or permittee by certified mail to his last known address, which notice shall contain a statement of the charge or charges against the licensee and a definite time and place for a hearing on the charge, and shall order the licensee to show cause why the license should not be suspended, revoked or denied renewal, and that failure by the licensee to appear at the hearing may result in suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of the license. 
(c)  The township manager shall appoint a hearing officer to conduct a public hearing at which the licensee shall be granted an opportunity to show cause why the license should not be suspended, revoked, or denied renewal. The hearing officer may be the township manager or any officer or employee of the township. 
(d)  In any proceeding under this section, the hearing officer has the power to administer oaths and affirmations and to certify official acts. The hearing officer shall proceed with reasonable dispatch to conclude any matter before him. Due regard shall be shown for the convenience and necessity of the parties and their representatives. 
(e)  The hearing officer shall cause a record of the entire proceeding to be made by tape recording or by other means of permanent recording determined appropriate by the hearing officer. A transcript of the proceedings shall be made available to all parties upon request and upon payment of a fee prescribed therefor. The fee may be established by the hearing officer but shall not be greater than the cost of making the transcript. 
(f)  The hearing need not be conducted according to the technical rules of evidence adopted for the courts of record in the state. 
(1)  The hearing officer shall take testimony from the licensee and any person having knowledge relevant to the suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a license. Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation of the party offering the testimony. 
(2)  Hearsay evidence may be used under the following guidelines: 
a.  Hearsay evidence may be used to explain other direct evidence. 
b.  Hearsay evidence may be used to support other direct evidence. 
c.  Hearsay evidence shall not be used in itself to support a finding, unless it would be admissible in a civil action in courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(3)  Any relevant evidence shall be admitted. The term "relevant evidence" shall be defined, for the purpose of this section, as the type of evidence upon which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Such relevant evidence shall be admitted regardless of whether or not it may be admissible in civil actions in courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(4)  Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. 
(g)  Each party shall have these rights: 
(1)  To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(2)  To introduce documentary and physical evidence; 
(3)  To cross examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing; 
(4)  To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; 
(5)  To refute the evidence; 
(6)  To represent himself or to be represented by any one of his choice: who is lawfully permitted to do so; and 
(7)  To make a closing statement at the conclusion of the evidentiary portion of the hearing. 
(h)  Failure of the licensee or his representative to appear at the hearing may be deemed to be an admission by the licensee of the facts set forth in the township manager's notice and order. 
(i)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make written findings of fact based upon the competent evidence and testimony admitted during the hearing. 
(j)  The hearing officer shall make a finding whether or not the license or permit shall be denied, revoked, or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 576, §§ 3-08.05.01—3-08.05.04, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-135. - Emergency suspensions. 
Where the township manager shall determine that, in the interest of the public health, morals, safety or welfare, an immediate suspension is necessary, he shall order the suspension. In such case, the township manager shall forthwith send a notice to the licensee by certified mail to his last known address, which notice shall contain a statement of the charge against the licensee and a definite time and place for a hearing of the charge and shall order the licensee to show cause why his license should not be suspended for an additional period of time or revoked. Unless the licensee requests a longer time, the township manager shall conduct such hearing within five days from the order of suspension. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with subsection 18-134(c). The decision of the township manager may be appealed pursuant to section 18-131. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.05.06, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-136. - Fee. 
No fee for any license or permit which has been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.05.07, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-137. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-137 which pertained to time period for retention of items; records, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-138. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-138, which pertained to purchase from minors, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 2017.  
Sec. 18-139. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-139, which pertained to hours of business; purchase or receipt of property from thief, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-140. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-140, which pertained to the sale of pistols, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-141. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-141, which pertained to stolen merchandise, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Secs. 18-142—18-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PAWNBROKERS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, MCL 446.201 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-161. - License. 
(a)  No person shall directly or indirectly operate, conduct or engage in the business of pawnbroker without first obtaining a license therefor. No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the police chief of the township. 
(b)  No such license shall be granted to any person unless a complete set of fingerprints of such person are on file in the noncriminal identification file of the township police department. 
(c)  As a condition of obtaining a license to operate a pawnshop, a licensee is required to acknowledge in writing receipt of a summary of materials regarding certain state statutes and township ordinances which regulate the licensing operation of such a business. 
(d)  The license shall designate the particular location where the business will be located and the business may not operate from any other place. Licenses issued under this division shall expire annually on January 15th of each year and must be renewed annually by payment of a renewal fee. Licenses not renewed by February 15th of any year shall be assessed a late fee in addition to the renewal fee. All license fees, late fees and renewal fees shall be established annually by resolution of the township board. A license issued hereunder shall not be transferable and may be revoked for good cause as provided in section 18-134. 
(e)  Upon the conviction of any persons set forth in this division, the license shall be revoked. No license fee shall be returned, and no further license shall be issued for a period of one year from the date of the revocation. 
(Ord. No. 576, §§ 3-08.04.01, 3-08.04.02, 3-08.04.05, 3-08.04.06, 3-08.04.12, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-162. - Bond. 
Before any such license is issued, the applicant therefor shall furnish a corporate surety bond in the sum of $3,000.00 with sufficient surety to be approved by the township clerk, which bond shall be conditioned upon the due observance during the time of the license of all laws of the state and all ordinances of the township. Any person aggrieved by the action of any such licensee shall have a right of action on the bond for the recovery of money or damages, or both. Such bond shall remain in full force and effect for a period of 90 days after the expiration or cancellation of any such license or after the termination of any action upon such bond. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.03, 1-1-1998)  
Sec. 18-163. - Records. 
No licensee shall fail to keep a record of all persons with whom he or she does business and all property coming into his or her possession. All reports, including thumbprint or fingerprint, must be electronically transmitted to the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department. Every pawnbroker or licensee, within 48 hours, must transmit to the chief of police, by means of a computer system specified by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department (the licensee shall pay the cost of such system and maintaining it), for identifying pawned property, all transactions in which the pawnbroker or licensee received goods the proceeding day by pawn, trade, purchase or consignment. Such system must be installed, operational and be approved by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department prior to issuance of a license. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department so requests. The report shall contain: 
(1)  A detailed description and a true and accurate photograph of the article, any serial numbers and/or identification marks. 
(2)  A sequential transaction number. 
(3)  Any amount of money loaned thereon. 
(4)  The full name and address of the person. 
(5)  A detailed description of the person. 
(6)  A true and accurate photograph of the person. 
(7)  A true and accurate photograph of the person's state identification used from whom the article was received. 
(8)  The day and hour when the article was received. 
A pawnbroker or licensee need not report electronically transactions taking place at a business location where the number of pawn transactions in each 90-day period does not exceed ten. A pawnbroker or licensee reasonably believing a location at which he or she conducts a pawnshop qualify under this subsection for exemption from computerized reporting and wish them to be exempt from the requirements of this section shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a declaration to that effect in a form developed by the chief of police or the chief's designee and, once the declaration is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed ten each 90-day period, pawn transactions taking place at that pawnshop need not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms. All pawnbrokers must have the equipment installed in their place of business prior to the issuance of a license. 
(Ord. No. 576 § 3-08.04.04, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 722, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-164. - Record of property received; contents; inspection; form of permanent record. 
(a)  A pawnbroker shall keep a record in which is written in English, at the time the pawnbroker receives any article of personal property or other valuable thing by way of pawn. The record shall contain: 
(1)  A detailed description and a true and accurate photograph of the article, any serial numbers and/or identification marks. 
(2)  A sequential transaction number. 
(3)  Any amount of money loaned thereon. 
(4)  The full name and address of the person. 
(5)  A detailed description of the person. 
(6)  A true and accurate photograph of the person. 
(7)  A true and accurate photograph of the person's state identification used from whom the article was received. 
(8)  The day and hour when the article was received. 
The record, the place where the business is carried on, and all articles of property in that place of business are subject to examination at any time by the township attorney, township police department or the department of state police. 
(b)  Upon the receipt of any article of personal property or other valuable thing by way of pawn, the pawnbroker shall make a permanent record of the transaction on a form provided by the pawnbroker that substantially complies with the form described in subsection (d) of this section. Each record of transaction shall be completed in duplicate by the pawnbroker, legibly in the English language, and shall contain all applicable information required to complete the record of transaction form under subsection (d) of this section. This subsection does not prohibit the use and transmission of the information required in the record of the transaction by means of computer or other electronic media as permitted by the township police department. 
(c)  The pawnbroker shall retain a record of each transaction and, within 48 hours after the property is received, shall send one copy of the record of transaction to the police department as provided in section 18-163. 
(d)  The record of transaction form kept by the pawnbroker shall be eight and one-half inches by 11 inches in size and shall be as follows and shall be in addition to the copy sent to the police department as required in section 18-163. 
(Ord. No. 576, §§ 3-08.04.07—3-08.04.09, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.205.  
Sec. 18-165. - Statement of daily transactions. 
Every pawnbroker must make daily, a sworn statement of all transactions, describing the items received, and setting forth the name, address and description of the person from whom they were received. The sworn statement shall be provided electronically to the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.20, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.535(8).  
Sec. 18-166. - Memorandum of items received. 
(a)  At the time a loan is made, the pawnbroker must give to the person pawning or pledging any goods, article or thing, a memorandum or note, signed by the pawnbroker, listing the items received, and setting forth the name, address and description of the person from whom they were received. 
(b)  The memorandum or note described in subsection (a) of this section must be consecutively numbered and must have printed on its back, in English, the following words: 
"If interest or charges in excess of three percent per month, plus storage charges hereinafter provided, are asked or received, this loan is void and of no effect; and the borrower cannot be made to pay back the money loaned or any interest, or any charges or any part thereof, and the pawnbroker loses all right to the possession of the goods, article or thing pawned, and shall surrender the same to the borrower or pawner upon due demand therefor." 
(Ord. No. 576, §§ 3-08.04.11, 3-08.04.12, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.208.  
Sec. 18-167. - Interest on loans; rate; storage charge; time of payment; computation; fee or excess charge prohibited. 
(a)  A licensed pawnbroker may charge upon any loan a rate of interest not to exceed three percent per month and is not required to accept any interest less than $0.50 on a single loan. 
(b)  A pawnbroker may also charge $1.00 per month or fraction of a month for the storage of property under any single pledge or pawn. 
(c)  A pawnbroker or the pawnbroker's agent or employee shall not charge or receive interest on the loan in excess of the amounts provided for in this article. 
(d)  Interest on any loan is not payable in advance and shall be computed on unpaid monthly balances without compounding. 
(e)  A pawnbroker is not entitled to any examination fee and shall not make any charge in excess of the amounts provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.13, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.205.  
Sec. 18-168. - Retention of property prior to resale. 
A pawnbroker cannot sell any pawn or pledge until the property has remained in his possession for three months. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.14, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.216(2).  
Sec. 18-169. - Defacing articles. 
(1)  A pawnbroker cannot deface, scratch, obliterate, melt, separate or break into parts any article or thing received by him in pawn or otherwise, and cannot, in any manner, do, cause or permit anything to be done by others which shall destroy or tend to destroy the identity of any pawned or pledged article or render the identification thereof more difficult. 
(2)  A pawnbroker shall not accept by way of pledge, pawn, purchase, or exchange any article or thing that customarily bears a manufacturer's serial number or other identifying insignia unless the number of insignia is plainly visible on the article or thing. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.15, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.213.  
Sec. 18-170. - Pawned property; acceptance from certain persons prohibited. 
A pawnbroker shall not receive for pawn any article from any person under 18 years of age or a person the pawnbroker suspects as having stolen the article to be pawned. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.16, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.214.  
Sec. 18-171. - Sunday business. 
A pawnbroker shall not conduct business on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.17, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 446.217.  
Sec. 18-172. - Pawning of pistols. 
A pawnbroker cannot take a pistol in pawn. To take a pistol in pawn is a misdemeanor. The term "pistol" means any firearm that is less than 30 inches in length or is any firearm that by its construction and appearance conceals it as a firearm. A flaregun is a pistol. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.19, 1-1-1998) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.229.  
Sec. 18-173. - Stolen goods. 
A pawnbroker or the agent, employee or representative of a pawnbroker who fails to make reasonable inquiry that a person selling or delivering property to him that is stolen, embezzled or converted property, or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterate on an external surface of the property shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.04.20, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.535(8).  
Secs. 18-174—18-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 764, adopted October 14, 2019, changed the title of Division 4 to read as set out herein. Formerly, Division 4 was entitled "Secondhand Merchants." 
 
Sec. 18-191. - License. 
(a)  (1)  Except for temporary displays at exhibit halls, banquet centers, schools, and other civic facilities, exposition facilities and other similar temporary uses, no person shall directly or indirectly operate, conduct or engage in the business or occupation of dealing in secondhand merchandise or used personal property without first obtaining a license therefor. For the purpose of this section, dealing in secondhand or used personal property shall include purchasing, selling, exchanging or storing to facilitate or promote the sale of secondhand or used personal property of any kind or description; provided, that this section shall not apply to persons who deal exclusively in used personal property commonly known as antiques or to nonprofit or charitable organizations who receive and offer for sale donated personal property. 
(2)  "Antique" means an object, especially furniture or a decorative object, belonging to the distant past and sought by collectors. 
(3)  This section does not require an internet drop-off store or a person engaged in the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of personal property or other valuable things for himself or herself, to obtain a license under this Act. 
(b)  No such license shall be granted except upon certification of the police chief of the township. 
(c)  As a condition of obtaining a license to operate as a secondhand dealer, licensee is required to acknowledge in writing receipt of a summary of materials regarding certain state statutes and township ordinances which regulate the licensing operation of such a business. 
(d)  Failure to obtain such license is a misdemeanor. 
(e)  The license shall designate the particular location where the business will be located and the business may not operate from any other place. Licenses issued under this division shall expire annually on January 15th of each year and must be renewed annually by payment of a renewal fee. Licenses not renewed by February 15th of any year shall be assessed a late fee in addition to the renewal fee. All license fees, late fees and renewal fees shall be established annually by resolution of the township board. A license issued hereunder shall not be transferable and may be revoked for good cause as provided in section 18-134. 
(f)  A dealer in precious items shall be required to obtain a certificate of registration from Saginaw Charter Township Police Department and pay a fee as set by resolution of the township board to cover the cost of issuing a certificate of registration. The application shall include all information required by Public Act 95 of 1981 and the township police department. Upon receipt of the certificate of registration from the township police department the dealer shall post it in a conspicuous place in the dealer's place of business. Not less than ten days before a dealer changes the name and address under which the dealer does business, the dealer shall notify the township police department, in writing, of the change. 
(Ord. No. 576, §§ 3-08.03.01, 3-08.03.02, 3-08.03.05, 3-08.03.07, 3-08.03.08, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-192. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-192, which pertained to bond, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-193. - Records; report to police chief. 
No person shall fail to keep a record of all persons with whom he does business and all property coming into his or her possession. All reports, including thumbprint or fingerprint, must be electronically transmitted to the chief of police. Every secondhand dealer or licensee, within 48 hours, must transmit to the chief of police by means of a computer system specified by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department (the licensee shall pay the cost of such system and maintaining it), for identifying secondhand or used personal property, all transactions in which the secondhand dealer or licensee received used goods the preceding day by trade, purchase, or consignment. Such system must be installed, operational and be approved by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department prior to issuance of a license. 
A secondhand dealer or licensee need not report electronically transactions taking place at a business location where the number of transactions in each 90-day period does not exceed ten. A secondhand dealer or licensee reasonably believing a location at which he or she conducts a business qualified under this subsection for exemption from computerized reporting and wishing to be exempt from the requirements of this section shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a declaration to that effect in a form developed by the chief of police or the chief's designee, and once the declaration is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed ten each 90-day period, transactions taking place at the business need not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.03.04, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 719, § 2, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 722, 7-11-2011; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-194. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-194, which pertained to fingerprints and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-195. - Record book. 
(a)  Every secondhand dealer must keep a book in either written or electronic form, which is open to inspection by a member of the police department in which is recorded at the time he purchases or exchanges any article of personal property the following information: 
(1)  A detailed description of the article; and a true and accurate photograph of the article, any serial numbers and/or identification marks. 
(2)  The full name of the seller; 
(3)  The residence address of the seller; 
(4)  A true and accurate photograph of the seller and a description of the seller including hair color, height, weight and other identifying characteristics. 
(5)  A true, accurate, and legible copy of the seller's driver's license, chauffeur's license or state ID card. 
(6)  The day and hour when the property was received, the location where the item was obtained and the method of payment. 
(7)  Payment for an item shall be made only by a check or by an electronic payment system. The record shall indicate the method of payment. 
(b)  Each entry must be numbered consecutively. Failure to comply with this provision is a misdemeanor and will result in the automatic revocation of the license and a one-year period during which a license may not be obtained. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 3-08.03.11, 1-1-1998; Ord. No. 719, § 1, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-196. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , repealed § 18-196, which pertained to prohibited transactions, and derived from Ord. No. 576, adopted Jan. 1, 1998.  
Sec. 18-197. - Time period for retention of items; records. 
Every article purchased or exchanged must be retained by the dealer in the same building in which it was received for at least 15 days before disposing of the article. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor and will result in the automatic revocation of the dealer's license and a one-year period during which a license may not be obtained. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-198. - Purchase from minor. 
A secondhand dealer cannot purchase directly or indirectly any item from a minor. Any such violation is a misdemeanor. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-199. - Hours of business, purchase or receipt of property from thief. 
A secondhand dealer cannot purchase or receive any item between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or purchase or receive an item from any person known to be a thief or an associate of thieves or a receiver of stolen property or from any person he has reason to suspect of being such nor from any visibly intoxicated person. Failure to comply with this section is a misdemeanor and will result in the automatic revocation of the license and a one-year period during which a license may not be obtained. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 445.407.  
Sec. 18-200. - Sale of pistols. 
A secondhand dealer shall not accept, offer or display a pistol for resale. The term "pistol" means any firearm that is less than 30 inches in length or is any firearm that by its construction and appearance conceals it as a firearm. A flare gun is a pistol. 
( Ord. No. 754, § 18-199(1), 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.229.  
Sec. 18-201. - Stolen merchandise. 
A person, or the agent, employee or representative of a dealer in secondhand merchandise or personal property who fails to make reasonable inquiry that a person selling or delivering property to him that is stolen, embezzled or converted property, or who buys or receives stolen, embezzled or converted property which has a registration, serial or other identifying number altered or obliterated on an external surface of the property, shall be presumed to have bought or received the property knowing the property to be stolen, embezzled or converted. 
( Ord. No. 754, § 18-199(2), 9-11-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.535(8)(10).  
Secs. 18-202—18-299. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - PRECIOUS METAL AND GEM DEALERS 
 
Sec. 18-300. - Compliance required. 
A dealer in precious items shall comply with the requirements of Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this division. 
Agent or employee means a person who, for compensation or valuable consideration, is employed either directly or indirectly by a dealer. 
Dealer means any person, corporation, partnership, or association, which, in whole or in part, engages in the ordinary course of repeated and recurrent transactions of buying or receiving precious items from the public within this state. 
Gold means elemental gold having an atomic weight of 196.967 and the chemical element symbol of Au, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
Internet drop-off store means a person, corporation, or firm that contracts with other persons, corporations, or firms to offer its precious items for sale, purchase, consignment, or trade through means of an internet website. 
Jewelry means an ornamental item made of a material that includes a precious gem. 
Local governmental unit means Saginaw Charter Township. 
Local police agency means the police agency Saginaw Charter Township. 
Platinum means elemental platinum having an atomic weight of 195.09 and the chemical element symbol of Pt, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
Precious gem means a diamond, alexandrite, ruby, sapphire, opal, amethyst, emerald, aquamarine, morganite, garnet, jadeite, topaz, tourmaline, turquoise, or pearl. 
Precious item means jewelry, a precious gem, or an item containing gold, silver, or platinum. Precious item does not include the following: 
(1)  Coins, commemorative medals, and tokens struck by, or in behalf of, a government or private mint. 
(2)  Bullion bars and discs of the type traded by banks and commodity exchanges. 
(3)  Items at the time they are purchased directly from a dealer registered under this act, a manufacturer, or a wholesaler who purchased them directly from a manufacturer. 
(4)  Industrial machinery or equipment. 
(5)  An item being returned to or exchanged at the dealer where the item was purchased and that is accompanied by a valid sales receipt. 
(6)  An item which is received for alteration, redesign, or repair in a manner that does not substantially change its use and returned directly to the customer. 
(7)  An item which does not have a jeweler's identifying mark or a serial mark and which the dealer purchases for less than $5.00. 
(8)  Scrap metal which contain incidental traces of gold, silver, or platinum that are recoverable as a by-product. 
(9)  Jewelry which a customer trades for other jewelry having a greater value, and which difference in value is paid by the customer. 
Silver means elemental silver having an atomic weight of 107.869 and the chemical element symbol of Ag, whether found by itself or in combination with its alloys or any other metal. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-301. - License. 
(a)  A dealer shall not conduct business in the township unless first obtaining a valid certificate of registration from the township or township police department. In addition, a dealer, as a condition of conducting business in the township must first obtain a license. The license shall designate the particular location where the business will be located and the business may not operate from any other place. Licenses issued under this division shall expire annually on January 15th of each year and must be renewed annually by payment of a renewal fee. Licenses not renewed by February 15th of any year shall be assessed a late fee in addition to the renewal fee. All license fees, late fees and renewal fees shall be established annually by resolution of the township board. A license issued hereunder shall not be transferable and may be revoked for good cause as provided in section 18-134. 
(b)  This section does not require an internet drop-off store complying with subsection (c), or a person engaged in the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of precious items for himself or herself, to obtain a registration under this act. 
(c)  An internet drop-off store compliance with the following conditions is exempt from registration as a dealer under this act. 
(1)  Has a fixed place of business within this state except that he or she exclusively transacts all purchases or sales by means of the internet and the purchases and sales are not physically transacted on the premises of that fixed place of business. 
(2)  Has the personal property or other valuable thing available on a website for viewing by photograph, if available, by the general public at no charge, which website shall be searchable by zip code or state, or both. The website viewing shall include, as applicable, serial number, make, model, or other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(3)  Maintains records of the sale, purchase, consignment, or trade of the personal property or other valuable thing for at least two years, which records shall contain a description, including a photograph, if available, and, if applicable, serial number, make, model and other unique identifying marks, numbers, names, or letters appearing on the personal property or other valuable thing. 
(4)  Provide the local police agency with any name under which it conducts business on the website and access to the business premises at any time during normal business hours for purposes of inspection. 
(5)  Within 24 hours after a request from a local police agency, provide an electronic copy of the seller's or consignor's name, address, telephone number, driver license number and issuing state, the buyer's name and address if applicable, and a description of the personal property or other valuable thing as described in subdivision (c). The provision of information shall be in a format acceptable to the local police agency but shall at least be in a legible format and in the English language. 
(6)  Provide that payment for the personal property or other valuable thing is executed by means of check or other electronic payment system, so long as the payment is not made in cash. No payment shall be provided to the seller until the item is sold. 
(7)  Immediately remove the personal property or other valuable thing from the website if the local police agency determines that the personal property or other valuable thing is stolen. 
(d)  A dealer shall apply to the local police agency for a certificate of registration, and pay a fee not to exceed $50.00 to cover the reasonable cost of processing and issuing the certificate of registration by disclosing the following information. 
(1)  The name, address, and thumbprint of the applicant. 
(2)  The name and address under which the applicant does business. 
(3)  The name, address, and thumbprint of all agents or employees of the dealer. 
Within 24 hours after hiring a new employee, the dealer shall forward to the local police agency the name, address, and thumbprint of the new employee. 
(e)  This act shall not be construed to excuse a dealer from complying with the local zoning ordinance or any local ordinance regulating commercial activities. However, a local government may not pass an ordinance, or enforce an existing ordinance, that provides additional standards which must be met before the issuance of a certificate of registration. 
( Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-302. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  A dealer in precious items shall maintain a permanent record of each transaction legibly written in ink and in English on forms promulgated by the police department and shall, each time it receives or purchases a precious item, record the following information on a record of transaction form as set forth in MCL 445.484. 
(1)  The dealer certificate or registration number. 
(2)  A true and accurate photograph and detailed description of the precious items received or purchased, including the type of metal or precious gem. In the case of watches, the description shall contain the name of the maker and the number of both the works and the case. In the case of jewelry, all letters and marks inscribed on the jewelry shall be included in the description. 
(3)  The date of the transaction. 
(4)  The name of the employee, owner, agent etc. of the dealer conducting the transaction. 
(5)  The full name, date of birth, driver's license number or State of Michigan personal identification card number, and street and house number of the customer, together with a true and accurate photograph of the customer and thumb-print or fingerprint of the customer. The thumb-print or fingerprint shall only be required on the record of transaction form retained by the dealer, but made available to the police department upon request in accordance with Public Act 95 of 1981, as amended. 
(6)  The price to be paid by the dealer for the precious item or precious items. 
(7)  The form of payment made to the customer, check, money order, bank draft, or cash. If the payment is by check, money order, or bank draft, the dealer shall indicate the number of the check, money order, or bank draft. 
(8)  The customer's signature. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-303. - Retention of precious item by dealer. 
A precious item received by a dealer shall be retained by the dealer for nine calendar days after it was received, without any form of alteration other than that required to make an accurate appraisal of its value. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-304. - Records; report to police chief. 
No person shall fail to keep a record of all persons with whom he does business and all property coming into his or her possession. All reports, including thumbprint or fingerprint, must be electronically transmitted to the chief of police. Every precious metal and gems dealer or licensee, within 48 hours, must transmit to the chief of police by means of a computer system specified by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department (the licensee shall pay the cost of such system and maintaining it), for identifying the gems or precious metals items, all transactions in which the precious items dealer or licensee received the items the preceding day by trade, purchase, or consignment. Such system must be installed, operational and be approved by the Saginaw Charter Township Police Department prior to issuance of a license. A transaction reported by electronic transmission under this subsection shall not be reported on paper forms unless the chief of police so requests. 
A precious gems or metals dealer or licensee need not report electronically transactions taking place at a business location where the number of transactions in each 90-day period does not exceed ten. Such dealer or licensee reasonably believing a location at which he or she conducts a business qualified under this subsection for exemption from computerized reporting and wishing to be exempt from the requirements of this section shall sign, under penalty of perjury, a declaration to that effect in a form developed by the chief of police or the chief's designee, and once the declaration to that effect in a form developed by the chief of police or the chief's designee, and once the declaration is signed, so long as the volume of transactions does not exceed ten each 90-day period, transactions taking place at that business need not be reported electronically, but shall be reported on paper forms. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 18-305. - Prohibited actions. 
A dealer or an agent or employee of a dealer shall not: 
(a)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from any person who is less than 18 years of age or any person known by the dealer or agent or employee of the dealer to have been convicted of theft or receipt of stolen property within the preceding five years, whether the person is acting in his or her own behalf or as the agent of another. 
(b)  Knowingly receive or purchase a precious item from a person unless that person presents a valid driver's license or a valid State of Michigan personal identification card. 
( Ord. No. 754, 9-11-2017 ; Ord. No. 764, 10-14-2019 )  
Secs. 18-306—18-400. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - RENTAL HOUSING BUSINESS LICENSE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 754, adopted Sept. 11, 2017 , directed for the renumbering of §§ 18-201—18-213, as §§ 18-401—18-413. Prior section numbers have been included in the history notes following each section. 
 
Sec. 18-401. - Purpose. 
It has been statistically demonstrated that areas with rental housing facilities are responsible for a disproportionate share of police calls for service. This disproportionate demand upon police services necessitates a disproportionate expenditure of public funds for such properties and impairs the value of these properties and the surrounding neighborhoods as well as the community as a whole. 
It is the purpose of this section to implement a crime-free rental housing program to provide a stable, more satisfied tenant base; increase demand for rental units with a reputation for active management; lower maintenance and repair costs; increase property values, and improve the personal safety for tenants, landlords, and managers. 
For these reasons, it is in the public interest for the protection of the health and safety of the people of Saginaw Charter Township to protect and promote the existence of sound and wholesome residential rental properties and rental units by the adoption of standards that encourage participation in Saginaw Charter Township's crime-free rental housing training program. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-201, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-402. - Scope. 
The provisions of this article shall apply to all residential rental properties in Saginaw Charter Township and all accessory uses thereon, including parking lots, driveways, landscaping, accessory structures, fences, walls, interior and exterior common areas, swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Housing accommodations in hotels, motels, inns or bed and breakfast facilities. 
(2)  Housing accommodations in any hospital; state-licensed group homes or adult foster care facilities; convent, monastery, or other facility occupied exclusively by members of a religious order; extended medical care facility; asylum; on-campus fraternity or sorority houses; or on-campus housing accommodations owned, operated or managed by an institution of higher education, a high school, or an elementary school of occupancy by its students. 
(3)  Mobile homes located within a state-licensed mobile home park. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-202, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-403. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Authorized agent is an individual(s) with legal authority and capable of executing documents for the sale or lease of the dwelling(s) and authority over the proceeds of such sale or lease. 
Business means and includes all activities engaged in with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, directly or indirectly, from the operation of rental housing. 
Licensing agent means the township clerk or such other township official or employee as may be designated by resolution of the township board. 
Owner means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, any real property in Saginaw Charter Township, including all persons shown as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the assessor's office. Owner includes agents and employees and any persons with powers of attorney, executors of estates, trustees, or who are court appointed administrators, conservators, guardians or receivers and agents and employees. 
Residential rental property means a parcel of real property upon which a residential rental unit is located. 
Residential rental unit means a rented or leased residential dwelling unit within a single-family or multiresidential building. A residential rental unit includes a single-family dwelling, duplex, or a unit in a multifamily or multipurpose dwelling, or a unit in a condominium or cooperative housing project. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-203, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-404. - Rental housing business license required. 
No person shall operate a residential rental property in Saginaw Charter Township without securing and maintaining an annual rental housing business license as required by this section. 
Each owner or authorized agent, on behalf of the owner, shall submit an application for a rental housing business license on a form provided by the township clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-204, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-405. - Local agent required. 
Whenever any rental business license is required, and neither the owner or the operator is a person domiciled within Saginaw Charter Township or a 30-mile radius, the owner shall appoint a person who is domiciled within Saginaw Township or a 30-mile radius, to serve as the local agent of the owner and the operator for 24-hour emergency contact information and for service of notices. Notices given to the local agent shall be sufficient to satisfy any requirement of notice to the owner or the operator. The owner shall notify the township clerk of any change of local agent within 15 days of such change. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-205, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-406. - Rental housing business license application. 
The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
(1)  The address of the residential rental property. 
(2)  The unit classification, e.g., single-family, duplex, multifamily, or condominium. 
(3)  The name, address and telephone number of the owner and authorized agent for the premises and any other person designated to be contacted in the event of an emergency at the premises. 
(4)  A description of any other business operated or to be operated at the same premises. 
(5)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner's agent, representative or property manager responsible for management of the rental property, if different from the owner, or if the owner resides outside a 30-mile radius of Saginaw Township, an owner's agent, representative or property manager who is within a 30-mile radius of Saginaw Township is required. 
a.  The owner/licensee shall have a continuing obligation to provide the above information as it becomes available and if any information provided changes during the term of the license. 
(6)  The application shall also include an acknowledgement to be signed by the owner/agent/licensee stating that he or she has been informed of the following: 
a.  That the owner/agent/licensee shall be responsible for maintaining the rental property in compliance with all Saginaw Charter Township codes. 
b.  That failure to maintain the rental property in compliance of the Saginaw Charter Township Code may result in enforcement against the owner/agent/licensee by all means available to the township. 
c.  Violation of this article is a civil infraction. In addition, any violation may result in the revocation of a license under section 18-213 of this article. The township shall seek all legal remedies, including obtaining injunctive orders to restrain, correct or abate a violation and the costs incurred by the township in correcting a violation, including attorney fees, shall become a lien on the real property upon which the residential rental unit is located. 
d.  That all tenants are provided a lease disclosure letter which provides information regarding township regulations, including: 
1.  The Township Noise Ordinance (Section 26-61 et seq.). 
2.  Curfew for minors (Section 38-158). 
3.  Open House Party Ordinance (Section 38-183). 
4.  International Property Maintenance Code (Sections 14-61 and 14-62). 
5.  Parking of vehicles (Section 403 of Zoning Ordinance). 
e.  That each lease or rental agreement entered for the licensed dwelling shall include the following addendum: 
CRIME FREE LEASE ADDENDUM 
In consideration of the execution or renewal of a lease of the dwelling unit identified in the lease, Owner and Resident agree as follows: 
1.  Resident, any members of the resident's household or a guest or other person under the resident's control shall not engage in criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on or near said premises. "Drug-related criminal activity" means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution, use, or possession with intent to manufacture, sell, distribute, or use a controlled substance (as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. 802). 
2.  Resident, any member of the resident's household or guest or other person under the resident's control shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity, on or near the said premises. 
3.  Resident or members of the household will not permit the dwelling unit to be used for, or facilitate criminal activity, including drug-related criminal activity, regardless of whether the individual engaging in such activity is a member of the household or a guest. 
4.  Resident, any member of the resident's household or a guest, or another person under the resident's control shall not engage in the unlawful manufacturing, selling, using, storing, keeping, or giving of a controlled substance or marijuana at any locations, whether on or near the dwelling unit premises or otherwise. 
5.  Resident, any member of the resident's household, or guest or another person under the resident's control shall not engage in any illegal activity including prostitution, criminal street gang activity, threatening, intimidating or stalking, assault, the unlawful discharge of firearms, on or near the dwelling unit premises, or any breach of the lease agreement that otherwise jeopardizes the health, safety, and welfare of the landlord, his agent or other tenant or involving imminent or actual serious property damage. 
VIOLATION OF THE ABOVE PROVISIONS SHALL BE A MATERIAL AND IRREPARABLE VIOLATION OF THE LEASE AND GOOD CAUSE FOR IMMEDIATE TERMINATION OF TENANCY. A single violation of any of the provisions of this added addendum shall be deemed a serious violation and a material and irreparable noncompliance. It is understood that a single violation shall be good cause for immediate termination of the lease. Unless otherwise provided by law, proof of violation shall not require criminal conviction, but shall be by substantial evidence of the type reasonably relied upon by property managers in the usual and regular course of business. 
In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any other provisions of the lease, the provisions of this addendum shall govern. 
This LEASE ADDENDUM is incorporated into the lease executed or renewed this day between Owner and Resident. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-206, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-407. - Processing of application. 
The township clerk's office shall determine whether the applicant has submitted a complete application for a rental housing business license within 14 days of its submission. An application is complete if it has been fully and properly completed in accordance with this section and the nonrefundable fee required pursuant to this section is tendered. 
(1)  Restrictions. No rental housing business license shall be issued until all fees, including water and sewer charges, delinquent personal property taxes and all other unpaid charges required by all township ordinances are paid in full. Further, no unresolved property maintenance issue shall be present if a rental business license is issued. 
(2)  Compliance with all laws. No rental housing business license shall be issued unless the applicant has complied with all township, county, state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(3)  Legal under existing law. No rental housing business license shall be issued by the licensing agent where the existing or proposed rental housing unit would be illegal under any law or ordinance of the township. 
(4)  Issuance after review. Upon submitting a completed application and required fee, the application shall be forwarded to the zoning administrator, treasurer's office and assessing department for the purposes of verifying if the rental unit or complex complies with the terms of this article. The clerk's office shall issue a license to the person to commence or continue the business designated in such application if the rental housing business complies with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-207, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-408. - Rental housing business license fee. 
The application for a rental housing business license, including any renewal thereof, shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by a resolution adopted by the Saginaw Charter Township Board. The fee shall be based on the owner/operator and not the number of dwelling units. The rental housing business license fee shall be used to defray the costs of processing, training and enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-208, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-409. - Duration of rental housing business license; renewals; late fees. 
The rental housing business license issued under this article shall be effective until January 15 of the following year in which issued. Licenses not renewed within 30 days of the January due date shall, in addition to the required fee, pay a late fee in the amount established by a resolution adopted by the Saginaw Charter Township Board. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-209, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-410. - Transfer of rental housing business license. 
A rental housing business license may be transferred by the holder to any other person upon submission of an updated rental housing business license application. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-210, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-411. - Failure to obtain a rental housing business license. 
Failure to obtain a rental housing business license will result in the issuance of a civil infraction citation by the township. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-211, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-412. - Rental housing services provided by the township. 
Owners and authorized agents who have obtained a rental housing business license are entitled to the following services by the Saginaw Charter Township: 
(1)  Free crime prevention training by the police department. 
(2)  The township will maintain a listing of all licensed rental housing properties for lease on our website. 
(3)  Our police department and code enforcement officers can assist the property owner through the eviction process. 
(4)  The clerk's office will maintain an emergency contact list for all licensed rental housing properties. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-212, 9-11-2017 )  
Sec. 18-413. - Revocation and/or suspension. 
(1)  In the event of any noncompliance with the provisions of this article after a license has been issued, the licensing agent may take one or more of the following actions to remedy the violation: 
(a)  The license may be revoked by order of the licensing agent until the noncompliance has been corrected. 
(b)  A civil infraction may be imposed. In addition to a civil infraction all violations shall constitute a nuisance per se and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief. Each day that a violation continues is a separate offense. 
(c)  The licensing agent and other departments within the township may develop a written agreement with the "owner" to stay further action while the owner addresses outstanding issues. 
(2)  The licensee may appeal all revocations to the township board, which, for cause shown, may uphold the revocation, or reinstate the license after giving the licensee reasonable notice and after holding a hearing, at which licensee shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(3)  In the event of revocation, the license fee shall not be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 710, 9-14-2009; Ord. No. 754, § 18-213, 9-11-2017 )  
Chapter 22 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; fire prevention and protection, ch. 30. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Emergency preparedness, MCL 30.401 et seq.; local emergency management ordinances, MCL 30.412. 
 
Sec. 22-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Coordinator means a person appointed to coordinate emergency planning and services within the township or as prescribed in this article. In the absence of an appointed person, the term "coordinator" shall mean the supervisor. 
Disaster means an occurrence or threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from a natural or human-made cause, including, but not limited to, fire, flood, snowstorm, ice storm, tornado, windstorm, wave action, oil spill, water contamination, utility failure, hazardous peacetime radiological incident, major transportation accident, hazardous materials incident, epidemic, air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, or hostile military action or paramilitary action, or similar occurrences resulting from terrorist activities, riots, or civil disorders. 
District coordinator means the state police district emergency services coordinator or his authorized representative. 
Emergency operations plan means the township emergency operations plan which has been prepared under section 22-37 to coordinate disaster response and recovery within the township. 
Emergency services shall have a broad meaning to include preparations for, and relief from, the effects of natural and manmade disasters, and to include civil defense. 
Emergency services forces means all disaster relief forces; all agencies of the municipal government, private and volunteer personnel, public officers and employees; and all other persons or groups of persons having duties or responsibilities under this article or pursuant to a lawful order or directive authorized by this article. 
Emergency services volunteer means any person duly registered and appointed by the coordinator and assigned to participate in the emergency services activity. 
Emergency situation means any situation confronting a community requiring emergency actions of a lesser nature than a disaster, to include, but not limited to, civil disturbance, labor strikes, visits by national or international dignitaries, and build-up activities prior to an actual disaster. 
State of disaster means a declaration by executive order or proclamation by the governor under the provisions of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.), which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of state, local and interjurisdictional disaster emergency plans and authorizes the deployment and use of any forces to which the plan or plans apply. 
State of emergency means a declaration by the supervisor pursuant to this article which activates the disaster response and recovery aspects of the township emergency operations plan and authorizes the deployment and use of any township forces to which the plan applies. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Definitions, MCL 30.402.  
Sec. 22-32. - Office of emergency services. 
(a)  The township office of emergency services will be the coordinating agency responsible for township-wide emergency preparedness; it will provide the means through which the township board and the township supervisor may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them by this article and Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.401 et seq.). 
(b)  The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board, is hereby authorized and directed to create an organization to prepare for community disasters utilizing to the fullest extent existing agencies within the township. The organization for providing emergency services shall consist of the office of emergency services as set out in subsection (c) of this section. 
(c)  An office of emergency services is established within the township government. The office of emergency services shall have an administrative head appointed who will be known as the coordinator, office of emergency services. Such assistants and other employees as are deemed necessary for the proper functioning of the organization will be employed. 
(d)  The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board, shall appoint an emergency services coordinator who shall be a person with the personal attributes, experience, and training needed to coordinate the activities of the agencies, departments, and individuals within the township to protect the public health, safety and welfare during emergency situations and disasters. 
(e)  The emergency services coordinator shall be responsible for the administration, planning, coordination and operation of all emergency preparedness activities in the township. The emergency services coordinator shall maintain liaison with county, state, and federal authorities, and the authorities of adjacent and nearby political subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective emergency operations. 
(f)  The duties of the emergency services coordinator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Disaster plans. Development of the township emergency operations plan, and any other appropriate disaster plans, for the immediate use of all of the facilities, equipment, manpower, and other resources of the township for the purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons or property; and protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public utilities necessary for the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(2)  Volunteers. Coordinating the recruitment and training of volunteer personnel and agencies to augment the personnel and facilities of the township for emergency purposes. 
(3)  Information programs. Through public information programs, educating the population as to actions necessary and required for the protection of persons and property in case of a disaster. 
(4)  Alerts. Conducting practice alerts and exercises to ensure the efficient operation of the township emergency organization and to familiarize residents of the township with emergency regulations, procedures, and operations. 
(5)  Emergency agencies. Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies engaged in any emergency or disaster relief programs. 
(6)  Properties and shelters. Negotiating with owners or persons in control of buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or property for emergency or disaster relief purposes, and designating suitable buildings as public shelters. 
(7)  Radiological defense program. Establishing and maintaining administrative control over a local radiological defense program, to include emergency preparations for both peacetime radiation incidents and international wartime disasters. 
(8)  County and adjacent municipalities. Coordinating municipal emergency preparedness activities with those at the county level and adjacent municipalities. 
(g)  Assistant coordinators shall be designated to work with the coordinator on emergency planning matters. Assistant coordinators shall be selected and shall serve as follows: 
(1)  There shall be one such assistant coordinator appointed from each township department as designated by the department head, with the approval of the township supervisor as part of the emergency services forces. 
(2)  Assistant coordinators shall assume the duties of the coordinator whenever he is unavailable during disasters or emergency situations in the order of designation by the township supervisor, acting upon the recommendation of the coordinator. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.03) 
State Law reference— Emergency management coordinators, MCL 30.409.  
Sec. 22-33. - Administration and operation. 
(a)  The township supervisor, as executive head of the township government, shall be the director of the emergency services forces of the township and shall be responsible for their organization, administration and operation, working through the coordinator. 
(b)  The township supervisor may exercise the emergency power and authority as specified in this article. 
(c)  Whenever a situation requires, or is likely to require, that the Supervisor invoke such power and authority, he shall, as soon as reasonably expedient, convene the township board to perform its legislative and administrative duties as the situation demands, and shall report to that body relative to emergency activities. Nothing in this article shall be construed as abridging or curtailing the powers of the township board unless specifically provided in this article. 
(d)  When obtaining formal approvals would result in delay of relief activity, the township supervisor may, until the township board convenes, waive procedures and formalities otherwise required pertaining to the performance of public works, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of temporary workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution of supplies, materials and facilities and expenditure of existing funds, and the township board is also empowered to waive any such procedures and formalities. 
(e)  The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board, is hereby empowered and has the authority: 
(1)  To appropriate and expend funds, make contracts, obtain and distribute equipment, materials, and supplies for disaster purposes. 
(2)  To provide for the health and safety of persons and property, including emergency assistance to the victims of a disaster. 
(3)  To assign and make equipment available for duty, the employees, property, or equipment of the municipality relating to firefighting; engineering; rescue; health, medical, and related services; police; transportation; construction; and similar items or service for disaster relief purposes within or without the physical limits of the municipality. 
(4)  In the event of a foreign attack upon this state, to waive procedures and formalities otherwise required by law pertaining to the performance of public work, entering into contracts, the incurring of obligations, the employment of permanent and temporary workers, the utilization of volunteer workers, the rental of equipment, the purchase and distribution with or without compensation of supplies, materials, and facilities, and the appropriation and expenditure of public funds. 
(f)  The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board, shall establish procedures for the succession of government during emergencies where officials are unavailable for exercising the powers and discharging the duties of their respective offices. 
(g)  The township supervisor, with the approval of the township board, may make regulations permitting the coordinator to assemble and utilize the emergency services forces and provide disaster relief aid as prescribed in subsection (e) of this section and sections 22-34 and 22-35. 
(Code 1986, §§ 2-07.04.01, 2-07.04.01(A), 2-07.04(D)—(F)) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 22-34. - Declaration of a state of emergency. 
Under the following circumstances, the township supervisor may declare a state of emergency exists in the township and may assemble and utilize the emergency services forces in accordance with the township emergency operations plan, and he may prescribe the manner and conditions of the use of such emergency services forces: 
(1)  Disaster or emergency. Whenever, on the basis of information received from authoritative sources, he feels that a large-scale disaster or emergency situation in the township, county or state is imminent. 
(2)  Duration. During any period of disaster in the township, county or state and thereafter as long as he shall deem it necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.04.01(B))  
Sec. 22-35. - Declaration of state of disaster. 
Whenever the township supervisor deems that any condition in the township is beyond the control of local public or private agencies or has attained or threatens to attain the proportions of a major disaster, he may request the governor to declare a state of disaster exists therein by instructing the coordinator to contact the district coordinator in accordance with section 14 of Public Act No. 390 of 1976 (MCL 30.414). 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.04.01(C))  
Sec. 22-36. - Personnel, equipment and facilities. 
The employees, equipment and facilities of all township departments, boards, institutions and commissions suitable for, or adaptable to emergency services activities may be designated as part of the total emergency services forces. Such designations shall be by the township supervisor with the approval of the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.04.02)  
Sec. 22-37. - Emergency operations plan. 
All officers and employees of departments, commissions, boards, institutions and other agencies of the township government designated by the supervisor, with the approval of the township board, as emergency services forces shall cooperate with the emergency services coordinator in the formulation of the emergency operations plan, and they shall assist the coordinator in all matters pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.04.03)  
Sec. 22-38. - Volunteers. 
(a)  Each department, commission, board, or other agency of township government may at any time appoint or authorize the appointment of volunteer citizens to augment the personnel of such township department, commission, board, or agency in time of emergency. 
(b)  Such individuals shall be enrolled as emergency services volunteers and shall be subject to the rules and regulations set forth by the respective department, commission, board, or agency head for such volunteers. 
(c)  The coordinator may enlist volunteer citizens to form the personnel of an emergency service for which the township has no counterpart, or to temporarily augment personnel of the township engaged in emergency activities. 
(d)  The coordinator shall maintain formal records of all such volunteers for workers' compensation purposes. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.04.04)  
Sec. 22-39. - Rights of township employees. 
Township employees assigned to duty as a part of the emergency services forces pursuant to the provisions of this article shall retain all of the rights, privileges, and immunities of township employees, and shall receive the compensation incident to their employment. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.05.05)  
Sec. 22-40. - Other responsibilities of officials. 
This article will not relieve any elected officials or departments of the normal responsibilities or authority given by general law or local ordinance, nor will it affect the work of the American Red Cross or other volunteer agencies organized for relief in a natural disaster. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.05.06)  
Sec. 22-41. - Willful obstruction or action. 
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any emergency services forces in the enforcement or accomplishment of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.06.01)  
Sec. 22-42. - Misrepresentation. 
It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or other means of identification as a member of the emergency services forces of the township unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by proper officials. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.06.02)  
Sec. 22-43. - Relief from liability. 
(a)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the state or a political subdivision a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the state or a political subdivision to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part or parts of the real estate or other premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, mock, or practice disaster, together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for negligently causing the death of or injury to any person on or about the real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or permission or for loss or damage to the property of the person. 
(b)  A person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who has gratuitously granted the use of the real estate or other premises for the purposes stated in this section shall be legally obligated to make known to the licensee any hidden dangers or safety hazards which are known to the owner or occupant of the real estate or premises which might possibly result in the death or injury or loss of property to a person using the real estate or premises. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.07)  
Sec. 22-44. - Suspension of conflicting provisions. 
At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations, insofar as the latter may be inconsistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2-07.05)  
Secs. 22-45—22-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - COST RECOVERY FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 748 , adopted July 11, 2016, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 22-71—22-73, and derived from the 1986 Code. 
 
Sec. 22-71. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Aircraft means any contrivance used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air. 
Emergency response means services provided by township personnel, or a third party contractor or entity responding at the request or direction of the township, responding to an incident, occurring on public or private property, which poses, or is reasonably believed to pose a threat to, an individual; the public health, safety, or welfare; to property; or to the environment, and which requires, or reasonably appears to require, urgent action to mitigate the threat, regardless of whether the person(s) responsible or the victim(s) desired the response, requested a response, or acknowledged the need for a response. Emergency response(s) include, but are not limited to, responses for the following: 
(1)  Vehicle, trailer, or recreational equipment related incident; 
(2)  Intentional fire at public or private property; 
(3)  The release of a hazardous material or hazardous substance where a reasonable person might conclude that it placed persons or property at immediate or long-term risk if not addressed in an urgent manner; 
(4)  Confined space rescue; 
(5)  High angle or trench rescue; 
(6)  Ice rescue; 
(7)  Water or watercraft rescue or fire; 
(8)  Actual or suspected bombs or other explosive devices; 
(9)  Actual or suspected biological or chemical materials or substances requiring specialized handling or equipment; 
(10)  Aircraft rescue or fire; 
(11)  Any technical or specialized rescue not otherwise enumerated herein; 
(12)  Any construction or excavation related incident that requires, or reasonably appears to require, urgent response to mitigate a threat to person(s) or property; 
(13)  Any incident involving a utility line or utility facility failure; 
(14)  Any incident that risks the personal health and safety of the responding township personnel and third party contractors or entities; 
(15)  A false alarm at a commercial, industrial, or manufacturing facility; 
(16)  Requests for aid of township personnel or third party contractors or entities responding at the request of the township, made under false pretense, including, but not limited to, bomb or explosive device threats, intentionally dishonest and or prank calls, and the filing of false police reports; and 
(17)  Any incident that necessitates dispatch or response of township personnel or third party contractors or entities responding at the request of the township, to mitigate an urgent threat to health or safety of person or property. 
Expense of emergency response means the actual or reasonably calculated costs incurred by the township, or that the township pays to a third party contractor or entity responding at the request or direction of the township, when making an emergency response. The expense of emergency response includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Salaries or wages, including overtime pay, fringe benefits and other compensation of township personnel directly responding to the emergency, for time spent responding to, cleaning up (including, but not limited to, cleaning, drying, and storage of rescue equipment and vehicles), performing any necessary restorative work to damaged property, and time spent taking all remedial measures; 
(2)  Any amounts paid by the township to third party contractors responding at the request or direction of the township, for time spent responding to, cleaning up (including, but not limited to, cleaning, drying, and storage of rescue equipment and vehicles), performing any necessary restorative work to damaged property, and time spent taking all remedial measures; 
(3)  Salary or wages, including overtime pay, paid by the township for mutual aid costs; 
(4)  A reasonable hourly rate for the use, maintenance, repair, replacement and storage of rescue equipment and vehicles; 
(5)  The direct cost of any expended non-reusable items, including, but not limited to, the cost of medical supplies, other non-reusable rescue items, cleaning materials, and direct costs of restoration to any damaged public property; 
(6)  Costs incurred to halt, abate, remediate or remedy any incident involving hazardous materials or substances or actual or suspected biological or chemical threats; 
(7)  Charges imposed to the township by local, state, or federal government entities related to the release of hazardous materials or substances, and any other contamination as a result of the incident; 
(8)  Costs incurred to extinguish or fight any fire in or at a structure or on a property, including, but not limited to, overhauling equipment, fire extinguishers and foam, any demolition costs if the structure must be demolished to protect public safety following the fire; 
(9)  The cost of traffic control and street closures necessary to protect public or individuals against the emergency; 
(10)  Upon criminal conviction of the person(s) responsible, any and all of the applicable expenses for which reimbursement is allowed pursuant to the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1927 PA 175, as amended, or by corresponding successor statute; 
(11)  All legal costs, including, but not limited to attorney fees and the payment of township personnel to attend court hearings, incurred by the township in prosecuting charges filed as a result of the emergency; 
(12)  Any other cost not otherwise enumerated above that is reasonably related to the emergency response; and 
(13)  Costs incurred to collect any amounts due under this article after default on the first invoice. 
False alarm means any activation of an alarm system eliciting a response by township personnel, or by third party contractors or entities at the request of the township, where no actual urgent threat to persons or property exists. A false alarm includes, but is not limited to, activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation or the negligence of the user of an alarm system or the negligence of the employee or agent of the user of the alarm system; but does not include an alarm caused by forces of nature, interruption of electrical or telephone service to the alarm user, visible signs of attempted break-ins or false activation by a third party not within the control of the alarm user. 
Hazardous material means any hazardous material as defined in the Fire Prevention Code, 1941 PA 207, as amended, or by corresponding successor statute, and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. 
Hazardous substance means a hazardous substance as defined in the Hazardous Substances Act, 1965 PA 188, as amended, or by corresponding successor statute, and any rules promulgated pursuant thereto. 
Person(s) responsible means the owner(s), operator(s), tenant(s), or person(s) in charge of, or in possession of the property or vehicle to which an emergency response is directed, and/or person(s) whose actions or inactions caused or contributed to causing, either intentionally or unintentionally, the incident which necessitated the emergency response. Any party determined to be the person responsible by law enforcement shall be jointly and severally liable for payment of the expense of emergency response. A person may be responsible regardless of whether the person(s) responsible or the victim(s) requested, desired, or acknowledged the need for emergency response and whether or not the person responsible is criminally prosecuted or civilly sued. Parents and or guardians shall be responsible for the payment of expense of emergency response incurred as a result of such conduct by their minor children or wards. 
Township personnel means fire department and police department, including on-call fire fighters, specialized rescue personnel, hazardous materials personnel, all other public safety personnel, and department of public works personnel. 
Vehicle means any vehicle as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code, 1949 PA 300, as amended, or by corresponding successor statute. 
Watercraft means any vessel used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 ) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-72. - Purpose. 
Emergency responses are dangerous and have the potential to be costly to many township departments. Township operational and financial costs incurred to respond to incidents on public or private property requiring urgent action to mitigate threats to individual or public health, safety, or welfare, or to the environment include, without limitation, (i) purchase, maintenance, repair, replacement, storage of specialized rescue equipment and vehicles; (ii) specialized training, licensure, and certification for township personnel; (iii) payment to third party contractors or entities providing needed services; (iv) overtime costs and costs resulting from the diversion of township personnel from normal duties; and (v) repair and clean-up costs when public property is damaged or debris needs to be removed. Emergency responses often risk the health and safety of township personnel and of the general public as township personnel rush to respond. Additionally, emergency responses have collateral effects such as street closures, traffic disruptions, delays, impaired access to homes, businesses, schools and public amenities. These effects often occur regardless of whether or not the situation was a true emergency or a false alarm and regardless of whether the person(s) responsible or the victim(s) desired, requested, or believed emergency response was necessary. This article necessary to recover emergency response costs and to impose responsibility for such costs on those whose intentional, reckless or negligent acts resulted in the emergency response. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Sec. 22-73. - Charges. 
(a)  The expense of an emergency response shall be charged against the person(s) responsible, as defined by this article. 
(b)  If there is more than one person responsible, liability shall be joint and several. 
(c)  Liability shall not depend upon a determination of intent, fault, negligence, or any determination of civil or criminal liability. 
(d)  Charges under this article shall be applicable regardless of the outcome of the emergency response. 
(e)  The charges shall constitute a debt of the person(s) responsible and shall be collectible by the township in the same manner as a contractual obligation under contract. 
(f)  This article shall be construed to impose responsibility and liability of a civil nature and shall not be construed to conflict, contravene, enlarge, or reduce any criminal liability or responsibility, including, but not limited to, fines or costs imposed by a court. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Sec. 22-74. - Fee schedule. 
The township board shall, by resolution, adopt a schedule of costs specifying the expenses associated with emergency response pursuant to this section. This schedule shall be available to the public from the township clerk. Bills to persons responsible may be based on the fee schedule or calculated actual costs. If a fee is listed on the adopted schedule, the billing shall be based on that fee unless the incident is of such an extraordinary nature that the fee is clearly insufficient to cover the actual costs. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Sec. 22-75. - Billing. 
The township manager, or the township manager's designee, shall submit a detailed bill for the expense of an emergency response by first class mail or personal service to the person(s) responsible. The bill shall require full payment within 30 calendar days from the date of billing. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Sec. 22-76. - Failure to pay. 
(a)  Any failure by a person responsible to pay a bill issued under this article within 30 calendar days of the date of billing shall be considered a default. In case of a default, the township may commence a civil suit or take any other action permitted at law or in equity to recover the expenses of an emergency response. 
(b)  If legal action is taken to collect an amount owed under this article, the township shall be entitled to recover the costs of such legal action from the person responsible, including reasonable and actual attorneys' fees. 
(c)  The township may also ask a court in which any person(s) responsible appear for a criminal or municipal civil infraction proceeding arising from the incident to which the emergency response was made to require payment of costs charged pursuant to this article as a part of any penalty imposed on the person appearing before the court. 
(d)  If the incident occurred on property owned by the person(s) responsible, the township may seek to impose the charge as a lien upon that property. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Sec. 22-77. - Severability. 
The phrases, sentences, sections, subsections and provisions of this article are severable; and a finding that any portion of this article is unconstitutional or otherwise unenforceable shall not detract from or affect the validity or enforceability of the remainder of this article. 
( Ord. No. 748, § 1, 7-11-2016 )  
Secs. 22-78—22-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Alarm systems, MCL 338.1051 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-101. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means a detection device or an assembly of equipment or devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police officers and/or fire department personnel are expected to respond. The term "alarm system" shall encompass burglar alarms and fire alarms. 
(1)  Alarm systems on motor vehicles. However, alarm systems on motor vehicles shall be excluded from the definition and operation of this article unless the motor vehicle alarm is connected to an alarm system at the premises owned and/or leased by the user. 
(2)  Internal alarm systems. 
a.  Signals within the premises excluded. Also excluded are internal alarm systems designed solely to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located of an unauthorized intrusion or the presence of a hazard within such premises. 
b.  Signals outside the premises included. If such an internal system, however, also employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises such an alarm system is within the provisions of this article. 
Alarm user means any person, firm, or corporation who is the owner, and any person, firm or corporation who is a lessee of such owner of premises in which an alarm system as defined in this section is installed and maintained. 
Burglar alarm means an alarm which is designed to detect an unwarranted intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery or other violent act at a premises. The term "burglar alarm" includes the terms "automatic hold-up alarm," "intrusions alarm," "disturbance alarm," "panic alarm," "robbery alarm," "hold-up alarm," and "local alarm." 
False alarm means activation of an alarm system through mistake, mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of prudent maintenance, or through the negligence of the occupant of the residence and/or building in which the alarm system is located, including their employees or agents. The term "false alarm" shall also mean any activation of an alarm system which indicates a crime or situation other than that which it was designated to indicate, or in the case of a fire alarm, any condition not resulting from a fire or potential fire hazard. 
Fire alarm means an alarm system which is designed to detect and provide warning of a fire emergency, including local alarms. 
(1)  Internal fire suppression equipment. Smoke detectors or other internal fire suppression equipment designed to monitor products of combustion and temperature rise and at a predetermined measurement discharge fire extinguishing substances are excluded from the definition and coverage of this article. 
(2)  Suppression with signals outside premises. If, however, such smoke detectors or fire suppression devices are connected to or are a part of a system designed to signal persons outside the premises in which such detection equipment is located that a fire hazard exists on such premises then such internal detection and suppression equipment is within this definition. 
Intentional false alarm means any intentional activation of an alarm system for the purposes of measuring response time of police and/or fire units. 
Local alarm means an alarm system which employs audible signals designed to alert persons outside the premises in which the alarm system is located. 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 22-102. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 727, § 1, adopted May 14, 2012, repealed § 22-102, which pertained to alarm systems permits and derived from Code 1986, § 7-09.03.  
Sec. 22-103. - License requirement established. 
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of providing for the installation, operation and/or maintenance of a burglar and/or fire alarm system and/or a combined alarm monitoring-sales facility unless properly licensed by the state pursuant to Public Act No. 330 of 1968 (MCL 338.1051 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.04)  
Sec. 22-104. - System and equipment requirements. 
(a)  Separate systems for separate units. Buildings having more than one occupant who utilize separate entrances for access to their individual units shall have separate alarms systems for each unit. This subsection shall not be construed to require the installation of alarm systems, but only to require separate systems for separate units when installed. 
(b)  Deactivation of local alarms. Local alarms shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off device, deactivating audible signals within a reasonable time. 
(1)  Time limit; misdemeanor violation. Whenever any local alarm continues to emit audible signals, whether continuously or a regularly repeating basis, for over 20 minutes, and persons listed on the permit application for the alarm system cannot be contacted by the police department, or do not respond within 30 minutes of being contacted, and the audible signal creates a nuisance or disturbance to the peace and tranquility of the surrounding area, the alarm user responsible for such alarm shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(2)  Disablement by police/fire units. In addition, the police department and/or fire department shall be authorized to disconnect or otherwise disable such local alarm by cutting such wires, disconnecting such speakers, or disabling such other components of the alarm system as are located on the exterior of the premises. 
(c)  Telephone alarm system prohibited. No person, firm, or corporation shall sell, install, operate, adjust, arrange for, or contract to provide a device which upon activation, either mechanically, electronically, or by any other means, initiates the automatic calling or dialing of, or makes a connection directly to, a telephone assigned to a police or fire agency for the purpose of delivering a recorded message, except those financial institutions approved for direct connection to central dispatch. 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.05)  
Sec. 22-105. - False alarms. 
(a)  Fee requirement established. Notwithstanding any penalties provided for upon conviction for any violation of this article, and notwithstanding the fact that prosecution for violation of this article has or has not commenced, any person, firm, or corporation operating an alarm system which signals more than two false alarms within one calendar year shall pay to the township a false alarm fee in order to defray a portion of the cost of response to false alarms. 
(b)  Fee. The fee to be paid to the township for a false alarm shall be as established by resolution. 
(c)  Exceptions to alarm fees. Alarm conditions existing under the following circumstances shall not constitute a false alarm and no false alarms fee shall be assessed: 
(1)  False alarms recorded in the first 30 days after installation are not counted for enforcement purposes; 
(2)  False alarms recorded as a result of storms, earthquakes, or other violent conditions beyond the control of owners and/or lessees; 
(3)  Alarm conditions being activated by a person working on the alarm system with prior notification to the township police department; 
(4)  Alarms which can be substantiated as being activated by disruption or disturbance of telephone company facilities or motor vehicle-utility pole accidents. 
(d)  Notice of alarm violation. A "Notice of Alarm Violation" shall be designed and used as required by this article. 
(1)  Forwarded to alarm user after violation. The township police department shall forward a notice of alarm violation to the alarm user following each such false alarm occurrence. 
(2)  Completion and return by user. The alarm user, upon receipt of the notice of alarm violation, shall complete any required information on the notice of alarm violation and return the notice as stipulated. 
(3)  Notification. The police department will, by first class mail, notify the alarm user of the status of the violation and/or the applicable false alarm fee. 
(4)  Completion of form. The alarm user will have ten days to complete the notice of alarm violation form and return it, or return any applicable alarm fee to the police department. 
(5)  Revocation. If the notice of alarm violation is not returned within the prescribed time, or if payment is not received, the police department may cause the alarm user's permit to be revoked. 
(e)  Appeal of violation and fee. 
(1)  Written appeal request. Within ten days of the date of receipt of a notice of alarm violation, an alarm user wishing to appeal a false alarm violation and the associated fee as a result of a condition described in subsection (c) of this section may do so by a written appeal request. 
(2)  Applicable condition documented. The appeal request, directed to the township police department, shall contain documentation of the applicable condition as described in subsections (c)(1) through (4) of this section. 
(3)  Determination by chief. The police chief or fire chief, or a designated representative, shall make a determination on the appeal request and shall notify the alarm user of the decision in writing. 
(4)  Appeal of decision to township manager. In the event the alarm user is not satisfied with the decision rendered by the police or fire chief, or a designated representative, the alarm user, within ten days of the determination of the police or fire chief, may file with the township manager a written request that the determination be reconsidered. 
(5)  Decision by manager. The township manager, or his designee, shall decide whether to uphold, or set aside in whole or in part, the decision reached by the police or fire chief. The alarm user shall be notified of that decision in writing. 
(6)  Opportunity for personal appeal. If the alarm user feels it necessary to appeal the decision, he may have the opportunity to personally be present and may be heard on the matter by the township manager or his designee. 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.06; Ord. No. 584, §§ 7-09.12.02, 7-09.13, 7-20-1998)  
Sec. 22-106. - Defective alarms. 
An alarm system signalling more than five false alarms within a calendar year is presumed to be defective. Upon written notice, the owner or occupant of the building or residence shall have the alarm system inspected, at the user's expense, by a licensed alarm system contractor within ten days of receipt of the fifth notice of alarm violation and shall forward to the township police department such contractor's report of the probable cause of the false alarms and the measures instituted to eliminate the false alarms. 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.07) 
State Law reference— Correction of systems giving false alarms, MCL 338.1085.  
Sec. 22-107. - Disclaimer of obligation. 
(a)  This article does not constitute a contract for the township or the township police or fire departments to answer any alarms, whether false or otherwise. 
(b)  Further, this article does not guarantee that the police or fire departments will respond to any alarm from any source. 
(c)  This article does not obligate the township or its police and/or fire departments in any manner to assist, respond, or answer any alarm system subscribed to or owned by any individual, organization or business. 
(Code 1986, § 7-09.08)  
Chapter 26 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Animals, ch. 10; disturbing the peace or environment, § 10-37; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; floods, ch. 34; parks and recreation, ch. 42; solid waste, ch. 50; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act, MCL 324.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BLIGHT CONTROL 
 
Sec. 26-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means any vehicle which has remained on private property for a period of 48 continuous hours, or more, without the consent of the owner or occupant of the property, or for a period of 48 continuous hours or more after the consent of the owner or occupant of the property has been revoked. 
Blighted structure means any dwelling, garage, or out-building, or any factory, shop, store, office building, warehouse or any other structure or part of a structure which, because of fire, wind, or other natural disaster, or physical deterioration, is no longer habitable as a dwelling, nor useful for the purpose for which it may have been intended. 
Building materials means lumber, brick, concrete or cinder blocks, plumbing materials, electrical wiring or equipment, heating ducts or equipment, shingles, mortar, concrete, or cement, nails, screws, or any other materials used in constructing any structure. 
Junk means parts of machinery or motor vehicles, broken and unusable furniture, stoves, refrigerators or other appliances, remnants of wood, metal or any other cast-off material of any kind, whether or not such material could be put to any reasonable use. 
Junk motor vehicles means any vehicle which is not licensed for use upon the highways of the state for a period in excess of 30 days, and shall also include, whether licensed or not, any motor vehicle which is inoperative for any reason for a period in excess of 30 days, provided that there is excepted from this definition unlicensed, but operative, vehicles which are kept as the stock in trade of a regularly licensed and established new or used automobile or other motorized vehicle dealer; provided, further, such vehicles are excepted as are upon the premises of a motor vehicle repair garage. 
Trash and rubbish mean any and all forms of debris not otherwise classified in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-32. - Findings. 
It is hereby determined that the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles, abandoned vehicles, building materials, and the maintenance of blighted structures upon any private property within the township tends to result in blighted and deteriorated neighborhoods, the spread of vermin and disease, the increase in criminal activity, and therefore is contrary to the public peace, health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.01)  
Sec. 26-33. - Violations. 
(a)  Notification. If, upon inspection, the township building inspector, any township police officer, fire inspector, health officer, township supervisor or county health officer shall find that any property within the township is being used in violation of this article, the owner and/or occupant shall be notified of such violation which may be given: 
(1)  By certified letter. By certified letter to the owner as he appears on the tax rolls of the township; or 
(2)  By service upon occupant. By service upon the occupant personally by any official of the township or the county health department. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  Public hearing. The owner and/or occupant may appeal to the township board for a public hearing which shall be held at the next regular township board meeting providing he files a request in writing with the township clerk within ten days of the receipt of the notice above specified. 
(2)  Board decision final. Following the hearing, the decision of the township board as to the violation shall be final. 
(c)  Failure to comply. If the owner and/or occupant of such premises shall not cause such material in violation of this article to be eliminated or removed within ten days after notice or within ten days after the decision of the township board is rendered in case of an appeal: 
(1)  Removal ordered by supervisor. The township supervisor shall direct some person, or persons, to remove and/or eliminate the violation at the cost and expense of the owner and/or occupant of the premises; 
(2)  Judgment for removal expense. After causing such materials to be eliminated or removed, the township supervisor may obtain a judgment against the owner and/or occupant in the amount of the total expense incurred by the township which shall be a lien upon the property; and 
(3)  Collection. The expense may be collected in any manner authorized by statute and, if not paid, may be placed on the tax roll and collected the same as other taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.04)  
Sec. 26-34. - Trash, rubbish, junk, or junk vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store, or to permit the storage or accumulation of trash, rubbish, junk, junk vehicles or abandoned vehicles on any private property in the township except within a completely enclosed building or upon the premises of a property zoned or legally operating, licensed or approved junk dealer, junk buyer, dealer in used auto parts, dealer in secondhand goods or junk, operator of an automobile repair garage and/or automobile wrecker business. In the event junk, a junk vehicle, or an abandoned vehicle is owned by a person other than the owner of the property on which it is located, both the property owner and the registered owner of the vehicle are responsible for a civil in fraction and the code enforcement officer may issue a civil infraction citation to either or both. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.03.01; Ord. No. 649, 10-13-2003) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 50; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.  
Sec. 26-35. - Blighted or vacant structures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any blighted or vacant structure, dwelling, garage, outbuilding, factory, shop, store, or warehouse unless the structure is kept securely locked, the windows kept glazed or neatly boarded up, and otherwise protected to prevent entrance thereto by unauthorized persons or unless such structure is in the course of construction in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the township and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.03.02)  
Sec. 26-36. - Building materials. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or permit the storage or accumulation of building materials on any private property, except: 
(1)  In enclosed building. In a completely enclosed building; 
(2)  Part of business stock. Where such building materials are part of the stock in trade or business located on such property; or 
(3)  Structure requiring permit. When such materials are being used in the construction of a structure on the property in accordance with a valid building permit issued by the township and unless such construction is completed within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1986, § 8-04.03.03) 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14.  
Secs. 26-37—26-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Motor vehicle noise, MCL 257.707 et seq. 
 
Sec. 26-61. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Decibel means a unit of sound level on a logarithmic scale measured relative to the threshold of audible sound by the human ear, in compliance with American National Standards Institute Standard 1.1-1960, as amended. 
Device means any mechanism which is intended to or which actually produces sound when operated or handled. 
Sound level meter means any instrument including a microphone, amplifier, an output meter, and frequency weighting networks for the measurement of noise and sound levels in a specific manner and which complies with standards established by the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters S1.4-1971, as amended. 
Unreasonable noise means any excessive or unusually loud sound that disturbs the peace, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities or injures or endangers the health or safety of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities of which causes injury to plant or animal life, or damage to property or business. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 8-08.02, 9-27-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 26-62. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the limits of the township is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noises are increasing. 
(b)  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive, unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the township. 
(c)  The necessity in public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted of this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the township and its inhabitants. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 8-08.01, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 26-63. - Exceptions. 
None of the terms or prohibitions of this article shall apply to or be enforced against the following: 
(1)  Operation of residential power devices. This article shall not prohibit the operation of any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, snow blower or similar device used outdoors in residential areas between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.; 
(2)  Any police or fire vehicle or any ambulance, while engaged upon emergency business; 
(3)  Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, highways or utilities by or on behalf of the township, county road commission or state department of transportation during the night, when the public safety, welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; 
(4)  The use of any such device listed in this article by a governmental agency in the furtherance of its authorized function; 
(5)  The use of any device listed in this article to warn of imminent danger; 
(6)  The reasonable use of any such device listed in this article by a church or other nonprofit religious organization upon its premises for the dissemination of music or bell tones as a call to, recessional from or integral part of, religious service; 
(7)  The use of a chime to indicate the time at not more frequent intervals than 15 minutes; or 
(8)  The dissemination of sound during a parade, outdoor band concert, athletic event, school event, theatrical performance, or noncommercial public speaking and public assembly activities conducted on any public space or public right-of-way provided the volume of sound is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons more than 50 feet from the point of amplification. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 8-08.06, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 26-64. - Excessive noise. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful, and be deemed a public nuisance, for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, and unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity residing in the area. 
(b)  Standard. 
(1)  The standard which may be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section exists may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  The level of noise; 
b.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual; 
c.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
d.  The level and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
e.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
f.  The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
g.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
h.  The time of the day and night the noise occurs; 
i.  The duration of the noise; 
j.  Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; 
k.  Noise radiating from all properties or buildings, as measured at the boundaries of the property, which is in excess of the decibel level established for the districts and times listed as follows shall constitute prima facie evidence that such noise unreasonably disturbs the comfort, quiet, and repose of persons in the area: 
Land Use Category 	Day-Time Standards 	Night-Time Standards 
	7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. 	9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
Residential 	55 DBA 	50 DBA 
Business 	65 DBA 	60 DBA 
Office 	55 DBA 	55 DBA 
Manufacturing 	70 DBA 	65 DBA 
 
(2)  The land use categories shall be defined in the zoning ordinances for the township. 
(3)  Where property is partly in two zoning districts or adjoins the boundary of a zoning district, the decibel level of the zoning district of the property where the noise is emanating shall control. 
(4)  Any business or industrial use of property which exists now or in the future as a legal nonconforming use, as defined in Chapter 2 of the township zoning ordinance, in a more restrictive zoning classification shall be allowed to emit noise in excess of these limitations for the particular zoning classification where such use is located; provided, that such noise does not exceed the limitation provided in this section for business and industrial zoning districts. 
(Ord. No. 599, §§ 8-08.03, 8-08.04, 9-27-1999)  
Sec. 26-65. - Noises prohibited. 
The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing, unnecessary and excessive noises in violation of this article in consideration of the excessive standards enumerated in subsection 26-64, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Sound amplifying equipment. 
a.  For the purpose of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: 
1.  Mobile sound amplifying equipment means any sound amplifying equipment capable of being operated while being transported from place to place and shall include without limitation any sound amplifying equipment upon or in any vehicle, including motorcycle or moped. 
2.  Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of human noise, music or any other sound. 
3.  Street means a public right-of-way, private highway or other place open to the general public or generally accessible to motor vehicles, including an area designated for the parking of motor vehicles; however, it shall not include that portion of a public street temporarily closed to vehicular traffic by public authority to accommodate or permit a public assembly. 
b.  No person shall use or permit the use of any sound amplifying equipment or mobile sound amplifying equipment, including radio, television, phonograph, drum, or musical instrument, the sound of which is cast upon any street, alley or property open to the public so as to produce sound that is already audible more than 50 feet from the point of amplification. 
(2)  Loudspeakers, radios, television sets, musical instruments, tape players, compact disc players and similar devices. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio, television, musical instrument, phonograph, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary or upon the public street. 
(3)  Shout, whistle, or make any loud noises. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing, or making any other loud noises on the public streets, sidewalks, bike pathways or other streets or paths or private property located within the township, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or making of any such noise at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a reasonable person of normal sensitivities in any office, dwelling, hotel, hospital or residence or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Operate construction tools or equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any tools or equipment used in construction, excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building, street or highway, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., such that the sound therefrom is plainly audible in any dwelling, hotel, hospital, office or residence, or on any residential property other than the property from which the noise emanates or originates. 
(5)  Operate steam or other engines. Operating or permitting the operation of any steam engine or internal combustion engine, whether stationary or mobile, so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of a person of normal sensitivities in any office, dwelling, hotel, hospital or residence or any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat, or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the school, institution of learning, church or court are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the street is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums and instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any event, performance, show or sale. 
(13)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(14)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noises from such blower or fan are muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 8-08.05, 9-27-1999)  
Secs. 26-66—26-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ODOR NUISANCE 
 
Sec. 26-81. - Purpose. 
To control odors that are a public nuisance and to provide the residents of Saginaw Charter Township protection from objectionable odor that unreasonably interfere with the health, safety and general welfare of the community. 
( Ord. No. 752, § 1, 7-10-2017 )  
Sec. 26-82. - Definition. 
Odor nuisance shall mean the doing of any act or omitting to do any act that causes injury, damage, hurt, danger, inconvenience, annoyance or discomfort of that unreasonably interferes with or adversely impacts a person of normal sensitivities or the normal use and enjoyment of property or that threatens health, safety and general welfare of the public that results from the emission of odor, chemicals, gas, smoke, fumes or other materials or processes across any parcel or property line. 
( Ord. No. 752, § 2, 7-10-2017 )  
Sec. 26-83. - Prohibition. 
No person shall cause, permit or fail to prevent the emission of an odor nuisance from any property he or she owns, occupies, leases or controls. In determining whether or not there is a violation the following may be considered in addition to other relevant factors: 
(a)  Frequency of occurrence of the odor. 
(b)  Intensity and character of the odor. 
(c)  Duration of the odor. 
(d)  Number and frequency of citizen complaints. 
(e)  Availability of technology to control or eliminate the odor. 
No violation shall be exempt from complying with this provision because of its existence or of any activity causing an odor nuisance at the time of the effective date of this provision. 
( Ord. No. 752, § 3, 7-10-2017 )  
Sec. 26-84. - Violation. 
Violation of this article by any person, firm or corporation is civil infraction. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition to prosecution, the township, through a code official, shall institute proceedings to restrain, correct or abate the violation. The cost of such action shall be assessed against the person, firm or corporation found to be in violation and, in lieu of payment, shall become a lien upon the real estate where such violation occurred. 
( Ord. No. 752, § 4, 7-10-2017 )  
Chapter 30 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; emergency services, ch. 22; water hydrants, § 78-38. 
State Law reference— Fire prevention code, MCL 29.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 30-1—30-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Departments, § 2-161 et seq. 
State Law reference— Township fire departments, MCL 42.13, 42.1, 41.801 et seq. 
 
Sec. 30-31. - Created. 
There is hereby created the township fire department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-08.02)  
Sec. 30-32. - Powers, duties, and responsibilities. 
(a)  The township fire department shall perform all of the duties and responsibilities of a municipal fire department as permitted under the statutes of the state, which duties include but are not limited to: fire suppression, fire prevention (including fire code enforcement), inspections, public education, communications, maintenance of apparatus and buildings, training, administration, planning, arson investigation, and other functions pertaining thereto. 
(b)  The township fire department shall also have such other additional powers, duties, and responsibilities as may be lawfully imposed upon it by any administrative directive, resolution of the township board, rule, Code provision or other provision of law. 
(c)  The township fire department shall have full power and authority to enforce all township Code provisions and state laws pertaining to the proper execution and administration of all township Code provisions, state laws, and adopted codes pertaining to the duties and responsibilities described in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2-08.03)  
Sec. 30-33. - Chief of the fire department. 
(a)  The duties and responsibilities of the township fire department shall be directed and administered by a chief of the fire department. 
(b)  Every employee or member of the township fire department shall be subject to the orders at any time of the chief of the fire department. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the township manager, with the consent of the township board. 
(d)  The chief of the fire department shall possess a broad range of knowledge and experience in the operations of a municipal fire department, subject to the other requirements and qualifications shown on the fire chief's approved job description. 
(e)  The fire chief may designate an acting chief in his absence, subject to the approval of the township manager. 
(f)  The chief of the fire department with the approval of the township board, shall: 
(1)  From time to time make and establish such rules and regulations as required under Public Act No. 33 of 1951 (MCL 41.801 et seq.); and 
(2)  Establish and promulgate such procedures as are necessary for the governing and operation of the fire department, and for the care and management of the motor vehicles, equipment, property and buildings pertaining thereto as shall be necessary for the proper and efficient operation and maintenance of the department. 
(Code 1986, § 2-08.04) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 30-34. - Department personnel. 
(a)  The township fire department shall be composed of such other personnel, full-time or part-time, volunteer or paid, as may be required and determined by the township board for the proper and efficient operation and maintenance of the township fire department. 
(b)  The personnel of the township fire department shall be appointed by the township manager, upon recommendation of the fire chief. 
(c)  Any of the township fire department's personnel engaged in fire suppression activities shall meet all of the requirements of the township and the state for performing that function, and any other department personnel performing specialized work shall meet the then current requirements of the state or the township for that activity. 
(Code 1986, § 2-08.05) 
Cross reference— Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.  
Sec. 30-35. - Violations of fire-related laws. 
The chief of the fire department, fire marshal and fire inspectors shall be authorized to issue and serve appearance tickets for violations of all state laws, as they may be authorized by state law, and township fire related Code provisions when they have reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a violation of such laws and Code provisions. The chief of the fire department, the fire marshal and fire inspectors shall further take such additional actions as permitted by law to secure compliance with such laws and Code provisions. 
(Code 1986, § 2-08.06; Ord. No. 689, 12-19-2005)  
Secs. 30-36—30-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE 
 
Sec. 30-61. - Adoption. 
A certain document being marked and designated as the International Fire Code, (2015 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, D, I, and K (see International Fire Code Section 101.2.1, 2015 edition), as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the fire code of the Saginaw Charter Township, in the State of Michigan regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties conditions and terms of said fire code, on file in the township clerk's office of Saginaw Charter Township are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in section 30-62 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 625, § 5-02.01, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 689, 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 709, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 721, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 740 , 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 751, 4-24-2017 ) 
State Law reference— Adoption by reference, MCL 42.23.  
Sec. 30-62. - Revisions. 
That the following sections are hereby revised: 
Section 101.1 Amend to read: Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of Saginaw Charter Township, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Add Section 101.6 Where referenced in this code, substitute International Building Code, International Mechanical Code, and ICC Electrical Code with Michigan Residential Code, Michigan Plumbing Code, Michigan Mechanical Code, Michigan Building Code, Michigan Rehabilitation Code for Existing Buildings, and the Michigan Electrical Code. 
Section 105.6.32 Amend to read: Open burning. An operational permit is required for the kindling or maintaining of an open fire or a fire on a public street, alley, road or other public or private ground. Instructions and stipulations of the permit shall be adhered to. 
Exceptions: 
1.  Recreational fires. 
2.  Fires in portable outdoor fireplaces. 
Add Section 105.6.50 Family Child Care Home or Group Child Care Home. An operational permit is required to operate a family child care home or group child care home. 
Add Section 108.1.1 Hearing. A hearing shall be set not less than ten (10) business days and not more than sixty (60) business days from the date of the appeal filed with the code official. Written notice of the date, time and place the hearing will be held will be given to the appellant at least ten (10) business days prior to the hearing date. The Fire Code Board of Appeals will have the opportunity to conduct investigations and will render decisions and findings in writing to the code official. The code official shall provide a duplicate copy of the decisions and findings to the appellant. 
Section 109.4 Amend to read: Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, install, alter, repair, or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $95 or greater than $250.00. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
Section 111.4 Amend to read: Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue to work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
Section 202 Add definition Strip Mall: A commercial building that is divided into separate spaces for business uses such as retail stores and service establishments, and which have outside entrances and share a parking lot. 
Section 302.1 Delete Bonfire 
Section 305.1 Amend to read: Clearance from ignition sources. Clearance between ignition sources, such as luminaries, heaters, flame-producing devices and combustible materials, shall be a minimum thirty-six inch (36") clear space or the clearance specified by the manufacturer of the source of ignition. 
Section 307.1.1 Amend to read: Prohibited burning. Open burning, recreational fires, and portable outdoor fireplaces are prohibited under the following conditions: 
1.  Burning that is offensive or objectionable because of smoke or odor emissions or when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous; 
2.  Burning on land or parcels developed as occupancies other than single family and one- and two-family residential uses, except Special Use Open Burning. 
3.  Burning of leaves, yard waste, ditch banks, household rubbish, building materials, paper products, or any product other than clean wood. 
4.  Burning when wind speeds exceed ten (10) miles per hour. 
5.  No fires may be started before dawn. 
Delete exception 
Section 307.3 Amend to read: Extinguishment authority: The fire code official or other identified member of the fire department is authorized to order the extinguishment by the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning, recreational fires, or fires in portable outdoor fireplaces that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. 
Section 307.4 Amend to read: Location. The location for open burning shall not be less than 50 feet (15,240 mm) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of any structure. The pile size for opening burning shall be 5 feet (1,524 mm) or less in diameter, and 3 feet (914 mm) or less in height. 
Special Use open burning shall be permitted on land or parcels developed as occupancies other than single-family and one- and two-family residential uses and where the location for open burning shall not be less than 300 feet (91.4 m) from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 300 feet (91.4 m) of any structure. The pile size for opening burning shall be 10 feet (3,048 mm) or less in diameter, and 6 feet (1,828 mm) or less in height. All Special Use open burning sites shall be inspected by a fire code official prior to the initiation of the burn. 
Delete exceptions 1 and 2 
Section 307.4.1 Delete entire section. 
Section 307.4.2 Amend to read: Recreational fires shall not be conducted within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a structure or combustible material. Conditions which would cause a fire to spread within 15 feet (4,572 mm) of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Recreational fires shall be 3 feet or less (914 mm) in diameter, and 2 feet or less (610 mm) in height. 
Section 307.4.3 Delete exception 
Section 307.5 Amend to read: Attendance. Open burning, recreational fires and use of portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended, by a responsible adult, at least eighteen (18) years of age, until the fire is extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher complying with Section 906 with a minimum 2-A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment such as dirt, sand, water barrel, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization. 
Add Section 307.6 Extinguishment. Recreational fires and fires in portable outdoor fireplaces shall not be ignited before 7 a.m. and shall be extinguished by 11:00 p.m. daily. Open burning shall not be ignited before 7 a.m. and shall be extinguished by dusk each day. 
Add Section 311.1.3 Fire damaged premises. Buildings, structures, premises or portions thereof damaged by fire shall be secured. Exterior openings and interior opening accessible to unauthorized persons shall be boarded, locked, blocked or otherwise protected to prevent entry by unauthorized persons. Fire damaged premises that in the opinion of the fire official are considered uninhabitable shall be declared unsafe and abated by demolition or rehabilitation in accordance with the currently adopted version of the International Property Maintenance Code and the International Building Code. 
Section 315.3 Amend to read: Storage of combustible materials shall be orderly and stacks shall be stable. Storage of combustible materials shall be separated from heaters, heating and fuel fired devices by a distance of thirty-six inches (36") or by shielding, tested and approved by the manufacturer of the fuel fired device so that ignition cannot occur. 
Section 315.3.3 Amend to read: Equipment rooms. Combustible material shall not be stored in boiler rooms, mechanical rooms or electrical equipment rooms. A minimum of thirty-six inches (36") of clear unobstructed space shall be maintained on all sides of mechanical and electrical equipment. 
Add Section 401.3.2.1 Non-emergency alarm activations. Contractors, service and maintenance personnel shall be responsible for notifying the fire alarm monitoring central station and the fire department prior to servicing or testing fire suppression and fire alarm equipment and systems. Alarm activations created by systems service, maintenance or testing that result in fire department response shall be unlawful. The person, firm or company responsible for failing to notify the alarm central station and the fire department prior to generating an alarm shall be liable for a fine of $250.00. 
Non-emergency alarm activations created by commercial tenants or alarm system owners during testing, conducting routine fire drills, or due to user error, improperly installed or maintained alarm systems that result in fire department response shall be considered unlawful. Any person responsible for said non-emergency alarm activations shall be guilty of a civil infraction. A notice of violation shall be issued to the tenant or alarm owner for the first fire department response within a calendar year; the second non-emergency fire department response shall result in a civil infraction of $150.00. The third and subsequent non-emergency alarm responses shall result in a civil infraction of $250.00 each. 
Non-emergency alarm activations created by residential tenants or alarm system owners during testing or due to user error, improperly installed or maintained alarm systems that result in fire department response shall be considered unlawful. Any person responsible for said non-emergency alarm activations shall be guilty of a civil infraction. A notice of violation shall be issued to the tenant or alarm owner for the first two (2) fire department responses within a calendar year; the 3 rd , 4 th , and 5 th non-emergency fire department responses shall result in a civil infraction of $35.00. The 6th and subsequent non-emergency alarm responses shall result in a civil infraction of $50.00 each. 
Add Section 401.3.2.2 Non-emergency alarm activations during construction, demolition, and renovations. Contractors, service and maintenance personnel shall be responsible to take proper precautions and corrective measures during all construction, demolition, and renovation operations to prohibit non-emergency alarm activations. Alarm activations created by contractors, service and maintenance personnel that result in fire department response shall be unlawful. The person, firm or company responsible for failing to take proper precautions and corrective measures during construction, demolition, and renovation operations prior to generating an alarm shall be liable for a fine of $250.00. 
Section 401.5 Amend to read: Making false report. It shall be unlawful for a person to give, signal or transmit a false alarm. Any person convicted of knowingly making a false report shall be liable for a fine equal to the actual costs of the fire department response, but not less than $1,000.00. 
Section 503.3 Amend to read: Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices or markings that include the words NO PARKING-FIRE LANE shall be provided, at maximum 50-foot intervals, for fire apparatus access roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. The enforcement zone for NO PARKING-FIRE LANE areas shall encompass a radius of twenty-five feet (25') from the center of the sign. The means by which fire lanes are designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. 
Section 603.5.2 Amend to read: Heating appliance installation and maintenance. Heating appliances shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, the International Building Code, the International Mechanical Code, the International Fuel Gas Code and the ICC Electrical Code. A minimum of thirty-six inch (36") clear-space shall be maintained around the perimeter of all heating appliances. 
Add Section 901.1.1 Installation and maintenance. Persons, companies, or corporations that service, recharge, install, hydro-test, inspect, maintain, alter, repair, or replace fire extinguishers, fire suppression devices or systems, other than water based fire sprinkler systems, within the jurisdiction of Saginaw Charter Township, shall have a Contractor Registration issued by the Saginaw Township Fire Prevention Bureau. 
Persons, companies, or corporations who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of not less than $95 or greater than $250.00. 
Add Section 901.1.1.1 Registration. An application for contractor registration shall be filed with the Saginaw Township Fire Prevention Bureau. Applications shall include written proof of liability coverage with a limit of not less than one (1) million dollars ($1,000,000), and one (1) of the following: 
1.  A certificate of training or certification issued by the manufacturer of the extinguisher, suppression device or system the applicant will be servicing, recharging, installing, hydro-testing, inspecting, maintaining, altering, repairing or replacing. 
2.  Authorization, certification, agreement or registration from the manufacturer of the fire extinguisher, suppression device or system the applicant will be servicing, recharging, installing, hydro-testing, inspecting, maintaining, altering, repairing or replacing. 
3.  Certification as an individual for fire extinguisher, fire suppression device or system training by a nationally recognized agency, association or testing firm acceptable to the fire code official. 
An approved registration shall constitute permission to service, recharge, install, hydro-test, inspect, maintain, alter, repair, or replace fire extinguishers, fire suppression devices or systems. 
Add Section 901.1.1.2 Expiration. A Contactor Registration shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed, or revoked, for a period of four (4) years from the date of issuance specified on the registration. 
Add Section 901.1.1.3 Termination of Registration. Registration of a contractor that leaves the employment of a company certified by an equipment manufacturer, a distributor of a certifying distributor or under the sponsorship of a distributor will be terminated on the date of unemployment. 
Section 902 Add definition Strip Mall: A commercial building that is divided into separate spaces for business uses such as retail stores and service establishments, and which have outside entrances and share a parking lot. 
Add section 914.2.1.1 Strip Mall Control Valves and Flow Alarms: Where required by the Fire Code Official, an approved supervised indicating control valve, water flow alarm device, and inspectors test shall be installed in each tenant space at all protected strip malls. 
Add Chapter 81 Family Child Care Home and Group Child Care Home 
Add Section 8101 General. The provisions of this chapter shall govern the occupancy and maintenance of all structures and premises permitted for use as family child care homes and group child care homes. 
Add Section 8101.2 Permits. An operational permit approving family child care and group child care homes shall be required as set forth in Section 105.6.50. Operational permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
Family child care homes and group child care homes shall be licensed by and comply with the licensing requirements of the Michigan Department of Human Services, the home occupancy business license of Saginaw Charter Township and the requirements of Chapter 81. 
Add Section 8102.1 Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purposes of this chapter and as used elsewhere in this code, have the meanings shown herein. 
Private home. A private residence in which the licensee permanently resides as a member of the household, which residency is not contingent upon caring for children or employment by a licensed or approved child placing agency. 
Family child care home. A private home in which one (1) but fewer than seven (7) minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year, unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage or adoption. 
Group child care home. A private home in which more than six (6) but not more than twelve (12) minor children are given care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the family by blood, marriage, or adoption. Group care home includes a home in which care is given to an unrelated minor child for more than four (4) weeks during a calendar year. 
Related. A parent, grandparent, brother, sister, step-parent, step-sister, step-brother, uncle, aunt, cousin, great aunt, great uncle, or step grandparent related by marriage, blood or adoption. 
Add Section 8103 Smoke Detection 
Add Section 8103.1 Smoke detection in family and group child care homes licensed for day and evening care. Smoke detectors in existing family and group childcare homes shall be capable of emitting an audible alarm signal of low battery supply. 
Newly licensed family and group childcare homes and existing family and group childcare homes within three (3) years of approval of the initial child care operational permit shall be provided with interconnected smoke detectors that sound an alarm in unison. All hard-wired smoke detectors shall be installed by a licensed electrician. All electrical wiring and installation shall be approved by the electrical authority. 
Add Section 8103.2 Smoke detection in new and existing family and group childcare homes licensed for overnight care shall have approved smoke detectors in locations as required in Section 5003.4 that are supervised by a listed residential fire alarm control panel. The fire alarm control panel shall be monitored twenty-four (24) hours daily at a UL listed Central Station. 
Add Section 8103.3 Smoke detector replacement. Smoke detectors shall be replaced before expiration of the manufacturer's warranty or not less than every ten (10) years. 
Add Section 8103.4 Smoke detector location. Approved smoke detectors shall be installed, as required by the manufacturer's installation requirements, in the following locations: 
1.  In each sleeping room. 
2.  In the hallway or path of egress immediately outside the sleeping rooms. 
3.  On each level of the structure. 
4.  At the top of the basement stairs. 
5.  In each room occupied by childcare. 
Add Section 8104 Carbon Monoxide Detection. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed on each level of the home in locations where they will be audible in the childcare areas. Carbon monoxide detectors shall be installed maintained and replaced as directed by the manufacturer's instructions and warranty. 
Add Section 8105 Heating and Electrical Equipment 
Add Section 8105.1 Heat producing appliances shall be installed and maintained as required in the Michigan Mechanical and Michigan Electrical Code. 
Portable electric, portable fuel fired and ventless heating appliances are prohibited. 
Add Section 8105.2 Fuel and gas-fired furnaces, boilers, water heaters and appliances shall be inspected and determined in safe operable condition every two (2) years by qualified personnel licensed by the State of Michigan. A copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the fire official at the time of annual inspections. 
Add Section 8105.2.1 A method to prevent storage from within thirty-six inches (36") around the perimeter of all fuel and gas fired appliances and electrical panels shall be approved by the fire official at the time of permit inspections. 
Add Section 8106 Wood Burning Fireplaces, Wood Burning and Solid Fuel Burning Appliances. Wood burning fireplaces, wood and solid fuel burning appliances and vents and chimneys shall be inspected every two (2) years by a qualified individual. 
Wood burning fireplaces shall be provided with tight fitting glass enclosure doors. Glass doors shall be maintained closed at all times during burning in the fireplace. 
An approved physical barricade shall be provided around the perimeter of all wood and solid fuel burning appliances to prevent children from reaching within thirty-six inches (36") of the appliance. 
Add Section 8107 Attached Garage. Doors that open from a home into an attached garage shall be a minimum of 1 ¾ inch, solid wood core door, or a "B" labeled fire door. 
Add Section 8108 Use of Multiple Stories 
Add Section 8108.1 Basements. Basements that are not provided with two (2) approved means of egress shall not be occupied by children. An approved means of egress shall be considered stairs constructed as required in the Michigan Building Code. One (1) means of egress from the basement shall lead directly to the exterior of the home. An approved rescue or escape window with stairs that lead to finished grade shall be considered as an approved means of egress. 
Add Section 8108.2 Second story homes. Second stories in family and group child care homes shall not be used for child occupancy without two (2) approved means of egress from the second story. Approved escape ladders permanently fastened to a rescue or escape window, constructed as required in the Michigan Building Code, in each room that will be occupied by children shall be approved as a means of egress. 
Add Section 8109 Exits and interior doors. Exit doors shall be openable from the inside without the use of keys, special knowledge or effort. Exit doors shall open with a single motion. Clasp and padlocks, and surface mounted bolts and latches are prohibited. 
Interior doors that are provided with locking mechanisms shall be openable from the entry side by an approved method, tool or releasing mechanism. The tool or releasing mechanism shall be mounted on the wall within reach of the locking door. 
Add Section 8110 Fire extinguishers. Each floor in family and group child care homes shall be provided with a readily accessible minimum type 2:A:10:BC rated fire extinguisher. Fire extinguishers shall be inspected and certified annually by a qualified firm. 
Add Section 8111 Address identification. Family and group child care homes shall have address numbers permanently affixed to the structure. Address numbers shall be a minimum of six inches (4") high, ½ inch (.75") stroke and shall contrast with their background in a manner that will be clearly legible and visible from the roadway. 
Section C105.1 Amend to read: Hydrant spacing. Hydrants shall be provided at all intersections within all plats. In residential areas, hydrants shall have a maximum spacing of 550 feet. Hydrant spacing in commercial, industrial, or high density residential areas shall not exceed 300 feet. All hydrants will be considered as part of the township water supply and easements shall be provided along the main and hydrant lead for access, repair, and/or replacement. Reference Saginaw Charter Township Code of Ordinances Section 62-101(c). 
(Ord. No. 625, § 5-02.02, 7-16-2001; Ord. No. 656, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 689, 12-19-2005; Ord. No. 709, 6-22-2009; Ord. No. 714, 4-12-2010; Ord. No. 721, 6-13-2011; Ord. No. 740 , 11-24-2014; Ord. No. 751, 4-24-2017 )  
Secs. 30-63—30-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SMOKE DETECTORS 
 
Sec. 30-91. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Approved smoke detector means a sensing device which detects smoke or visible or invisible particles of combustion which: 
(1)  Shall bear a label or other identification issued by an approved testing agency having service for inspection of materials and workmanship at the factory during fabrication and assembly; and such device, combination of devices and equipment shall be approved and installed for the purposes for which they are intended; and 
(2)  Shall in the case of AC powered detectors be equipped with a "power on" visible indicator; and where a battery power supply is employed, all power requirements shall be met for a period of at least one year; and 
(3)  Shall sound an alarm signal easily audible in each sleeping area with a rating of not less than 45 decibels and not more than 120 decibels at ten feet. Provided, however, that such alarm shall be reasonably audible to the inspecting authority. 
Approved smoke detector system means a connection interrelated combination of approved smoke detectors, which system shall sound an audible alarm signal throughout the entire system on activation of any one of the approved smoke detectors. 
Dead air means that space located at the corner of a room where the ceiling and wall meet and into which smoke or heat may have difficulty penetrating. 
Hotel and motel mean a building in which rooms are rented on a transient basis, with accommodations for more than 15 units or apartment buildings and multifamily buildings more than three stories in height. 
Multifamily building means a building in which rooms or a combination of rooms are rented on a transient or nontransient basis and condominium living units, with accommodations for more than one unit. 
Sleeping area means the area or areas of a building in which the bedrooms or sleeping areas are located. Bedrooms or sleeping areas located adjacent to each other where one approved smoke detector system shall be deemed to be effective by the enforcement officer shall be considered to be one sleeping area. Bedrooms or sleeping areas separated by other areas such as kitchens, living rooms, family rooms, recreation rooms, parlors but not bathrooms shall be considered as separate sleeping areas. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.02; Ord. No. 604, §§ 1, 2, 12-13-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-92. - Enforcement. 
The chief of the fire department and his agency and/or the chief building inspector and his designated agency are authorized to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.07.01)  
Sec. 30-93. - Order to comply. 
The chief of the fire department and his agency and/or the chief building inspector and his designated agency shall upon complaint and inspection being made, issue a warning citation and an order to comply. Upon failure of the party or parties to comply with such order within 20 days, the chief of the fire department and/or the chief building inspector may seek a warrant for the prosecution of such person or persons. 
(Code 1986, §§ 8-07.07.02, 8-07.07.03)  
Sec. 30-94. - Violations and penalties. 
Any person, firm or corporation or any other person acting on behalf of such person, firm or corporation in the township in violation of this article and failing to correct deficiency within 20 days shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.08)  
Sec. 30-95. - Compliance responsibility. 
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of each multifamily, hotel, or motel dwelling unit to install approved smoke detectors that comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.03)  
Sec. 30-96. - Location. 
(a)  Multifamily buildings. 
(1)  In multifamily dwellings containing two or more dwelling units, smoke detectors shall be installed within each dwelling unit outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. 
(2)  All stairwell or hallway detectors that may be installed and are located within a given stairwell or hallway shall be interconnected such that, if one detector goes into alarm, all detectors will alarm. The approved control panel for these interconnected alarms shall be installed in a location approved by the fire chief. 
(b)  Hotels and motels. In hotels and motels built prior to July 1, 1983, approved smoke detectors shall be installed within each dwelling unit outside of each separate sleeping area in the immediate vicinity of the bedrooms and in common hallways and stairwells at the highest habitable level and on each floor, story or level below, located on the ceiling near the base but not within the stairwell. All approved smoke detectors shall be monitored and powered by an approved fire alarm control panel. The provisions of this subsection (hotels and motels only) shall become effective on September 1, 1985. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.04; Ord. No. 604, § 3, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 30-97. - Installation. 
(a)  Owner responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to supply and install all required detectors. 
(b)  NFPA requirements. All detectors, control panels and associated equipment installed shall meet the installation requirements of the state electrical code, NFPA 72 and 73. 
(c)  Compliance date. Approved smoke detectors required by this article shall be installed by December 31, 1983. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.05; Ord. No. 604, § 4, 12-13-1999)  
Sec. 30-98. - Testing and maintenance. 
(a)  Owner responsibility. 
(1)  The owner shall be responsible for testing and maintaining detectors in common stairwells and hallways. 
(2)  The owner shall be responsible for providing each tenant with written information regarding detector testing and maintenance. 
(3)  The owner or authorized agent shall replace all battery powered smoke detectors in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations but not to exceed seven years, whichever is the shorter period. 
(b)  Tenant responsibility. 
(1)  It shall be the responsibility of the tenant to test and maintain detectors within dwelling units or rooming units and to notify the owner or authorized agent in writing of any deficiencies. 
(2)  The tenant shall be responsible for notifying the owner of the need for replacement of the battery or unit except that such battery or unit shall be in operating condition at the time that the tenant takes possession. 
(Code 1986, § 8-07.06; Ord. No. 604, § 5, 12-13-1999)  
Secs. 30-99—30-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FIRE LANES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
 
Sec. 30-121. - Definition. 
The term "parking" is defined as defined in the Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 7-04.02; Ord. No. 640, 3-10-2003) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 30-122. - Required; specifications. 
(a)  Private parking-free ingress and egress. To provide open, safe, and adequate facilities for fire-extinguishing equipment, and other emergency vehicles, the owners, occupants, and/or persons in control of said premises used for shopping centers, apartment complexes, and other similar developments in Saginaw Charter Township which attract large numbers of persons and require provisions for parking large numbers of motor vehicles, shall provide: 
(1)  A hard surface private road or fire lane adjoining those areas of the building serving the public open from all entrances from public highways, and to all exits to public highways, which shall not be less than 30 feet wide from the edge of the sidewalk, if any, or from the edge of the building, if there is no sidewalk, to where parking begins. 
(2)  With all parking prohibited between the buildings and the furthest edge of such private road, which shall be plainly marked. 
(b)  If such private road shall have a corner, or turn, approximately 90 degrees or more, then the width of such private road, or fire lane, shall be increased so as to provide sufficient width for the operation of large fire extinguishing equipment. 
(c)  The fire lane shall be kept free and clear of all obstructions of every kind to permit entrance, operation, and exit of all fire extinguishing equipment and other emergency equipment to all parts of the property when, and if, necessary. 
(d)  Every such private road, or fire lane, shall be clearly marked. 
(Code 1986, § 7-04.03; Ord. No. 640, 3-10-2003)  
Sec. 30-123. - Parking prohibited. 
No person may park a vehicle or otherwise obstruct such private road or fire lane. 
(Code 1986, § 7-04.04)  
Sec. 30-124. - Violations; civil infraction. 
(a)  Civil infraction. Any person who shall knowingly violate this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction, as defined in the Motor Vehicle Code as adopted by Saginaw Township; and 
(b)  Fines. 
(1)  Paid within 72 hours. Shall be subject to a fine of $25.00, if paid within 72 hours from the time the ticket is issued. 
(2)  Not paid within 72 hours. If not paid within 72 hours, such persons will be subject to a maximum fine of $50.00, and 
(3)  Failure to pay. On failure to pay said fine shall be subject to such punishment, as the court, under like circumstances, shall impose for a violation of a civil infraction. 
(Code 1986, § 7-04.05; Ord. No. 640, 3-10-2003)  
Chapter 34 - FLOODS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A; FC-1 floodplain and conservation districts, app. A, § 701 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 34-1—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOODPLAINS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Unlawful occupation, filling or grading of floodplain, MCL 324.3108. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Appeal means a request for a review of the chief building inspector's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations located within an area of special flood hazard. 
Flood and flooding mean a general and temporary condition or partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland waters; and/or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report provided in which the Federal Insurance Administration has provided flood profiles, as well as, the flood boundary-floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain means land subject to a base flood. Within a floodplain, there exists two zones: Part is the portion known as the "floodway" and defined in this section; the balance is the "floodplain fringe" which is the balance of the land outside of the "floodway" in the floodplain. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than two-tenths of a foot. 
New construction means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
Start of construction means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure (other than a mobile home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not as part of the main structure. For a structure (other than a mobile home) without a basement or poured footings, the "start of construction" includes the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, or a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its pre-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either: 
(1)  Before the improvement or repair is started; or 
(2)  If the structure has been damaged and is being restored. 
For purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
(2)  Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 34-32. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
(6)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas; 
(7)  To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
(8)  To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.01.01)  
Sec. 34-33. - Methods. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article includes methods and provisions for: 
(1)  Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
(4)  Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.01.02)  
Sec. 34-34. - Scope. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the township. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.03.01)  
Sec. 34-35. - Full compliance mandatory. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.03.02)  
Sec. 34-36. - Adoption of flood insurance study. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study" for Saginaw Charter Township dated October 16, 1997, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary and floodway maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. The flood insurance study is on file in the office of the township clerk, Saginaw Township Hall, 4980 Shattuck Road, Saginaw, Michigan. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.03.01(A), (B); Ord. No. 574, 10-27-1997)  
Sec. 34-37. - More stringent restrictions prevail. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.03.04)  
Sec. 34-38. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the township board; 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.03.05)  
Sec. 34-39. - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the area of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the township, any officer or employee thereof or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.07)  
Secs. 34-40—34-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 34-56. - Development permits. 
(a)  Required. Development permits shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established. 
(b)  Application information. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the chief building inspector and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been floodproofed; 
(3)  Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the floodproofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the floodproofing criteria; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-03.04.01, 4-03.04.02)  
Sec. 34-57. - Building official approval. 
The building official is appointed to administer and implement this article by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with the provisions of this article. The duties of the building official shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Review of all applications for development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied; 
(2)  Review all applications for development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is necessary; 
(3)  Review all applications for development permits to determine if the proposed development is located in the floodway. If located in the floodway, assure that the encroachment provisions are met; 
(4)  Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest habitable floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures; 
(5)  For all new or substantially improved floodproofed structures: 
a.  Verify and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which the structure has been floodproofed; 
b.  Maintain the floodproofing certifications required; and 
c.  Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article; 
(6)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources land and water management division prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(7)  Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity is not diminished; 
(8)  Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact locations of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in section 34-58. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-03.04.03, 4-03.04.04)  
Sec. 34-58. - Appeals and variances. 
(a)  Board of appeals established. The construction board of appeals as established by the township shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  Appeals. The construction board of appeals shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. In passing upon such applications, the construction board of appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this article and: 
(1)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of other; 
(2)  The danger to life and property due to flooding, or erosion damage; 
(3)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(4)  The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
(5)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(6)  The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage; 
(7)  The compatibility of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program of that area; 
(8)  The relationship of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(9)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, to the expected site; 
(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood condition, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
(c)  Issuance of variances. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (b)(1) through (11) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(d)  Conditions for variances. 
(1)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section; 
(2)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result; 
(3)  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; 
(4)  Variances shall only be issued upon: 
a.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(e)  Notice of flood insurance cost. A community shall notify the applicant in writing over the signature of a community official that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage, and such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions. 
(f)  Conditions attached to variances. Upon consideration of the factors in this article and the purposes of this article, the construction board of appeals may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(g)  Appeals to circuit court. Those aggrieved by the decision of the construction board of appeals, or any taxpayer, may appeal such decision to the circuit court as provided by statute. 
(h)  Record appeal action; report variances. The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions, including technical information, and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.05)  
Secs. 34-59—34-75. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 34-76. - Construction standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be: 
a.  Anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
b.  Constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
c.  Constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and 
(3)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.06.01)  
Sec. 34-77. - Subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage. 
(d)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments which contain at least 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.06.02)  
Sec. 34-78. - Lowest floor above base flood elevation. 
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided, the following standards are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above base flood elevation. 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the level of the base flood elevation; or 
a.  Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the building official. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.06.03)  
Sec. 34-79. - Floodways. 
Located within areas of special flood hazard as established in section 34-34 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other developments unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; 
(2)  If the subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable provisions of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.06.04)  
Sec. 34-80. - Mobile homes or parks prohibited. 
No mobile homes or mobile home parks shall be permitted in a floodplain. 
(Code 1986, § 4-03.06.05)  
Secs. 34-81—34-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - REAR LOT DRAINAGE 
 
Sec. 34-101. - Finding of fact. 
The township board hereby recognizes that the construction of new subdivisions and condominiums significantly alters the natural drainage pattern of the land. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.01)  
Sec. 34-102. - Plat and site plan requirements. 
To minimize any potential harm or damage from inadequate drainage, all newly constructed subdivisions and condominiums must provide rear lot drainage in accordance with the provisions stated in this article. Such provisions shall be shown on the preliminary plat (subdivision) or site plan (condominiums), and submitted to the township for review and approval. Any fees for such review shall be established separately by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.02)  
Sec. 34-103. - Drain tile installation. 
(a)  Generally. Rear lot drainage shall consist of a minimum of four-inch polyethylene perforated plastic tile with a fabric sock installed with a minimum of four inches of 2NS sand under the pipe and backfilled with a cover of six inches of 2NS sand. 
(b)  Topsoil. A minimum of six inches topsoil shall be placed over the backfill mixture. 
(c)  Minimum grade and cover. Pipe shall have a minimum grade of one-tenth foot per 100 feet with a minimum cover of two feet. 
(d)  Maximum service area. A four-inch drain line shall not serve any more than one gross acre of land. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.01)  
Sec. 34-104. - Catchbasins. 
Two-foot diameter or larger precast concrete catchbasins shall be installed at all natural depressions, however, they shall not be spaced more than 300 feet apart, unless a better alternative can be made effective and is approved by the township planning commission. Any bends, 90-degree turns, or dead ends shall include a two-foot diameter catchbasin. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.02)  
Sec. 34-105. - Abutting adjacent subdivision/condominiums. 
Where a proposed subdivision/condominiums abut the rear of an existing subdivision/condominiums with rear lot drainage, the proposed development will be required to install its own rear lot drainage system; or the developer may obtain a written agreement with the subdivision/condominium owners to use the existing rear lot drainage if it is approved by the planning commission and the township engineer. Such agreement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.03)  
Sec. 34-106. - Mandatory installation of drainage. 
Where a proposed subdivision/condominiums abut the rear of an existing subdivision/condominiums with inadequate rear lot drainage, the proposed subdivision/condominiums must install rear lot drainage. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.04)  
Sec. 34-107. - Connection to approved storm system. 
All drains must connect to an approved stormwater drainage system. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.05)  
Sec. 34-108. - System owned and maintained by subdivision/condominiums. 
Rear lot drainage systems shall be owned and maintained by the subdivision/condominiums. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.06)  
Sec. 34-109. - Public utility maintenance easements. 
Public utility maintenance easements ten-foot wide shall be provided for the rear lot drainage system in all cases, even when rear lot drainage may not be required as stated under section 34-105. Such easements shall be written so as to permit neighboring property or condominium owners with a specific interest in the rear lot drainage to maintain such drainage as it may affect their property. For example, a lot owner in a subdivision may repair a drain tile which extends through their neighbor's lot in order to maintain their drainage provided the neighbor's lot is restored to its original condition. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.07) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78.  
Sec. 34-110. - Assumed responsibilities. 
(a)  Cost of construction. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to construct the rear lot drainage system at 100 percent of his cost prior to final plat or site plan approval. 
(b)  Certification of system installation. The proprietor and engineer of the subdivision or condominiums shall certify that the rear lot drainage system has been installed in accordance with the proposed plat and specifications prior to final plat approval. 
(Code 1986, § 4-04.03.08)  
Chapter 38 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcoholic beverage means alcoholic liquor as that term is defined in section 105 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 436.1105). 
Loitering means: 
(1)  To stand or lounge around or move slowly about, to spend time idly, to saunter, or to linger; or 
(2)  To repeatedly pass by the same place without any apparent reason. 
Public place means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access. Among places included are any: 
(1)  Highway, street, road, alley, sidewalk, park, parking lot, river, public water, dock, publicly owned or controlled open ground; 
(2)  Publicly owned or controlled building, excluding any interior portion thereof being used as a dwelling; 
(3)  Place of business; 
(4)  Place of amusement, entertainment, recreation, or education open to the general public; 
(5)  Place where services are rendered to the public or a substantial group of persons; 
(6)  Transport facility; 
(7)  Place of religious worship; 
(8)  Place of manufacturing; 
(9)  Railroad right-of-way; 
(10)  Hospital or medical facility; 
(11)  Cemetery; 
(12)  Common area of any motel, hotel, or apartment building; 
(13)  Private meeting place when a privately employed special-duty police officer, special-duty deputy sheriff, or deputy sheriff is on duty there; 
(14)  Grounds appurtenant to any of the areas designated in this definition; 
(15)  Parking facility used in connection with any of the areas designated in this definition; 
(16)  The enumeration in this definition shall be deemed partial and shall not operate to exclude other places which are within the general terms of this definition. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.02.01, 7-03.02.06, 7-03.02.09) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 38-2. - Violations. 
Violations of this chapter are a misdemeanor unless stated otherwise in this chapter.  
Sec. 38-3. - Aiding and abetting. 
Every person concerned in the commission of an offense under this chapter, whether he directly commits the act constituting the offense or procures, counsels, aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted, indicted, tried and on conviction shall be punished as if he had directly committed such offense. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.03.01)  
Sec. 38-4. - Attempts. 
Any person who shall attempt to commit an offense prohibited by this chapter, and in such attempt shall do any act towards the commission of such offense, but shall fail in the perpetration or shall be intercepted or prevented in the execution of the offense, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.03.02) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.92.  
Sec. 38-5. - Attending or operating illegal places. 
No person shall attend, frequent, operate, or be an occupant or inmate of any place where prostitution, gambling, the illegal sale of intoxicating liquor, or any other illegal business or occupation is permitted or conducted with intent to engage in or aid any such illegal activity. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.22) 
State Law reference— Engaging in illegal occupation or business, MCL 750.167(1)(e).  
Sec. 38-6. - Transportation of persons to illegal places. 
No person shall knowingly transport any person to a place where prostitution or gambling is practiced, encouraged, or allowed for the purpose of enabling such person to engage in gambling, an act of prostitution, or any other illegal act. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.23) 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74.  
Sec. 38-7. - Playing games. 
No person shall play any ball game, street hockey, skateboarding, or any other game in any public street, or any sidewalk either alone or by collecting in groups thereon, or on any private property open to the public without the express consent of the property owner, occupant, agent, or servant of the owner or occupant. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.14) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.546 et seq.  
Sec. 38-8. - Littering. 
No person shall knowingly, without the consent of the public authority having supervision of the public property or the owner of private property, to dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave, or cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of, litter on any public or private property or waters other than property designated and set aside for such purposes. In this section the phrase "private property" includes, but is not limited to, dumpsters or other such trash receptacles owned, leased, rented, or controlled by another. The word "waters" shall include, but is not limited to, any body of water or watercourse, or the shores and beaches thereof and including the ice above such waters. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.15) 
Cross reference— Solid waste, ch. 50. 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq.  
Sec. 38-9. - Adoption of Youth Tobacco Act by reference. 
Sections 2 and 3 of the Youth Tobacco Act (MCL 722.642, 722.643) relating to use and possession of tobacco products by minors are hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 2(e), 4-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Adoption of statutes by reference, MCL 42.23.  
Sec. 38-10. - Ignition, discharge and use of consumer fireworks. 
(1)  For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
(a)  Act. The Michigan Fireworks Safety Act, Public Act 256 of 2011, MCL 28.451 et seq. 
(b)  Consumer fireworks. Fireworks devices that are designed to produce visible effects by combustion, that are required to comply with the construction, chemical composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission under 16 CFR parts 1500 and 1507, and that are listed in APA standard 87-1, 3.1.2, 3.1.3, or 3.5. Consumer fireworks are often commonly known as, but not limited to, sky rockets, bottle rockets, missile-type rockets, helicopters, aerial spinners, roman candles, mine and shell devices, aerial shell kits, firecrackers, chasers, and certain multiple tube fireworks devices. Consumer fireworks does not include low-impact fireworks. 
(c)  Consumer fireworks certificate. The certificate issued by the department which allows a person to sell consumer fireworks in accordance with the Act. 
(d)  Department. The Michigan Department of Licensing and Regulatory Affairs. 
(e)  Display fireworks. Large fireworks devices that are explosive materials intended for use in fireworks displays and designed to produce visible or audible effects by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, as provided in 27 CFR 555.11, 49 CFR 172, and APA standard 87-1, 4.1. 
(f)  Fireworks. Any composition or device, except for a starting pistol, a flare gun, or a flare, designed for the purpose of producing a visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation. Fireworks consist of consumer fireworks, low-impact fireworks, articles pyrotechnic, display fireworks, and special effects. 
(g)  Low-impact fireworks. Ground and handheld sparkling devices as that phrase is defined in APA standard 87-1, 3.1, 3.1.1.1 to 3.1.1.8, and 3.5. Low impact fireworks are often commonly known as, but not limited to, sparklers, cylindrical fountains, cone fountains, illuminating torches, wheels, ground spinners, flitter sparklers, certain toy smoke devices, certain wire sparklers/dipped sticks, and certain multiple tube fireworks devices. 
(h)  National holiday. As used in this article, a national holiday is any of the following: New Year's Day (January 1); Birthday of Martin Luther King Jr. (third Monday in January); Washington's Birthday (third Monday in February); Memorial Day (last Monday in May); Independence Day (July 4); Labor Day (first Monday in September); Columbus Day (second Monday in October); Veterans Day (November 11); Thanksgiving Day (fourth Thursday in November); and Christmas Day (December 25). 
(i)  Novelties. The term "novelties" shall have the same meaning as set forth in APA Standard 87-1, 3.2, 3.2.1, 3.2.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.4, and 3.2.5, often commonly known as, but not limited to, party poppers, snappers, toy smoke devices containing not more than 5g of pyrotechnic composition, snakes, glow worms, wire sparklers/dip sticks containing not more than 100g of pyrotechnic composition, and all of the following: 
1.  Toy plastic or paper caps for toy pistols in sheets, strips, rolls, or individual caps containing not more than .25 of a grain of explosive content per cap, in packages labeled to indicate the maximum explosive content per cap. 
2.  Toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, toy trick noisemakers, and toy guns in which toy caps as described in subparagraph (i) are used, that are constructed so that the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion, and that are not designed to break apart or be separated so as to form a missile by the explosion. 
3.  Flitter sparklers in paper tubes not exceeding 1/8 inch in diameter. 
4.  Toy snakes not containing mercury, if packed in cardboard boxes with not more than 12 pieces per box for retail sale and if the manufacturer's name and the quantity contained in each box are printed on the box; and toy smoke devices. 
(j)  Person. An individual, agent, association, charitable organization, company, limited liability company, corporation, labor organization, legal representative, partnership, unincorporated organization, or any other legal or commercial entity. 
(k)  Retailer. A person who sells consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks for resale to an individual for ultimate use. 
(2)  Pursuant to state law, a person shall not ignite, discharge, or use consumer fireworks on public property, school property, church property, or the property of another person without that organization's or person's express permission to use those fireworks on those premises. "Property of another person" includes hotel and motel property, apartment property, rental property including duplex, attached townhomes or quad units and condominium property, where an owner, management company, or association has or retains authority and control over the use of the property or common areas. A person who violates this subsection is responsible for a municipal civil infraction as provided by section 1-7. A person who receives a civil infraction citation for violating this subsection and who commits another violation of this subsection within 72 hours of the first violation shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 38-2. 
(3)  An individual who uses, ignites, or discharges consumer fireworks or low-impact fireworks while under the influence of alcoholic liquor, a controlled substance, or a combination of alcoholic liquor and a controlled substance is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by up to 30 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.00, or if the violation caused damage to the property of another person, by up to 90 days in jail and/or a fine up to $500.00. 
(4)  An individual who violates the smoking prohibition under NFPA 1124, 7.3.11.1 (smoking within 50 feet of a consumer fireworks retail sales area) is guilty of a state law misdemeanor punishable as provided in the Act. 
(5)  Consumer fireworks shall not be ignited, discharged or used in the township except on the following days after 11:00 a.m.: 
a.  December 31 until 1:00 a.m. on January 1. 
b.  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Memorial Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
c.  June 29 to July 4 until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
d.  July 5, if that date is a Friday or Saturday, until 11:45 p.m. 
e.  The Saturday and Sunday immediately preceding Labor Day until 11:45 p.m. on each of those days. 
(6)  State law prohibits any ordinance enacted under the Fireworks Safety Act from regulating the ignition, discharge or use of consumer fireworks during the times and on the days as set forth in section 38-10(5) of this section. However, state law does not prohibit enforcement of other ordinances not adopted under the Fireworks Safety Act, nor does the state law provide immunity for noise and community disturbances committed as a result of igniting, discharging, or using consumer fireworks. Therefore, other violations of the Code committed during or as a result of the ignition, discharge, or use of consumer fireworks may still be enforced, including, but not limited to: 
(a)  Violating chapter 26, article III, sections 26-61—26-65 of the Saginaw Charter Township Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  Violating chapter 38, article I, section 38-8 of the Saginaw Charter Township Code of Ordinances. 
All other ordinances not adopted pursuant to the Act and not directly or specifically targeted at the use of consumer fireworks shall continue to apply and may be enforced at any time of the year, even on the day before, during, or the day after a national holiday. 
(7)  No adult person other than the person igniting, discharging, or using a consumer firework shall be within 25 feet of a consumer firework that is being ignited, discharged, or used, and no minor shall be within 50 feet of a consumer firework that is being ignited, discharged, or used, unless such adult or minor is on his or her own neighboring property. Any person with control over the property who allows any adult or minor to violate this subsection shall also be in violation of this subsection. The township board of trustees hereby finds that a motivating factor for the use of consumer fireworks is the presence and reaction of spectators, and the purpose of this subsection is to discourage family members, neighbors, guests, onlookers, and spectators from too closely gathering around the use of consumer fireworks, thereby subjecting themselves to potential injury by a person who is allowed under state law to ignite consumer fireworks without any regulation of such activity. This subsection shall be liberally construed to achieve the goal of protecting spectators from potential harm. 
(8)  It shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided by section 38-2, if, as a result of having ignited, discharged, or used a consumer firework, any harm or damage is caused to any person or the property of another. 
(9)  Every fireworks vendor advertising consumer fireworks for sale within the township shall provide notice, as set forth in this subsection, to every purchaser of consumer fireworks by including an 8½" x 11" flyer with every purchase and by displaying a sign affixed to each side of any display area or temporary facility or consumer fireworks retail stand, as both are defined by the Michigan Administrative Code, where fireworks are sold at retail. To be in compliance with this subsection, the font on a flyer shall be no smaller than 14 point boldface type, and the lettering on a sign shall be visible and discernible from every point of sale and, for temporary facilities, from a distance of at least 20 feet outside the footprint or boundaries of the facility. Each day that a vendor remains out of compliance with the requirements of this subsection shall be chargeable as a separate offense. At a minimum, each flyer and/or sign shall contain any information required by the township manager, the police chief, or the fire chief, as well as all of the following information: 
NOTICE OF TOWNSHIP AND STATE LAWS 
1.  FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND ARE PROHIBITED IN SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP, EXCEPT AFTER 11:00 A.M. ON THE FOLLOWING DAYS OF EACH YEAR: 
a.  DECEMBER 31 UNTIL 1:00 A.M. ON JANUARY 1. 
b.  THE SATURDAY AND SUNDAY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING MEMORIAL DAY UNTIL 11:45 P.M. ON EACH OF THOSE DAYS. 
c.  JUNE 29 TO JULY 4 UNTIL 11:45 P.M. ON EACH OF THOSE DAYS. 
d.  JULY 5, IF THAT DATE IS A FRIDAY OR SATURDAY, UNTIL 11:45 P.M. 
e.  THE SATURDAY AND SUNDAY IMMEDIATELY PRECEDING LABOR DAY UNTIL 11:45 P.M. ON EACH OF THOSE DAYS. 
2.  FIREWORKS THAT MAKE NOISE THAT CAN BE HEARD FROM ANY PUBLIC PLACE MAY NOT BE USED AFTER 10:00 P.M. 
3.  DURING THE DAYS EACH YEAR WHEN FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND ARE PERMITTED, THEY MAY NOT BE USED BEFORE 11:00 A.M. AND MAY NOT BE USED AFTER 11:45 P.M. EXCEPT ON JANUARY 1 WHEN THEY MAY BE USED UNTIL 1:00 A.M. ON THAT DATE. 
4.  FOR FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND, ONLY THE PERSON IGNITING THE FIREWORKS MAY BE WITHIN 25 FEET, AND MINORS MAY NOT BE WITHIN 50 FEET. 
5.  FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND MAY NOT BE DISCHARGED ON GOVERNMENT PROPERTY, INCLUDING PARKING AREAS, STREETS, AND SIDEWALKS, OR ON PROPERTY OWNED BY ANOTHER UNLESS YOU HAVE EXPRESS PERMISSION FROM THE GOVERNMENT OR THE PROPERTY OWNER (NOT OCCUPANT) TO DISCHARGE FIREWORKS. 
6.  FIREWORKS THAT LEAVE THE GROUND MAY NOT BE USED BY A PERSON WHO IS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR AND/OR ANY CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE (INCLUDING PRESCRIPTIONS). 
7.  NOISE AND NUISANCE VIOLATIONS, AND LITTERING ARE MISDEMEANORS. YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANING UP ANY FIREWORKS DEBRIS THAT ENDS UP ON PROPERTY THAT IS NOT YOUR OWN. 
8.  POLICE AND FIRE OFFICIALS MAY CITE YOU FOR MISDEMEANOR OR CIVIL INFRACTION VIOLATIONS OF STATE LAWS AND TOWNSHIP ORDINANCES, WITH FINES SET AT $500 FOR EACH VIOLATION. OFFICIALS MAY ALSO CONFISCATE ILLEGAL FIREWORKS AND FIREWORKS BEING USED UNLAWFULLY. YOU WILL BE RESPONSIBLE FOR THE COST OF DISPOSING OF THOSE FIREWORKS. 
The reverse side of every flyer shall depict a standard calendar for the applicable year, with each day on which consumer fireworks may be used highlighted for easy reference. The title on the calendar side of the flyer shall read: "Consumer fireworks may only be used on 30 days each year, subject to the rules on the reverse side. Permitted days are highlighted on the calendar below." 
(10)  Any individual who violates the restrictions in subsections (5), (7), or (8), or who aids, abets, perpetuates, participates in, or otherwise promotes the actions of the individual that violate said restrictions, may be cited and prosecuted for the applicable ordinance violation(s) and/or shall be responsible for a municipal civil infraction, punishable as provided in section 1-7. If the unlawful activity does not cease or resumes within 72 hours after issuance of a municipal civil infraction citation, the owner, occupant, or other person with control of the real property where the violations are occurring and/or the person who has or shares control of the fireworks shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in section 38-2. 
(11)  A law enforcement officer and/or fire official may confiscate and impound all fireworks and fireworks paraphernalia involved in causing a violation of this article or which are found to be within the access and control of the violator(s). If the impounded items are lawful to possess, they may be retained as evidence until any court proceedings or citations have been adjudicated and any probationary periods have been completed. If the impounded items are unlawful to possess, the police department or fire department shall dispose of or destroy the items in accordance with evidence protocols that will still allow for effective prosecution of the charged offenses without actual retention of the items. If any fireworks are retained by the township, they shall be stored in compliance with the Act and rules promulgated under the Act. The person from whom fireworks are seized under the Act or this article shall pay the actual costs of storage and/or disposal of the seized fireworks. The police department may dispose of the seized fireworks by providing them to a disposal organization approved by the chief of police or designee, or by allowing them to be used by township police, fire, and code enforcement agencies for training purposes. 
(12)  Unless otherwise specified herein, novelties are not subject to any of the regulations in this article, except that they may not be utilized in such a manner as to cause, create, or perpetuate a violation of any other section of the Township Code of Ordinances. 
(13)  This article is directed to be published in the Township View, a newspaper of general circulation within Saginaw Charter Township on May 26, 2016 and shall be effective upon publication. 
( Ord. No. 747, 5-23-2016 ; Ord. No. 762, §§ 1—3, 9-9-2019 ) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 747 , adopted May 23, 2016, amended § 38-10 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 38-10 pertained to the hours for use of fireworks, and derived from Ord. No. 732, adopted Oct. 28, 2013 .  
Secs. 38-11—38-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC AUTHORITY 
 
Sec. 38-31. - Resisting or hindering police. 
No person shall resist any police officer, any member of the police department, or any person duly empowered with police authority while in the discharge, or apparent discharge, of his duty or in any way to interfere with or hinder him in the discharge of his duty. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.24) 
State Law reference— Obstruction of police, MCL 750.479.  
Sec. 38-32. - Failure to disperse. 
No person shall refuse or knowingly fail to obey an order by a peace officer to disperse from the vicinity when the person or others is participating in a course of conduct described in section 38-62, 38-124 or 38-157, which is likely to cause substantial harm or serious public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.03)  
Sec. 38-33. - Refusal to move from fire or hazardous area. 
No person shall refuse or knowingly fail to obey a reasonable official request or order to move for the purpose of maintaining public safety from an area in dangerous proximity to a fire or other hazard. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.04) 
State Law reference— Obstructing or resisting firefighters, MCL 750.241.  
Secs. 38-34—38-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 
 
Sec. 38-61. - Harassment. 
No person shall with purpose to harass or alarm another: 
(1)  Insult, taunt, or challenge another by the use of fighting words or gestures in a manner reasonably likely to provoke a violent, disorderly response; 
(2)  Frighten, or attempt to frighten, another by threat or menace or unlawful bodily harm to any person; 
(3)  Accost, molest, or otherwise annoy by word of mouth, any person in any public place; or 
(4)  Engage in any other course of harassing or alarming conduct serving no legitimate purpose of the actor. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.09) 
State Law reference— Ethnic intimidation, MCL 750.147b; malicious use of service provided by communications common carrier, MCL 750.540e; harassment messages through electronic medium, MCL 750.411s; stalking, MCL 750.411h; malicious annoyance by writing, MCL 750.390.  
Sec. 38-62. - Jostling others. 
No person shall purposely cause, recklessly create a risk of, or knowingly contribute to inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to any person in a public place by jostling or roughly crowding persons unnecessarily. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.02(B)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.167(1)(l).  
Sec. 38-63. - Voyeurism. 
No person shall peep into an occupied dwelling of another person or go upon the land of another with the intent to peep into an occupied dwelling of another person. No person shall peep into an area where an occupant of the area reasonably can be expected to disrobe, including restrooms, baths, showers, and dressing rooms, without the consent of the other person. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.10)  
Secs. 38-64—38-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY RIGHTS 
 
Sec. 38-91. - Trespass. 
(a)  No person shall willfully and without lawful authority: 
(1)  Enter upon the lands or premises of another after having been forbidden to do so by the owner, occupant, person in control thereof, or the agent or servant of the owner, occupant, or person in control thereof; or 
(2)  Being upon the premises of another, neglect or refuse to depart therefrom after being notified to do so by the owner, occupant, person in control thereof, or agent or servant of the owner, occupant, or person in control thereof. 
(b)  No person shall occupy, lodge, or sleep in or on any structure, vehicle, or other means of conveyance, or vacant land without owning the structure, vehicle, or other means of conveyance, or vacant land or without the permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession thereof. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.08, 7-03.05.19) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.552 et seq.  
Sec. 38-92. - Recreational trespass. 
Part 731 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.73101 et seq.) relating to recreational trespass is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 608, § 2(c), 4-1-2000) 
State Law reference— Adoption of statutes by reference, MCL 42.23.  
Sec. 38-93. - Unlawful presence at schools. 
No person shall remain in any building or on any ground owned, occupied, or otherwise used by any public, private, or parochial school for any purpose other than a purpose related to school business unless authorized in writing by a duly empowered official of such public, private, or parochial school or unless he is a student or employee thereof or a parent or guardian of any student enrolled therein. The term "student" as used in this section is defined as a person of school age and enrolled in the school at which he is present. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.28) 
State Law reference— Trespass, MCL 750.377a et seq.  
Sec. 38-94. - Malicious mischief. 
No person shall willfully destroy, damage, or in any manner deface any property not his own, or any public school building, bridge, fire hydrant, street light, street sign, or parking meter, or make or post handbills on, or in any manner mar the walls of any public building or destroy, take, tamper, or meddle with any property belonging to or under the control of the township or remove such property from the building or place where it may be kept, placed, or stored without proper authority. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.26, 7-03.05.29) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq.  
Secs. 38-95—38-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 38-121. - Regulations for possession and use of firearms. 
(a)  The term "firearms" for the purpose of this section shall mean any weapon or device from which is propelled any missile, projectile, bullet, shot, pellet or mass by means of explosives, compressed air or gas having a force of .177 caliber or less. 
(b)  No person shall have in his possession any firearm which is loaded. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A law enforcement officer or member of a duly authorized military organization when acting in discharge of his duties; or 
(2)  A person acting pursuant to a license under the laws of the United States or the State of Michigan to carry a concealed weapon. 
(3)  A person lawfully defending his home, person or property; or 
(4)  A person within his own habitation or within a building owned by him or a person so acting within such habitation or building of another with the permission of the latter; or 
(5)  A person shooting at an educational or training program under adequate supervision; or 
(6)  A person hunting as permitted under the laws of the State of Michigan in those areas open to and/or in those areas where open hunting is permitted by the State of Michigan within the township. 
(7)  A person is years of age or older, operating a firearm .177 caliber or less on premises owned by him or on premises upon which he has been given specific permission to use for this purpose, and operating said firearm in a safe and lawful manner; or 
(8)  A person under 18 years of age operating a firearm .177 caliber or less on his own premises or other premises with specific permission to do so, under close supervision of a responsible adult, and operating said firearm in a safe and lawful manner. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.20, 7-05.04; Ord. No. 410, §§ 1—2.1, 1-25-1988) 
State Law reference— Local regulation of firearms, MCL 123.1101 et seq.  
Sec. 38-122. - Unlawful use of firearms within regulated areas. 
(a)  All words and phrases used in this section shall be construed and have the same meaning as those words and phrases defined in Act 159, P.A. 1967, M.C.L. 317.331. 
(b)  Hunting with, or the discharge of, a firearm is unlawful within the following described area of Saginaw Township, Saginaw County: 
Beginning at a point in the northeast corner of Saginaw Township at the junction of Interstate Highway 675 and Tittabawassee Road; thence west on Tittabawassee Road to Mackinaw Road; thence south on Mackinaw Road to the 1/2 section line of section 4; thence west on the 1/2 section line of section 4 to the center of section 4; thence south from the center along the 1/2 section line to McCarty Road; thence west on McCarty Road to Mannion Road; thence south on Mannion Road to Shattuck Road; thence west on Shattuck Road to State Highway M-47; thence south on M-47 to Gratiot Road; thence east on Gratiot Road to St. Andrews Street; thence south on St. Andrew Street to Michigan Street; thence east on Michigan Street to the Saginaw Township line; thence north on the Saginaw Township line to Weiss Street; thence east on Weiss Street to the Saginaw Township line and Interstate Highway 675; thence north on Interstate Highway 675 to the point of beginning. 
(c)  Hunting with or the discharge of a rifle is unlawful in Saginaw Township, Saginaw County, except at a target range recognized and approved by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 7-05.03; Ord. No. 365, §§ I—III, 11-12-1984) 
State Law reference— Hunting restrictions, MCL 324.41901 et seq.  
Sec. 38-123. - Crowds. 
No person shall collect or stand in crowds, or arrange, encourage, or abet the collection of persons in crowds with the intent to cause or risk public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.13) 
State Law reference— Riots, MCL 752.541 et seq.  
Sec. 38-124. - Creating hazardous condition. 
No person shall purposely cause, recklessly create a risk of, or knowingly contribute to inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to any person in a public place by creating a hazardous condition by any act which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.02(C))  
Sec. 38-125. - Prowling or loitering. 
(a)  No person shall prowl or loiter on foot, in a motor vehicle, or in any other way in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety or health of any person or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether such alarm is warranted is the fact that the person: 
(1)  Takes flight upon appearance of or investigation by a peace officer; 
(2)  Refuses or fails to adequately identify himself; or 
(3)  Manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impracticable, a peace officer shall, prior to an arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by requesting him to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. 
(d)  No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the peace officer did not comply with subsection (c) of this section or if it appears at trial that the identification and explanation were true and, if believed by the peace officer at the time, would have dispelled the alarm. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.01)  
Secs. 38-126—38-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 
 
Sec. 38-151. - False alarms and false reports. 
No person shall initiate or circulate a report or warning of a fire or an impending bombing or other catastrophe or crime knowing that the report or warning is false or baseless and knowing or recklessly disregarding that it is likely to cause evacuation of a building, place of assembly, or facility of public transport, or otherwise likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.07) 
State Law reference— False fire alarms, MCL 750.240; false report of crime, MCL 750.411a.  
Sec. 38-152. - Disrupting meetings, processions or gatherings. 
No person shall with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, procession, or gathering: 
(1)  Do any act tending to obstruct or interfere with it physically; or 
(2)  Make any utterance, gesture, or display designed to outrage the sensibilities of the group. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.06) 
State Law reference— Disturbing lawful meeting, MCL 750.170.  
Sec. 38-153. - Obstructing public places. 
(a)  No person shall without legal privilege to do so, and whether alone or with others, purposely or recklessly obstruct or cause to be obstructed any building, public passage or place, street or park. 
(b)  No person shall block, impede, or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public street by means of a barricade, object, or device, or with his person. This subsection shall not apply to persons maintaining, rearranging, or constructing public utility facilities in or adjacent to a street. 
(c)  No person shall refuse or knowingly fail to obey a reasonable official order or request to move to prevent obstruction of any public passage or place or blockage, impediment, or other interference with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic upon a public street. The terms "obstruct" and "obstruction" mean render impassable or unusable without unreasonable inconvenience or hazard. 
(d)  When persons are lawfully assembled in a public place to communicate publicly or to listen to or observe such communication, no person (including communicator) so assembled shall be convicted of recklessly obstructing in violation of this section unless he has first been given a reasonable opportunity to comply with this section. 
(e)  No person whose lawful behavior attracts an obstructing audience shall be guilty of violating this section if the obstruction can be readily remedied by reasonable police control of the size or location of the audience. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.05, 7-03.05.11) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
Sec. 38-154. - Picketing, sit-ins, etc. 
No person shall hinder or prevent by mass picketing, unlawful threats or force, or by sit-in demonstrations, the pursuit of any lawful work or employment, or obstruct or interfere with entrance to or egress from any place of employment, public place, or residence or obstruct or interfere with free and uninterrupted use of public roads, streets, or other ways of travel. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.16)  
Sec. 38-155. - Public intoxication. 
No person shall be intoxicated in a public place and either directly endanger the safety of another person or property or act in a manner that causes a public disturbance. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.30(A)) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Local ordinances prohibiting public intoxication, MCL 333.6523, 750.167(1)(e).  
Sec. 38-156. - Disturbing lawful occupation, vocation or avocation. 
No person shall by threats, intimidations, or otherwise, and without authority of law, interfere with, or in any way molest or attempt to interfere with, or in any way molest or disturb, without such authority, any person, in the quiet and peaceable pursuit of his lawful occupation, vocation, or avocation, or on the way to and from such occupation, vocation, avocation, or aid and abet in any such unlawful acts. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.17)  
Sec. 38-157. - Fighting, quarreling or disturbing behavior. 
No person shall purposely cause, recklessly create a risk of, or knowingly contribute to inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to any person in a public place by engaging in fighting, quarreling, or threatening, or engaging in violent, tumultuous, or disturbing behavior. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.02(A), 7-03.05.12) 
State Law reference— Disorderly persons, MCL 750.167.  
Sec. 38-158. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  No minor under the age of 17 years shall loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection do not apply if the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(6)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(b)  No parent, guardian, or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years shall permit such minor to violate this section. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.04.01, 7-03.04.02) 
State Law reference— Curfew for minors, MCL 772.751 et seq.  
Secs. 38-159—38-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 38-181. - Prostitution. 
No person shall engage in any act of prostitution. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.21) 
State Law reference— Prostitution, MCL 750.448 et seq.  
Sec. 38-182. - Indecent exposure. 
No person shall make any immoral exhibition or indecent exposure of his person with the apparent intent to alarm or annoy others. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.18) 
State Law reference— Indecent exposure, MCL 750.335a.  
Sec. 38-183. - Open house parties. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
Alcoholic beverage means an alcoholic liquor as defined in section 105 of the Michigan Liquor Control Code of 1998 (MCL 426.1105). 
Allow means to give permission for, or approval of, possession or consumption of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance, by any of the following means: 
(1)  In writing. 
(2)  By one or more oral statements. 
(3)  By any form of conduct, including a failure to take corrective action, that would cause a reasonable person to believe that permission or approval has been given. 
Control over any premises, residence, or other real property means the authority to regulate, direct, restrain, superintend, control, or govern the conduct of other individuals on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and includes, but is not limited to, a possessory right. 
Controlled substance means that term as defined in section 7104 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7104). 
Corrective action means any of the following: 
(1)  Making a prompt demand that the minor or other individual depart from the premises, residence, or other real property, or refrain from the unlawful possession or consumption of the alcoholic beverage or controlled substance on or within that premises, residence, or other real property, and taking additional action described in subsection (2) or (3) of this definition if the minor or other individual does not comply with the request. 
(2)  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to a law enforcement agency having jurisdiction over the violation. 
(3)  Making a prompt report of the unlawful possession or consumption of alcoholic liquor or a controlled substance to another person having a greater degree of authority or control over the conduct of persons on or within the premises, residence, or other real property. 
Minor means an individual less than 21 years of age. 
Premises means a permanent or temporary place of assembly, other than a residence, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  A meeting hall, meeting room, or conference room. 
(2)  A public or private park. 
Residence means a permanent or temporary place of dwelling, including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  A house, apartment, condominium, or mobile home. 
(2)  A cottage, cabin, trailer, or tent. 
(3)  A motel unit, hotel unit, or bed and breakfast unit. 
Social gathering means an assembly of two or more individuals for any purpose, unless all of the individuals attending the assembly are members of the same household or immediate family. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (c) of this section, an owner, tenant, or other person having control over any premises, residence, or other real property shall not do either of the following: 
(1)  Knowingly allow a minor to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
(2)  Knowingly allow any individual to consume or possess a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
(c)  This section does not apply to the use, consumption, or possession of a controlled substance by an individual pursuant to a lawful prescription, or to the use, consumption, or possession of an alcoholic beverage by a minor for religious purposes. 
(d)  Evidence of all of the following gives rise to a rebuttable presumption that the defendant allowed the consumption or possession of an alcoholic beverage or a controlled substance on or within a premises, residence, or other real property, in violation of this section: 
(1)  The defendant had control over the premises, residence, or other real property. 
(2)  The defendant knew that a minor was consuming or in possession of an alcoholic beverage or knew that an individual was consuming or in possession of a controlled substance at a social gathering on or within that premises, residence, or other real property. 
(3)  The defendant failed to take corrective action. 
(e)  This section does not authorize selling or furnishing an alcoholic beverage to a minor. 
(f)  A penalty for violation of this section may be imposed in addition to any penalty that may be imposed for any other offense arising from the same conduct. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-07.01—7-07.04) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 750.141a.  
Sec. 38-184. - Public consumption of alcohol. 
(a)  No person shall consume any alcoholic or intoxicating beverages on any street, alley, park, or any place owned or controlled by the township or within any motor vehicle while being operated or parked on any street, alley, park, or any place owned or controlled by the township. 
(b)  The township supervisor and township board, pursuant to written application made, may grant approval for consumption or sale of alcoholic liquor, beer, and wine in any public place under their jurisdiction if such sale or consumption is approved by the state liquor control commission in those cases where such approval is required. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-03.05.25, 7-03.05.30(B)) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic liquor, ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Transportation or possession of alcohol in open containers in vehicles, MCL 257.624a; transportation or possession of alcohol in vehicles by persons less than 21 years of age, MCL 257.624b.  
Sec. 38-185. - Under influence of narcotics. 
No person shall be under the influence of any narcotic drug in any public place. 
(Code 1986, § 7-03.05.30(B))  
Sec. 38-186. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 759 , adopted Feb. 11, 2019, repealed § 38-186, which pertained to marijuana, and derived from Ord. No. 609, adopted Apr. 1, 2000; and Ord. No. 699, adopted Oct. 22, 2007.  
Sec. 38-187. - Prohibition on sale and consumption of marihuana in public places. 
(a)  In conformance with Sections 4.1(e) and 6.2(b) of the Act, (except as otherwise provided in this section,) the sale or consumption of marihuana in any form and the sale or display of marijuana accessories, as defined by the Act, is prohibited in any public place within the boundaries of the township. 
(b)  Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00, plus court-imposed costs. 
(c)  This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the transfer and consumption of marijuana on private property to the extent authorized by the person who owns, occupies or operates such property, as provided in and authorized by the Act, and does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the use of marihuana for medical purposes as provided by any law of the State of Michigan allowing for or regulating marihuana for medical use. 
( Ord. No. 759, § 2, 2-11-2019 )  
Sec. 38-188. - Drug paraphernalia. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Controlled substance means any drug, substance, or immediate precursor in part 72 of the Public Health Code (MCL 333.7201 et seq.). 
Drug paraphernalia means all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance. It includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substance; 
(3)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
(4)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances; 
(5)  Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances; 
(7)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances. 
(8)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
(9)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; 
(10)  Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; 
(11)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cocaine into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials; 
f.  Chamber pipes; 
g.  Carburetor pipes; 
h.  Electric pipes; 
i.  Air-driven pipes; 
j.  Chillums; 
k.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(12)  In determining whether an object is under the term "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
a.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
b.  The proximity of the object, in the time and space, to a direct violation of this division; 
c.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
d.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
e.  Director or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of this division; the innocence of an owner or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of this division shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as "drug paraphernalia"; 
f.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
g.  Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use; 
h.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
i.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
j.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
k.  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; 
l.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
( Ord. No. 763, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 38-189. - Reserved.  
Sec. 38-190. - Exceptions. 
(a)  To the extent of such permitted conduct only, this division does not apply to any person or entity who is licensed, registered, or otherwise permitted by law to manufacture, use, possess, prescribe, dispense, distribute, conduct research with respect to or administer a controlled substance; including persons suffering from asthma, diabetes, or other medical conditions requiring introduction of a controlled substance into the human body. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to nor prohibit marijuana accessories as defined in and allowed by the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act (Initiative 1 of 2018)(MCL 333.27951 et. seq.). 
( Ord. No. 763, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 38-191. - Possession. 
No person shall use, or possess with intent to use, drug paraphernalia to plant, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a controlled substance into the human body. 
( Ord. No. 763, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 38-192. - Sale, display or delivery. 
No person shall deliver, sell, offer for sale, display, supply, possess with intent to deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or sell, drug paraphernalia knowing that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce a controlled substance into the human body. 
( Ord. No. 763, 10-14-2019 )  
Sec. 38-193. - Advertisements. 
No person shall place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. 
( Ord. No. 763, 10-14-2019 )  
Secs. 38-194—38-205. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 3 of Ord. No. 759, adopted Feb. 11, 2019, repealed div. 2, §§ 38-206—38-211, which pertained to drug paraphernalia, and derived from the 1986 Code. 
 
Secs. 38-206—38-211. - Reserved.  
Chapter 42 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Environment, ch. 26; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Township parks, MCL 42.1, 41.421 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 42-1—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CONDUCT IN PARKS 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  The park commission shall within six months from passage of the ordinance from which this article is derived promulgate rules and regulations to control the conduct of all people who use park lands in the township. The rules and regulations shall provide for hours of usage and rules governing the activities permitted and prohibited, all consistent with providing a safe, clean environment for the health, safety and general welfare of all citizens using park facilities. 
(b)  A hearing shall be held on such rules and regulations, after which, they shall be forwarded to the township board for their approval. 
(Code 1986, § 8-05.02) 
State Law reference— Township park commission, MCL 41.426 et seq.  
Sec. 42-32. - Permits. 
No person, without first obtaining a written permit from the township park commission shall engage in certain activities as specified by the commission. Such activities requiring a permit and the standards for issuance of a permit shall be promulgated by the township park commission and approved by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 8-05.03)  
Sec. 42-33. - Park concessions. 
No person shall sell or rent, or attempt to sell or rent, any service, merchandise or any object in any park without first entering into a lease agreement with the township to operate a park concession, except that a group or organization may, on a special occasion, sell merchandise to its own members provided a written permit therefor, has been first obtained from the township park commission as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 8-05.04)  
Sec. 42-34. - Damage to park facilities. 
Any person or organization who shall cause damage or injury to a park facility shall pay to the township forthwith any costs incurred by the township as a result of such loss, damage or injury. 
(Code 1986, § 8-05.05) 
State Law reference— Malicious mischief, MCL 750.377a et seq.  
Chapter 46 - PANHANDLERS, PEDDLERS, CHARITABLE SOLICITORS AND TEMPORARY BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Home solicitation, MCL 445.111 et seq.; transient merchants, MCL 445.371 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - PANHANDLING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 730, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, amended chapter 46, arts. I, and II to read as herein set out. Former arts. I, and II pertained to similar subject matter, consisted of §§ 46-1—46-4, 46-31—46-34, 46-51—46-63, and derived from the 1986 Code. 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
 
Sec. 46-1. - Panhandling. 
As used in this section, "panhandling" means any solicitation made in person upon any street, public place or park in the township, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person, and includes but is not limited to seeking donations: 
(a)  By vocal appeal or for music, singing, or other street performance; and 
(b)  Where the person being solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. However, panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting nor performing music, singing or other street performance with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, without any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another person. 
1.  It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling on any day after sunset, or before sunrise. 
2.  It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling when either the panhandler or the person being solicited is located at any of the following locations: at a bus stop; in any public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility; in a vehicle which is parked or stopped on a public street or alley; outdoor eating area; or within 20 feet in any direction from an automatic teller machine or entrance to a bank. 
3.  It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in an aggressive manner, including any of the following actions: 
a.  Touching the solicited person without the solicited person's consent; 
b.  Panhandling a person while such person is standing in line and waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment; 
c.  Blocking the path of a person being solicited, or the entrance to any building or vehicle; 
d.  Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from the panhandler after being solicited. 
e.  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following a refusal to make a donation, or making any statement, gesture, or other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or feel compelled; or 
f.  Panhandling in a group of two or more persons. 
g.  Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a public nuisance and a separate violation of this Code. Each violation shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction per section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
ARTICLE II. - PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS ENTERING PRIVATE PREMISES 
 
Sec. 46-2. - Statement of purpose. 
(a)  It is hereby determined that the regulation of solicitation and peddling is sufficiently connected to the township's interest in preventing crime and protecting citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace as to warrant regulation, but such regulation should not prohibit otherwise lawful activity. 
(b)  It is also determined that a connection exists among evening solicitation and the disruption of citizens' quiet enjoyment and peace such that reasonable limits on solicitation between 9:00 a.m. and dusk or 8:00 p.m. Eastern Standard or Daylight Saving Time, whichever is earlier, Mondays through Saturdays and between 11:00 a.m. and 6 p.m. on Sundays is warranted. 
(c)  It is further determined that the township has no other less restrictive means available to achieve its objectives but through reasonable regulation. 
(d)  It is further determined that prohibiting solicitation after dusk or 8:00 p.m. (6:00 p.m. on Sundays), whichever is earlier, and before 9:00 a.m. (11:00 a.m. on Sundays) leaves ample alternative channels of communication open to solicitors in the township. 
(e)  The investigation and licensing fees provided herein are levied to defray the costs of regulation and not to place an undue burden on interstate commerce. 
(f)  It is expressly the purpose of this article to provide for and promote the safety and welfare of the general public and not to create or designate any particular class of persons who will or should be specially protected by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-3. - Immunity. 
(a)  It is the specific intent of this article to place the obligation of complying with its terms on the licensee, and no provision of this article is intended to impose any duty upon the township or its employees. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this article is intended to be nor shall be construed to create any liability on the part of the township or its employees for any injury or damage resulting from the failure of the licensee to comply with the provisions of this article, or by reason or consequence of any act or omission in connection with the implementation or enforcement of this article on the part of the township or its employees. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-4. - Definitions. 
(a)  Peddler or solicitor means a person selling goods or services; or offering to sell goods or services to be delivered in the future; or obtaining information to be used by another in the sale or offer of sale of any goods or services; or requesting donations of money, goods or services; and who pursues these activities by traveling from door to door, street to street, or place to place. 
(b)  Principal of an organization engaged in peddling or soliciting means a person organizing, supervising or managing peddlers or solicitors. 
(c)  Charitable or religious organization shall be defined for the purposes of this article as a benevolent, educational, philanthropic, humane, or patriotic nonprofit organization of persons which solicit or obtain donations solicited from persons for benevolent, education, philanthropic, humane, or patriotic purposes. This term shall also include any duly constituted religious organization when no part of the net income of which directly benefits any individual if said organization has received a declaration of current tax exempt status from the United States. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-5. - Exemptions. 
Unless as qualified below, this article does not apply to: 
(a)  Persons dealing with only merchants, businesses or professional consumers. 
(b)  Newspaper carriers, state-licensed insurance and real estate agents; advertising sales persons calling on commercial enterprise or a sale under court order. 
(c)  Transient merchants making sales or taking orders for farm products produced or raised by that merchant. 
(d)  Officers or members acting on behalf of nonprofit, charitable or religious organizations. 
(e)  Persons under the age of 18, unless employed by another person or organization. 
(f)  Honorably discharged members of the armed forces of the United States, as to licensing, application, fees, revocation, appeal and exhibition [of sections] 46-6 through 46-14 provided they comply with the provisions of Act 359 of the Public Acts of 1921, as amended, being MCL 35.441 et seq. and the sales by the member are those exempted by that Act. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-6. - License/registration required. 
It is unlawful for a person to peddle or solicit within the township's limits without having a current and valid peddlers/solicitors license, as provided in this article. Charitable/religious organizations are required to register with the township prior to engaging in any hawking, peddling, vending, door-to-door selling or soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-6.1. - Registration of charitable/religious organizations. 
Charitable/religious organizations shall complete and file with the township clerk a registration form disclosing the following information: 
(a)  Name and address and phone of applicant. 
(b)  Name and address and phone of the charitable organization and purpose and use for which solicitation is to be made. 
(c)  A fee, as required, to cover the costs associated with a background check for each individual. 
(d)  The area or place of solicitation. 
(e)  A general description of the method of solicitation. 
(f)  Documentation required ascertaining compliance with the ordinance's definition of a charitable/religious organization. 
(g)  State license number or reason one is not required. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-7. - Contents of application for peddlers. 
Applicants for a license under this article must file a written application on a form provided by the township. The application must be filed with the township's clerk's office and contains the following information: 
(a)  Name, date of birth, and a color copy of driver's license or state issued identification card of applicant. 
(b)  Permanent home address, and if applicable, full local address of the applicant. 
(c)  A brief description of the nature of the business and goods to be sold. 
(d)  Place of manufacture or production of goods to be offered for sale, the present location of such goods, and the proposed method of delivery of such goods. 
(e)  Length of time for which the right to do business is desired. 
(f)  Name and address of the employer or parent organization the applicant is representing. An applicant is exempt from this requirement if a principal for the organization being represented has already supplied this information on an application for a license under this article for the same time period. 
(g)  Signature of the applicant authorizing an investigation of the applicant. 
(h)  Two, two-inch by two-inch current photos of the applicant if the township intends to use them on identification cards provided by the township. 
(i)  Description and license plate number(s) of the vehicle(s) used by the applicant(s) when peddling or soliciting. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-8. - Applicant investigation. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a completed written application for a license under this article, the original application shall be referred to the police department for investigation of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-9. - Fees. 
The applicant shall pay a fee to cover the costs of the background investigation. Fees for license and duration of said license shall be as provided for in the township's adopted rates and charges resolution. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-10. - Duration of license. 
All licenses shall expire 31 days from the date of issuance, unless a different date has been approved by the clerk. No license shall be issued for more than one year. Fees for license by duration shall be as provided for in the township's adopted rates and resolutions. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-11. - Issuance or denial of license. 
The clerk's office shall issue a license upon police department approval and payment of the prescribed license fee. In the event of police department disapproval, the clerk's office shall notify the applicant of the denial and the procedures for appeal pursuant to this article within 14 days of the date of application. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-12. - Revocation. 
Licenses issued under this article may be revoked by the township clerk subject to appeal pursuant to this article. Licenses may only be revoked for good cause including, but not limited to, the following: 
(a)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement(s) contained in the application for license. 
(b)  Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statement(s) made in the course of carrying on the business of peddling or soliciting. 
(c)  Any violation of this article. 
(d)  Any felony or misdemeanor conviction directly related to the fitness of a licensee to carry on the activities of peddling or soliciting. 
(e)  Conducting business in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-13. - Appeal procedure. 
Any person aggrieved by denial or revocation of a license may file an appeal with the township board. The notice of appeal must be filed within 14 days after notice of the denial or revocation has been mailed to the person's last known address. The request must be in writing and must explain the grounds for appeal. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-14. - Exhibition of license required. 
All licenses issued must be carried with the licensee at all times. 
If the township issues a badge (with or without a photograph of the individual) to a peddler, such person shall wear or affix such badge on the outside of their clothing while working within the township so that the badge will be readily visible to any person encountering the peddler. No such badge shall be altered, except by a township official pursuant to this article. 
Only the person to which the license is issued shall use and exhibit the license and/or badge. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-15. - Restrictions on the time and place. 
(a)  A peddler or solicitor, whether exempt from the provisions of licensing or not, shall not engage or attempt to engage in activity at any home, residence, apartment, apartment complex, or business that displays a "No Solicitors" or other similar sign, or otherwise provides notice that the occupants do not desire to be contacted by them. 
(b)  A peddler or solicitor shall not engage in the act of peddling or soliciting between the hours as provided in 46-2(b). 
(c)  A peddler or solicitor shall not intentionally obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(d)  Unless specifically approved by the township, no peddling or soliciting shall occur on any township park or township property. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-16. - Enforcement and penalty. 
(a)  In addition to the exhibition of license requirements in section 46-14, any person peddling or soliciting shall be required to produce his or her peddler's or solicitor's license if requested to do so by any police officer. In the absence of a license, the person shall be required to provide information reasonably necessary to verify a claim of exemption from this article. 
(b)  Any police officer shall enforce the provisions of this article against any person found to be violating it, and failure to produce a license or information necessary to verify a claimed exemption under this article shall constitute probable cause for enforcement action. 
(c)  Each violation shall be punishable as a municipal civil infraction per chapter 1, section 1-7. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Sec. 46-17. - Severability. 
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision of this article to be unenforceable, in whole or in part, such declaration shall only affect the provision or section held to be unenforceable and shall not affect any other part, provision, or section; provided that if a court of competent jurisdiction declares a penalty provision to exceed the authority of the township, the penalty shall be construed as the maximum penalty that is determined by the court to be within the authority of the township to impose. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Secs. 46-18—46-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 730, adopted Aug. 12, 2013, repealed art. III, §§ 46-91—46-94, 46-111—46-118, pertaining to charitable solicitations, and deriving from the 1986 Code, in its entirety. 
 
Secs. 46-91—46-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TEMPORARY BUSINESSES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 46-151. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Excluded from regulation under this article are businesses or individuals displaying or selling inside a building for less than 21 days during a calendar year. Any business or individual operating indoors for more than 21 days in a calendar year must obtain a standard annual township business license. 
(b)  No temporary business shall be exempt from the provisions of this article by reason of associating himself temporarily with any merchant, tradesman, or other person doing business permanently within the township or by conducting his business in connection with or as a part of the business of, or in the name of, any merchant, tradesman or other person doing business permanently in the township. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-04.04.02, 3-04.06.01)  
Sec. 46-152. - Hours of operation. 
A licensee under this article shall only be allowed to conduct the business of sales or service of his temporary business between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.10(A))  
Sec. 46-153. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  Persons licensed under this article shall be allowed to operate only in community commercial and general commercial zoning areas on Bay Road, Midland Road, Gratiot Road, and State Street. 
(b)  Persons licensed under this article must meet all zoning ordinance regulations applicable to businesses operating within the township. 
(c)  Persons licensed under this article must operate completely within the setback requirements; 30 feet behind the township established right-of-way. 
(d)  Persons licensed under this article shall not sell products or provide services within 2,000 feet of a parcel on which those products or services are provided by a permanent business. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.10(B))  
Sec. 46-154. - Definitions. 
Temporary business means all persons, associations, firms and corporations, and their agents, servants and employees, who engage in the temporary business of selling and/or delivering of goods, wares, merchandise, and/or service within the township but have no current township business license and who is not assessed for personal property taxes in the township, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building or structure, motor vehicle, tent, parking lot, or public rooms in hotels, lodging houses, apartments, shops, or other place within the township, for the exhibition or sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction. Such terms shall also include the taking and sale of photographs at retail. 
(Ord. No. 730, 8-12-2013)  
Secs. 46-155—46-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 46-171. - Required. 
No person, either as a principal or an agent, shall engage in business as a temporary business within the limits of the township without having first obtained a license in the manner provided in this division. All agents and employees must be listed on the application and license. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.01)  
Sec. 46-172. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in business as a temporary business within the limits of the township shall make and file with the township clerk, a written application for a license to engage in business as a temporary business. The application shall: 
(1)  Be signed by and sworn to by the applicant and shall state his full name, his physical description, his local and permanent residential addresses. 
(2)  Contain a sworn statement by the applicant to adhere to all zoning requirements in regard to setback areas on the roads involved, and acknowledge a limitation of one sign, not to exceed 35 square feet, and that the sign will be no closer to the roadway than the established right-of-way line for the period of time that the license is issued. 
(3)  List the names of the last three cities in which the applicant has worked and shall further state the nature of the business proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  State the name and address of the owner of such business. 
(b)  At the time of filing an application for a license under this article, the applicant shall furnish the township with two photographs of himself. 
(c)  Application for a license under this article must be filed with the township clerk 14 consecutive days prior to the start of any such sale. 
(d)  The applicant is to provide written permission of the property owner or lessee of the property which shall be submitted when the application is filed. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.03)  
Sec. 46-173. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  The township clerk may withhold the granting of a license applied for under this article until such time as he may receive information on the applicant from the police department. Whenever the township clerk receives information from any source indicating that the applicant has violated any law or ordinance of any state or municipality, the township clerk shall refer the application to the township board, which shall determine whether the license shall be granted. 
(b)  If the circumstances do not require the township clerk to refer such application to the township board, the township clerk shall issue the license. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-04.04.06, 3-04.04.07)  
Sec. 46-174. - Fee. 
(a)  The nonrefundable fee for a license required by this article shall be as established by resolution and shall be paid to the township clerk at the time the application is filed. 
(b)  No license fee shall be required under this section from any person exempt from such fee by state or federal law, but such person shall be issued a license without charge and shall comply with all other provisions of this article. Also exempted from such fee are licensed township businesses operating normally from a permanent location but conducting an off-premises sale within an area approved under subsection 46-153(a). 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.05)  
Sec. 46-175. - Cash or surety bond. 
(a)  At the time of filing an application for a license under this article, the township clerk may require the applicant to deposit with the township clerk the sum of $500.00 as a cash bond, or file a surety company bond in a like amount. 
(b)  Such cash bond or surety bond shall be conditioned for the faithful performance of his promises and contracts made during his course of business as a temporary business within the township and for compliance with this Code. Such bond shall be further conditioned that any person injured by the breach of any obligation which the bond is given to secure may sue upon such bond in his own name in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover any damages such person may have sustained by such breach. 
(c)  Such bond shall be for a term of not less than six months. 
(d)  Deposits of money or bonds to be deposited as may be required to be made with the township clerk according to the provisions of this section shall be subject to the claims of creditors in all cases where a judgment has been obtained against such temporary business and the date for the appeal of such judgment has expired. In such cases, garnishment proceedings may be commenced against the township clerk. It shall be the duty of the township clerk to remit to any court any balance of such cash deposit remaining in his hands not exceeding the amount of the judgment for the purpose of satisfying the judgment. 
(e)  Any balance of such cash deposit remaining in the hands of the township clerk for a period of six months after the expiration of the license shall be remitted to the temporary business. 
(f)  Any license issued under the provisions of this article shall expire and be void as soon as the amount of the bond filed with the township clerk shall have been diminished or used in whole or in part because of suits as provided for in subsection (d) of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.04)  
Sec. 46-176. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses issued under the provisions of this article shall not be issued for a period of less than seven days nor more than 30 days with a combined time for all licenses not to exceed a total of 30 days per one calendar year, per single temporary business use, from and after the date of issuance. 
(b)  All licenses may be renewed within the provisions set forth in this division and subsection (a) of this section. All licenses must be applied for at least 14 days in advance. A renewal fee in the amount established by resolution will be required whenever a license is renewed. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-04.04.11, 3-04.04.12)  
Sec. 46-177. - Nontransferable; return upon expiration. 
Any license issued under this article shall be nontransferable and shall be returned to the township clerk within two days after its date of expiration, together with all facsimile copies thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.16)  
Sec. 46-178. - Form and content. 
All licenses granted under this article shall be in such form as to contain a true photograph of the licensee, his name, address, physical description, location to be licensed, type of product to be sold, location of sign and displays to be used, and the length of time the license will be issued for. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.08)  
Sec. 46-179. - Carried by licensee. 
All licensees shall carry with them at all times the license described in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.09(A))  
Sec. 46-180. - Alterations prohibited. 
No licensee under this article shall alter, remove or obliterate any entry made on such license. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.09(B))  
Sec. 46-181. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  The township clerk shall have the power to suspend any license issued under this article for violation of a township ordinance or any condition or regulation under which the license was granted. 
(b)  The township clerk shall report all suspensions to the township board, which may for cause shown, revoke or reinstate the license after giving the licensee reasonable notice and an opportunity to be heard. 
(c)  In the event of revocation, the license fee shall not be refunded. No person whose license has been revoked shall receive another license for a period of one year thereafter. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-04.04.13, 3-04.04.14)  
Sec. 46-182. - Records of licenses. 
A full, complete record of each license issued under this article, including renewals or revocations thereof, and serious complaints and charges against the licensee, together with his photograph shall be kept on file in the office of the township clerk. 
(Code 1986, § 3-04.04.15)  
Chapter 48 - SIGNS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 48-1. - Authority. 
This article is enacted pursuant to Act No. 359 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1947 (MCL 42.1 et seq.), as amended, and repeals all other sign ordinances of the township. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-2. - Title. 
This article shall be known as the Saginaw Charter Township Sign Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-3. - Statement of purpose. 
These standards are adopted to: 
(1)  Maintain and enhance the aesthetics of the community. 
(2)  Enhance pedestrian and traffic safety. 
(3)  Preserve public health, safety, and welfare. 
(4)  Limit multiple or conflicting signs. 
(5)  Minimize the adverse effects of signs on nearby public and private property. 
(6)  Minimize driver distraction. 
(7)  Protect and enhance the scenic views and natural landscapes. 
(8)  Protect and enhance economic viability by assuring aesthetic appeal for visitors and residents. 
(9)  Promote the use of aesthetically pleasing sign materials and colors. 
(10)  Avoid obstacles, distractions, or traffic hazards that impair a traveler's ability to see pedestrians, traffic signs, or vehicles. 
(11)  Preserve the right to enjoy scenic amenities. 
(12)  Enhance the effectiveness of directional and warning signs. 
(13)  Preserve property values. 
(14)  Provide for the effectiveness of permitted signs. 
(15)  Avoid adverse lighting or reflection. 
(16)  Require structurally safe signs. 
The standards in this article are determined to be the minimum necessary to achieve the above stated purposes. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-4. - Definitions. 
Words or terms contained in this article shall have the meanings as defined in this section. Any words or terms not defined in this section shall have the meanings normally ascribed to them, or as they are defined in the other ordinances. 
Abandoned means a sign shall be deemed abandoned if: 
(1)  It does not display a well-maintained structure or sign face for a consecutive 120-day period; 
(2)  The owner of the sign cannot be located at the owner's last known address, as reflected on the records of the department; or 
(3)  A structure designed to support a sign no longer supports the sign for a period of 120 consecutive days. 
(4)  Any sign not repaired or maintained properly, after notice, pursuant to the terms of this section. 
Amortization period means the time between the date of adoption of this article and February 16, 2016. 
Area of sign. The entire area within a circle, triangle, parallelogram, or other geometric configuration enclosing the extreme limits of writing, representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background against which it is placed. 
For purposes of calculating sign area, the following shall be excluded: 
The necessary supports or columns, on which such sign is attached, provided they are less than 24 inches in width. 
The portion of a ground-mounted or monument sign that is used as the base, provided it is less than four feet in height. 
Any numbers displaying the address of the property. 
Awning sign. See Canopy sign. 
Billboard means a freestanding outdoor sign which advertises an establishment, service, merchandise, use, entertainment, activity product or message which is not conducted, sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished upon the parcel or lot in which the sign is located, and additionally shall include those signs as regulated by the state pursuant to Act No. 106 of the Public Acts of Michigan of 1972 (MCL 252.301) et seq,; MSA 9.39 (101) et seq.) as amended.  
Canopy sign means any sign attached to or constructed on a canopy. A canopy is a permanent roof-like shelter extending from part of or all of a building face. 
Changeable copy sign/reader board means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 
Clear vision area means the area bounded by the street property lines of corner lots and a line intersecting the street property lines, 30 feet from their point of intersection. 
Construction sign means a sign containing identifying information concerning construction activity in progress on the premises on which the sign is located, such as the name of the future occupant or business, development name, type of development, name of the developer, and names of architects, engineers, contractors and lenders involved in the construction activity. 
Department means the Community Development Department of Saginaw Charter Township. 
Directional sign means a sign on private property the primary purpose of which is to direct traffic movement onto or off of a premise. Such signs include entrance, exit, or street number. 
Electronic message board means a variable message sign that utilizes computer generated messages or other electronic means of changing copy. These signs include displays using incandescent lamps, LEDs, LCDs, or a flipper matrix.  
Freestanding sign means a sign supported by one or more uprights, braces, pylons, or foundation elements located in or upon the ground and not attached to a building.  
Governmental sign means a sign authorized by this municipality, a governmental agency, the State of Michigan, or the federal government, for the benefit of the public. Such signs may include safety signs, danger signs, trespassing signs, street direction signs, destination signs, hazardous condition signs, or signs for traffic control purposes. 
Grand opening sign. See Special event sign. 
Ground-mounted. See Monument sign. 
Industrial center means a coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate industrial buildings. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed on a integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design, orientation and open space. 
Integral sign means signs made an integral part of the walls of the structure or roof for farm buildings, or when carved into stone, concrete, or similar material or made of bronze, aluminum or other permanent type construction. 
Marquee means any hood, canopy, awning, or permanent construction that projects from a wall of a building.  
Monument sign means a freestanding sign where the base of the sign structure is permanently in the ground or integrated into landscaping or other solid structural features.  
Nonconforming sign means any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the effective date of this article, and any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to any applicable regulations and restrictions of this article, or a sign for which a permit was previously issued that does not comply with the provisions of this article. 
Nonresidential sign means a sign located on a parcel that does not have a dwelling as its principle structure and is located in the CG, AG, R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, district. Examples of the uses that may be associated with nonresidential uses in these districts include but are not limited to subdivisions, schools, religious institutions, public buildings and cemeteries. 
Owner means a person owning the sign and/or the property owner upon which the sign is located. 
Parcel means contiguous real estate taxed as a single parcel on one side of a public road. 
Permit means the authorization for the installation of a sign issued by the department. 
Person means any individual or entity, including a firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited liability company, trustee, and their legal successors. 
Political campaign signs means signs announcing candidates for public political office, referendum issues or other data pertinent to an upcoming election. 
Portable sign means a sign that is not permanently anchored or secured to a building and not having supports or braces permanently secured in the ground, included but not limited to "sandwich" signs and signs mounted on wheels so as to be capable of being pulled by a motor vehicle from one location to another. Banners, pennants, pinwheels, ribbons, streamers, strings of light bulbs, inflatables or similar devices intended for a limited period of display shall also be considered a portable sign. This definition does not include specified exceptions for grand opening type signs.  
Projecting sign means a sign affixed to any part of a building or structure that extends beyond the building or structure by more than 20 inches.  
Replacing copy means any change consisting of relettering, replacing or changing the sign face, repainting, cleaning, or other similar nonstructural changes. 
Regional commercial center means a coordinated development of a tract of land with two or more separate commercial buildings with uses classified as regional business uses for zoning purposes. Such development is planned, designed, constructed and managed on a integrated and coordinated basis with special attention given to on-site vehicular circulation, parking, utility needs, building design, orientation and open space. Regional commercial centers are greater than 20 acres in site size. 
Regional plaza/center means commercial development, usually one store deep. This type of development can include individual buildings on one site or a linear shopping centers with coordinated parking and access. Plaza/centers are less than 20 acres in size. Plaza/centers must have a minimum of three businesses. 
Residential neighborhood identification sign means a sign at the entrance of a residential neighborhood identifying the neighborhood. 
Roof line means the highest point on any building where an exterior wall encloses usable floor space. The term "roof line" includes the top of any parapet wall, providing said parapet wall extends around the entire perimeter of the building at the same elevation. The facade of a building is not defined as part of the roof line. 
Roof sign means a sign erected, constructed, or maintained upon, or which projects above, the roof line of a building.  
Sign means a structure which includes a name, identification, image, description, display or illustration which is affixed to, painted or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or parcel of land, and which directs attention to an object, product, place, activity, facility, service, event, attraction, person, institution, organization or business, or idea and which is visible from any street, right-of-way, sidewalk, alley, park or other public property. This definition includes the base, frame, and support members of the sign. Customary displays of merchandise or objects and material within an enclosed building or placed behind a store window are not signs. A sign shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor shall it include the flag of a political unit or school. 
Sign location means the area on which a sign is placed. Permitted freestanding or monument signs may be located anywhere on the premises except in clear vision area or within the proposed right-of-way. 
Sign setback means where it is specified that a sign must be located a minimum or other certain distance from property lines, or public rights-of-way, or proposed public rights-of-way, such distance shall be measured from the portion of the sign structure nearest to such specified line. For the purpose of this measurement, the property lines and public right-of-way lines extend vertically and perpendicularly from the ground to infinity. Unless otherwise noted all signs shall be setback at the proposed right-of-way line. 
Sign width means the distance between two sign faces back to back on a freestanding or monument sign shall not exceed six feet measured from the front of each sign face. This applies to parallel and nonparallel sign faces. Signs constructed in a triangular manner shall not exceed six feet at the widest point. 
Special event sign means a sign advertising display that is temporary in nature, is not permanently attached to the ground or sign surface, and is used for special events, such as, but not limited to grand openings, seasonal sales, liquidations, going out of business sales, fire sales, promotions, and other similar limited term events. 
Street banner means fabric signs, suspended across public streets advertising a public entertainment or event. The location and contents of each street banner must be specially approved by the Saginaw Charter Township Board and the Saginaw County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation. 
Structural alteration means the modification of a sign and/or sign structure that affects size, shape, height, or sign location; changes in structural materials; or replacement of electrical components with other than comparable materials. The replacement of wood parts with metal or plastic parts, the replacement of incandescent bulbs with light-emitting diodes (LED), or the addition of electronic elements to a nonelectrified sign would all be structural alterations. 
Exception: Structural alteration does not include ordinary maintenance or repair, repainting an existing sign surface, including changes of message or image, exchanging painted and pasted or glued materials on painted wall signs, or exchanging display panels of a sign through release and closing of clips or other brackets. 
Through lot means a lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets. 
Wall sign means a sign attached to, painted upon, placed against, or supported by the exterior surface of any building. Wall signs also include marquees and canopy signs.  
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008)  
Sec. 48-5. - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are considered to be unsafe, dangerous, hazardous or a nuisance, therefore these signs shall not be permitted, erected or maintained in any zoning district. 
(1)  Any sign for which a permit is required and has not been issued is prohibited, excluding any existing legal nonconforming sign. 
(2)  Signs which incorporate in any manner any flashing or moving lights. 
(3)  Street banners, portable signs, pennants, spinners and streamers, and inflatable figures except as specifically permitted in accordance with this article or the zoning ordinance. 
(4)  Any sign which moves or has any moving or animated parts, or images, whether the movement is caused by any mechanical, electronic or electrical device or wind or otherwise, including swinging signs and strings of flags or streamers, or cloth flags moved by natural wind. Such a prohibition shall not pertain to public message signs on governmental property and those on public property that display time, temperature or stock market quotation signs. 
(5)  Any sign or sign structure which 
a.  Is structurally unsafe, or 
b.  Constitutes a hazard to the safety or health of person or property by reason of inadequate design, fabrication, mounting or maintenance or because it has been abandoned or 
c.  Is not kept in good repair, or 
d.  Is capable of causing electrical shocks to persons that may come in contact with it. 
(6)  Any sign which by reason of it size, location, coloring, intensity, or manner of illumination constitutes a traffic hazard or a detriment to traffic safety by obstruction of visibility or creation of driver confusion of any traffic sign or control device on any public street or road. 
(7)  Any sign which obstructs free ingress or egress from a required door, window, fire escape, driveway or other required access route. 
(8)  Signs which make use of words such as "stop", "look", "danger", or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to resemble standard traffic control signs and interfere with, mislead or confuse drivers of vehicles traveling upon any highway, driveway or parking area. 
(9)  Any sign or other advertising structure or display which conveys, suggests, indicates or otherwise implies by pictures, drawings, words, emblems, logos, or other communication methods including but not limited to human genitalia, sexual acts, adult nude human bodies, obscene words, or obscene gestures. 
(10)  Any sign, hereafter existing owned by or on the premises of a business that has ceased operation. Said signs shall be removed by the owner within 30 calendar days after a business closes or vacates the premises. 
(11)  Any sign, except traffic or other municipal approved signs, as permitted in this article that is located in or projects into or over a public right-of-way or dedicated easement. 
(12)  Any sign that exceeds the height limitation for structures in the zoning district in which it is located, or a wall sign that extends beyond or above the structure to which such sign is affixed except as may specifically be provided for in other provisions. 
(13)  Placards, posters, circulars, show bills, handbills, political signs, cards, leaflets or other advertising matter, except as otherwise provided herein, shall not be posted, pasted, nailed, placed, printed, stamped or in any way attached to any fence, wall, post, tree, sidewalk, pavement, platform, pole, tower, curbstone or surface in or upon any public easement, right-of-way or any public or private property whatsoever. Provided, however, nothing herein shall prevent official notices of the township, school districts, county, state, or federal government from being posted on any public property deemed necessary. All placards, posters, circulars, show bills, handbills, political signs, cards, leaflets or other advertising matter posted, pasted, nailed, placed, printed, stamped on any right-of-way or public property may be removed and disposed of by the Saginaw Charter Township Code Enforcement Officer without regard to other provisions of this article. 
(14)  Display or parking a motor vehicle or trailer upon a lot or premises in a location visible from a public right-of-way, for the primary purpose of displaying a sign attached to, painted on or placed on the vehicle or trailer, with the exception of vehicles used regularly in the course of conducting the principle use located on the premises. 
(15)  Roof signs. 
(16)  No portion of a privately-owned sign, or its supporting structures, such as poles or cables, shall be placed on, or within the air space above, publicly owned property, a public right-of-way (such as a street or sidewalk), or a proposed public right-of-way. 
(17)  Signs which obstruct free use of a roadway, required door, window, fire escape or other required exit way. No sign may obstruct the clear vision area. 
(18)  Billboards, except those that are located within 150 feet of the right-of-way line of Bay Road, or I-675 one-half mile North of Tittabawassee Road, that comply with the setback requirements for the zoning district, do not exceed 300 square feet in area, are located no closer than 5,000 feet to another billboard sign on either side of the road, are no higher than a total of 35 feet and otherwise are in compliance with the township zoning and general ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-6. - Signs authorized without a permit. 
The following signs are permitted without a sign permit in all zoning districts where the principle permitted use to which they are related is a permitted use in that district. 
(1)  Address numbers, nameplates (including apartment units and office suites) identifying the occupant or address of a parcel of land. 
(2)  Memorial signs or tablets, not to exceed eight square feet in area, containing the name of the building and date of erection, when cut into any masonry surface or constructed of bronze or other non-combustible material and affixed to the exterior wall of the building. 
(3)  Signs painted on or permanently attached to legally licensed vehicles that are used upon the highways for transporting persons, goods or equipment. 
(4)  Traffic or other municipal signs including, but not limited to, the following, legal notices, historic site designations, municipal facility directional signs, street or traffic signs, railroad crossing signs, danger and other emergency signs as may be approved by the township board or any federal, state or county agency having jurisdiction over the matter of the sign. Such signs may be located in any zoning district. However, all signs on governmental property on which a municipal building is located shall meet the commercial zoning district requirements stated herein. 
(5)  Community special event signs approved by the township board. 
(6)  One sign advertising parcels of land or building for rent, lease or sale, when located on land or building intended to be rented, leased or sold, not exceeding six square feet in area, four feet in height in residential districts. In office, commercial, and industrial districts the sign shall be limited to 32 square feet in area, eight feet in height. 
(7)  Flags of government, civic, philanthropic, educational, religious organizations and other public entities. In addition, one flag bearing the seal or trade mark of a private organization or entity may be displayed by an individual establishment or proprietor of any single building or parcel of land. 
(8)  Signs of a decorative nature, not used for any commercial purpose and commonly associated with any national, local or religious holiday; provided that such signs shall be displayed for a period of not more than 60 consecutive days, nor more than 60 days in any one year. 
(9)  Political campaign signs, not to exceed one sign per candidate or issue, and not to exceed 16 square feet of area per sign, shall be permitted with the property owner's permission on all improved lots or parcels regardless of zoning. Political signs are not permitted on vacant parcels of land. 
Corner lots: Two political campaign signs per candidate or issue are allowed on corner improved lots. 
Placement: Political campaign signs shall not be placed closer than ten feet from the edge of a public road for safety purposes. 
Political campaign signs may not be displayed more than 30 days prior to an election for which they are related and must be removed within ten days thereafter. 
(10)  Garage sale signs not exceeding five square feet in area and not displayed in excess of three days. 
(11)  One sign identifying on-site construction activity, during the time of construction, not exceeding 32 square feet in area. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet in height. 
(12)  Help wanted signs not exceeding six square feet in area and four feet in height may be displayed on private property for a period of up to four weeks at a time and not more than four times within each calendar year. 
(13)  Crop identification signs in the agricultural district. 
(14)  Painting, re-painting, cleaning, maintenance, repair, and change of sign message or graphics shall not be considered erection or alteration of a sign which requires issuance of a permit, provided that no structural alterations or additions to the display area are made. 
(15)  Private traffic control on private property such as directional signs. Such signs may not exceed one and one-half square feet or three feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008)  
Sec. 48-7. - Signs authorized with a permit. 
The department may issue a permit for signs in accordance with the following provisions. 
(1)  Agricultural/floodplain/conservation district signs. 
a.  Wall, residential. One wall sign is permitted on a dwelling structure. The sign may be up to three square feet in size and placed anywhere on the wall of the structure. 
b.  Wall, nonresidential. Wall sign is permitted on the principal structure of a nonresidential use. The sign may be up to 32 square feet in size and placed anywhere on the wall of the structure. Nonresidential uses with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage on one road or located on a corner lot may have two wall signs, each no greater than 32 square feet in size. 
c.  Integral sign, nonresidential. One integral sign may be incorporated into the structure of the nondwelling on the parcel. 
d.  Freestanding/monument nonresidential use. One freestanding or monument sign is permitted for each parcel. The freestanding or monument sign may not exceed a height of eight feet above the uniform finished grade or 50 square feet in size. 
i)  Corner lots. Nonresidential uses on a corner lot may be permitted two signs of up to 50 square feet each and eight feet in height if they are located a minimum of 100 feet from the intersection and any other sign. 
ii)  Entrance signs. In addition to the above-mentioned regulations, if the nonresidential use is located on a parcel of at least five acres in size, a monument or ground-mounted sign is permitted at no more than two entrances. Each sign must comply with the following regulations: 
a.  Each monument or ground-mounted sign may be up to 24 square feet in area and five feet in height for each entrance from a public road. 
b.  These ground-mounted or monument signs are only allowed if the other signs on the parcel are farther than 100 feet from said entrance. 
c.  No portion of these signs is permitted to be an electronic message board. 
e.  Neighborhood. A single-family residential neighborhood, mobile home park or multiple family residential development is permitted to have two monument signs identifying the residential neighborhood for each street entrance. Such signs shall not extend into any public right-of-way or proposed right-of-way. The face of each sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Both signs must be the same size. The height of the signs may not exceed five feet above the uniform finished grade. 
f.  Portable. One portable sign is permitted per improved parcel. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not exceed a total of 45 days in any calendar year. 
g.  Electronic message boards. A sign or portion thereof that is an electronic message board shall not be greater than 24 square feet in area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
i)  If signs are determined to be a nuisance or traffic hazard, the maximum brightness for the sign shall be reduced so not to exceed an illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 1,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during the period from sunset to sunrise, as measured from a sign face at maximum brightness. 
ii)  Each electronic message board shall have a dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower one for the period of time from sunset to sunrise. Each sign must appropriately adjust display brightness to conform with applicable brightness specifications as ambient light levels change at each such sign location due to sunrise, sunset, prevailing weather conditions or otherwise. 
iii)  No additional electronic message board is permitted on the building, if it is visible from a public road. 
(2)  R1-A, R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 residential zoning districts. 
a.  Wall, residential. One wall sign is permitted on a dwelling structure. The sign may be up to three square feet in size and placed anywhere on the wall of the structure. 
b.  Wall, nonresidential. A wall sign is permitted on a nonresidential use. The sign may be up to 32 square feet in size and placed anywhere on the wall of the structure. Nonresidential uses with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage on one road or located on a corner lot may have two wall signs, each no greater than 32 square feet in size. 
c.  Wall/marquee, residential multiple family. One wall sign is permitted on a nondwelling. The sign may be up to 32 square feet in size and placed anywhere on the wall of the structure. Nonresidential uses with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage on one road or located on a corner lot may have two wall signs, each no greater than 32 square feet in size. 
d.  Neighborhood. A residential neighborhood is permitted to have two monument residential neighborhood identification signs for each street entrance. Such signs shall not extend into any public right-of-way or proposed right-of-way. The face of each sign shall not exceed 24 square feet. Both signs must be the same size. The height of the signs may not exceed five feet above the uniform finished grade. 
e.  Freestanding/monument residential multiple family use: A residential multiple family use is permitted to have one freestanding/monument sign not to exceed 32 square feet in area and five feet above the uniform finished grade. 
f.  Freestanding/monument nonresidential use: One freestanding or monument sign is permitted for each parcel. The freestanding or monument sign may not exceed a height of eight feet above the uniform finished grade or 50 square feet in size. 
i)  Corner lots. Nonresidential uses on a corner lot may be permitted two signs of up to 50 square feet each and eight feet in height if they are located a minimum of 100 feet from the intersection and any other sign. 
ii)  Entrance signs. In addition to the above-mentioned regulations, if the nonresidential use is located on a parcel of at least five acres in size, a monument or ground-mounted sign is permitted at no more than two entrances. Each sign must comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Each monument or ground-mounted sign may be up to 24 square feet in area and five feet in height for each entrance from a public road. 
B.  These ground-mounted or monument signs are only allowed if the other signs on the parcel are farther than 100 feet from said entrance. 
C.  No portion of these signs is permitted to be an electronic message board. 
g.  Portable. One portable sign is permitted per improved parcel. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not exceed a total of 45 days in any calendar year. 
h.  Electronic message boards. A sign or portion thereof that is an electronic message board shall not be greater than 24 square feet in area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
i)  If signs are determined to be a nuisance or traffic hazard, the maximum brightness for the sign shall be reduced so not to exceed an illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 1,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during the period from sunset to sunrise, as measured from a sign face at maximum brightness. 
ii)  Each electronic message board shall have a dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower one for the period of time from sunset to sunrise. Each sign must appropriately adjust display brightness to conform with applicable brightness specifications as ambient light levels change at each such sign location due to sunrise, sunset, prevailing weather conditions or otherwise. 
(3)  B-1 office business commercial, zoning district. 
a.  Freestanding/monument: One freestanding or monument sign is permitted for each B-1, office business developed parcel with up to 400 lineal feet in frontage on the public right-of-way. Such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet in size, limited to two faces back-to-back and a height of eight feet above the uniform finished grade. 
For parcels with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage and less than 20 acres in size, one 50-square foot sign is permitted for each 400 lineal feet and fraction thereof. Each sign must be located at least 100 feet from any other sign on the same parcel, and 25 feet from any side lot line and must not block an existing property owner's previously erected sign. 
If the lot is a through lot, this 400-foot regulation applies to each road frontage as calculated independently of one another. If the lot is a corner lot, each road frontage shall be calculated independently on their own true road frontage measured along the road right-of-way intersection. 
b.  Wall/marquee sign. A wall sign may not project more than 12 inches from the surface of the building to which it is mounted [or into any right-of-way.] 
c.  Awning or canopy signs. Awning or canopy signs shall not project more than seven feet from the surface to which it is attached nor less than nine feet above the average grade of a walking surface. Awning or canopy signs shall not extend more than 24 inches above the roof line. 
d.  Portable. One portable sign is permitted per occupied tenant space. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not exceed a total of 45 days in any calendar year. 
e.  Street banners. Street banners may extend across a public right-of-way subject to approval of Saginaw Charter Township Board and the Saginaw County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation, but in no case may be displayed more than 14 days before an event and seven days after an event. 
f.  Electronic message boards. A sign or portion thereof that is an electronic message board shall not be greater than 24 square feet in area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
i)  If signs are determined to be a nuisance or traffic hazard, the maximum brightness for the sign shall be reduced so not to exceed an illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 1,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during the period from sunset to sunrise, as measured from a sign face at maximum brightness. 
ii)  Each electronic message board shall have a dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower one for the period of time from sunset to sunrise. Each sign must appropriately adjust display brightness to conform with applicable brightness specifications as ambient light levels change at each such sign location due to sunrise, sunset, prevailing weather conditions or otherwise. 
iii)  No additional electronic message board is permitted on the building if it is visible from a public road. 
g.  Billboards. Regulated through zoning ordinance. 
h.  Special event signs. One special event sign is permitted per parcel. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet or 20 feet in diameter or 16 feet in height and shall not exceed a total of 15 days in any calendar year. There shall not be more than one portable sign displayed at any one time on each property. 
(4)  B-2, B-3, B-3A and B-4 commercial zoning districts. 
a.  Freestanding/monument: One freestanding or monument sign is permitted for each B-3, community commercial developed parcel [with] up to 400 lineal feet in frontage on the public right-of-way. Such signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in size, limited to two faces back to back and a height of 12 feet above the uniform finished grade. 
For parcels with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage, one 64-square-foot sign is permitted for each 400 lineal feet and fraction thereof. Each sign must be located at least 100 feet from any other sign on the same parcel, and 25 feet from any side lot line and must not block an existing property owner's previously erected sign. 
If the lot is a through lot, this 400-foot regulation applies to each road frontage as calculated independently of one another. If the lot is a corner lot, each road frontage shall be calculated independently on their own true road frontage measured along the road right-of-way intersection. 
b.  Regional commercial centers: Two signs, not to exceed 74 square feet each and 12 feet in height, are permitted for each public road frontage. 
i)  Entrance signs. In addition to the above-mentioned regulations, one monument or ground-mounted sign is permitted at no more than two entrances. Each sign must comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Each monument or ground-mounted sign may be up to 24 square feet in area and five feet in height for each entrance from a public road. 
B.  These ground-mounted or monument signs are only allowed if the other signs on the parcel are farther than 100 feet from said entrance. 
C.  No portion of these signs is permitted to be an electronic message board. 
c.  Regional plaza or center identification signs. An additional 16 square feet of signage is permitted for use to identify the name of a plaza or center where multiple tenants are located. Lettering on this portion of the sign must be at least 12 inches in height. 
d.  Wall/marquee sign. A wall sign may not project more than 12 inches from the surface of the building to which it is mounted or into any right-of-way. 
e.  Awning or canopy signs. Awning or canopy signs shall not project more than seven feet from the surface to which it is attached nor less than eight feet above the average grade of a walking surface. Awning or canopy signs shall not extend more than 24 inches above the roof line. In no event may awning or canopy signs project into the right-of-way. 
f.  Portable [sign]. One portable sign is permitted per occupied tenant space. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not exceed a total of 45 days in any calendar year. There shall not be more than one portable sign displayed at any one time on each parcel. 
g.  Street banners. Street banners may extend across a public right-of-way subject to approval of Saginaw Charter Township Board and the Saginaw County Road Commission or Michigan Department of Transportation, but in no case may be displayed more than 14 days before an event and seven days after an event. 
h.  Electronic message boards. A sign or portion thereof that is an electronic message board shall not be greater than 24 square feet in area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
i)  If signs are determined to be a nuisance or traffic hazard, the maximum brightness for the sign shall be reduced so not to exceed an illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 1,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during the period from sunset to sunrise, as measured from a sign face at maximum brightness. 
ii)  Each electronic message board shall have a dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower one for the period of time from sunset to sunrise. Each sign must appropriately adjust display brightness to conform with applicable brightness specifications as ambient light levels change at each such sign location due to sunrise, sunset, prevailing weather conditions or otherwise. 
iii)  No additional electronic message board is permitted on the building if it is visible from a public road. 
i.  Special event signs. One special event sign is permitted per parcel. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet or 16 feet in height and shall not exceed a total of 15 days in any calendar year. There shall not be more than one portable sign displayed at any one time on each property. 
j.  Billboards. Regulated through zoning ordinance. 
(5)  M-1 and M-2 industrial/manufacturing zoning districts. 
a.  Freestanding/monument: One freestanding or monument sign is permitted for each industrially developed parcel [with] up to 400 lineal feet in frontage on the public right-of-way. Such signs shall not exceed 64 square feet in size, limited to two faces back to back and a height of ten feet above the uniform finished grade. 
For parcels with greater than 400 lineal feet of frontage, one 64-square-foot sign is permitted for each 400 lineal feet and fraction thereof. Each sign must be located at least 100 feet from any other sign on the same parcel, and 25 feet from any side lot line and must not block an existing property owner's previously erected sign. 
If the lot is a through lot, this 400-foot regulation applies to each road frontage as calculated independently of one another. If the lot is a corner lot, each road frontage shall be calculated independently on their own true road frontage measured along the road right-of-way intersection. 
b.  Industrial centers. Two signs, not to exceed 74 square feet each and 12 feet in height, are permitted for each public road frontage. 
One monument or ground-mounted sign is permitted at no more than two entrances. The monument or ground-mounted signs may be up to 24 square feet and five feet in height, for each entrance from a public road. These ground-mounted or monument signs are only allowed if the other signs on the parcel are farther than 100 feet from said entrance. 
c.  Portable [sign]. One portable sign is permitted per occupied tenant space. The sign shall not exceed 50 square feet in area and shall not exceed a total of 45 days in any calendar year. There shall not be more than one portable sign displayed at any one time on each parcel. 
d.  Billboards. Regulated through zoning ordinance. 
e.  Wall/marquee sign. A wall sign may not project more than 12 inches from the surface of the building to which it is mounted or into any right-of-way. 
f.  Electronic message boards. A sign or portion thereof that is an electronic message board shall not be greater than 24 square feet in area and shall comply with the following regulations: 
i)  If signs are determined to be a nuisance or traffic hazard, the maximum brightness for the sign shall be reduced so not to exceed an illumination of 5,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during daylight hours or 1,000 NITS (candelas per square meter) during the period from sunset to sunrise, as measured from a sign face at maximum brightness. 
ii)  Each electronic message board shall have a dimmer control to produce a distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower one for the period of time from sunset to sunrise. Each sign must appropriately adjust display brightness to conform with applicable brightness specifications as ambient light levels change at each such sign location due to sunrise, sunset, prevailing weather conditions or otherwise. 
iii)  No additional electronic message board is permitted on the building if it is visible from a public road. 
REGULATIONS FOR SIGNS THAT REQUIRE A PERMIT—Also see regulations in the text by district. 
ZONING DISTRICTS 	SIGN TYPE 	MAXIMUM 
SIGN SIZE 
PER PARCEL 	HEIGHT 
AGRICULTURAL/FLOODPLAIN CONSERVATION 	Wall, residential: 	3 sq. ft. 	wall height 
	Wall, nonresidential: 	32 sq. ft. 	wall height 
	Integral, nonresidential: 	no limit 	no limit 
	Freestanding/monument, nonresidential: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Neighborhood: 	24 sq. ft. 	5' 
	Portable: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Electronic message board: 	24 sq. ft. 	8' 
RESIDENTIAL 	Wall, residential: 	3 sq. ft. 	wall height 
	Wall, nonresidential: 	32 sq. ft. 	wall height 
	Wall/marquee, multiple family: 	32 sq. ft. 	wall height 
	Neighborhood: 	24 sq. ft. 	5' 
	Freestanding/monument, multiple family: 	32 sq. ft. 	5' 
	Freestanding/monument, nonresidential: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Portable: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Electronic message board nonresidential: 	24 sq. ft. 	8' 
B-1 	Freestanding/monument: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Wall/marquee: 	no limit 	wall height 
	Awning/canopy: 	see text 	see text 
	Portable: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Street banner: 	see text 	see text 
	Electronic message board: 	24 sq. ft. 	8' 
B-2, B-3, B-3A and B-4 	Freestanding/monument: 	64 sq. ft. 	12' 
	Regional commercial center: 	74 sq. ft. 	12' 
	Regional plaza/center: 	16 sq. ft. 	12' 
	Wall/marquee: 	no limit 	wall height 
	Awning/canopy: 	see text 	see text 
	Portable: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
	Street banner: 	see text 	see text 
	Electronic message boards: 	24 sq. ft. 	12' 
	Special event signs: 	see text 	see text 
INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING 	Freestanding/monument: 	64 sq. ft. 	10' 
	Regional industrial center: 	74 sq. ft. 	12' 
	Electronic message boards: 	24 sq. ft. 	10' 
	Portable: 	50 sq. ft. 	8' 
 
Note: The future right-of-way line is determined by referencing the official right-of-way map kept by the Michigan Department of Transportation and the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
Billboards are regulated through Section 512 of the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008)  
Sec. 48-8. - Bonus provisions for sign area in commercial and industrial districts. 
Bonus provisions apply to each sign on a parcel and may be cumulative, however, the total bonus area allowed in this section may not be greater than 30 percent of the total permitted sign area per sign without bonus provisions. In no case shall a sign exceed 100 square feet. 
(1)  Landscaping. Ten percent bonus in the size of one sign when any freestanding or monument sign which is erected in a landscaped area. The landscaped areas must contain a minimum of two square feet for each square foot of the sign area. The landscape design must be approved by the planning commission or its designee. 
(2)  Setback. Ten percent bonus in sign size for any freestanding or monument sign setback an additional amount from the right-of-way line. 
Sign located at the right-of-way ..... No bonus 
Five feet from the right-of-way ..... Ten percent bonus 
Ten feet from the right-of-way ..... Twenty percent bonus 
(3)  Design. A ten-percent bonus in sign area will be allowed if the base of the sign structure is comprised of brick, stone or architectural block. The base of the sign shall be four feet or less in height and eight feet or less in width and in no case shall exceed the total height of the sign permitted in the district. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008)  
Sec. 48-9. - Construction requirements. 
(a)  Codes. All signs shall conform to the latest edition of the applicable building and electrical codes. 
(b)  Fastenings. All signs must remain safe and secure during the period of use. All parts of the signs, including bolts and cables, shall remain painted, and free of corrosion. 
(c)  Fire escapes. A sign may not obstruct a fire escape. 
(d)  Identification. All signs for which a permit is required shall identify the name and operating telephone number of the person responsible for the sign. 
(e)  Display of street address. The street address number shall be displayed on the primary freestanding identification sign for each premises on land located in any commercial or industrial district. Display of street address numbers shall conform with the following standards: 
(1)  Address number shall be displayed on the sign face or on the supporting structure of the sign, at a minimum height of two feet above grade. 
(2)  The height of numbers shall be eight inches. 
(3)  If the premises which are identified by a primary freestanding identification sign contains more than one street address number, the street address number displayed on the sign shall identify the lower and upper ends of the address range to which the sign pertains. 
(4)  Display of street address numbers on a sign structure shall not be considered a sign subject to the regulations contained in unless the height of the address numbers exceeds eight inches, in which case the street address number shall be considered a sign, subject to the limitations on size and number signs contained in this article. 
(f)  Responsibility for compliance. The owner of the parcel on which a sign is placed and the person maintaining the sign are each fully responsible for the condition and the maintenance of the sign, and the area around the sign. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-10. - Illumination. 
(a)  Michigan Electrical Code. Any electrical illumination of a sign shall be done in full compliance with the Michigan Electrical Code as amended and adopted by the township. 
(b)  Shading. The light from any illuminated sign shall be so shaded, shielded or directed that the light intensity or brightness will not be objectionable to occupants of surrounding properties, and so that no direct rays from the light source are visible from any public right-of-way or from abutting property. 
(c)  Intermittent lights. Except as otherwise provided for in this article, no sign shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices, such as changing light intensity, brightness or color. No sign shall utilize moving patterns of light so as to convey an illusion of motion or animation. Beacon lights are not permitted. 
(d)  Colored lights. No colored lights shall be used at any location or in any manner so as to be confused with or construed as traffic control devices. 
(e)  Reflection. Neither the direct, nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a traffic hazard to operators of motor vehicles on public streets. 
(f)  Exposed bulbs. No exposed reflective type bulbs, no strobe lights, and no incandescent lamps which exceed 40 watts shall be used so as to expose the face of the bulb, light or lamp to any public street or adjacent property. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-11. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Intent. This article is intended to encourage the eventual elimination of signs that do not comply with the article. The elimination of non-conforming signs is as much a subject of health, safety, and welfare as is the prohibition of new signs in violation of this article. Therefore, this article attempts to realize the removal of non-conforming signs and to avoid any unreasonable invasion of established property rights. 
(b)  Continuance. A nonconforming sign may be continued during the useful life of the sign if it is maintained in good condition. It shall not, however, be replaced by another nonconforming sign. It may not be structurally altered so as to prolong the useful life of the sign. It may not be reestablished after damage or destruction if the department determines that the estimated cost of reconstruction exceeds 50 percent of the estimated replacement costs. 
All nonconforming signs in existence at the time of adoption of this article are presumed to have a useful life that ends on February 26, 2016, after which time, they must come into conformance with this article. 
Any nonconforming sign owner who believes their nonconforming sign has a useful life beyond February 26, 2016, may file a petition with the sign board of appeals, no earlier than February 26, 2015, requesting determination be made that a nonconforming sign's useful life be extended beyond February 26, 2016. 
The sign board of appeals, after hearing as provided in this article, may determine that such sign has a different useful life than established by this article, and if so, shall determine the remaining useful life of such sign. 
All petitions to extend the useful life of a nonconforming sign shall include the following information: 
(1)  Copies of all leases for the sign for the last five years; 
(2)  Copies of all maintenance records for the sign for the last five years; 
(3)  A description of all deferred maintenance on the sign that needs to be accomplished and the estimated cost; 
(4)  The square footage of the sign; 
(5)  The height of the sign above ground level; and 
(6)  A drawing showing the position of the sign and all other structures on the parcel and all roads abutting the property. 
(7)  Date when sign was installed. 
(8)  Initial capital cost of sign. 
(c)  Nuisance. An unsafe or abandoned sign is declared a public nuisance that shall be abated. 
(d)  Inventory. The department shall inventory all nonconforming signs within one year of the adoption of this article. 
(e)  Condemnation. The township board may initiate proceedings and prosecute for condemnation of nonconforming signs under the power of eminent domain in accordance with Article 149 of the Public Acts of 1911, as amended, being sections 213.21 through 213.41 of the Michigan Compiled Laws or other appropriate statutes. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-12. - Sign permit requirements. 
(a)  Permit. A permit is not required for "signs authorized without a permit." A permit must first be obtained from the department for all other signs. The permit process is intended to review compliance with height, dimensional, construction and other similar provisions of this article. It is not intended to review the content of the message to be displayed. 
(b)  Application. Applications for sign permits shall be made upon a form provided by the department for this purpose. The application shall contain the following information. 
(1)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person applying for the permit. 
(2)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail, of the person owning the parcel upon which the sign is proposed to be placed. 
(3)  Address and permanent parcel number of the property on which the sign is or will be located. 
(4)  Identification of the type of sign (monument, freestanding, wall etc.) 
(5)  Name of business or name of premises to which the sign belongs or relates. 
(6)  Two copies of the plans and specifications. The method of construction and/or attachment to a building, or in the ground, shall be explained in the plans and specifications. 
(7)  Copy of stress sheets and calculations, if deemed necessary by the department, showing the structure as designed for dead load and wind pressure as determined by the building code. 
(8)  Name, address, phone, and if available, fax and e-mail of the person erecting the sign. 
(9)  Such other information, other than the content of the message to be displayed, as the department may require to show compliance with this sign ordinance, and any other applicable laws. 
(10)  The seal or certificate of a registered structural or civil engineer, when required by the department. 
(11)  The zoning district in which the sign is to be placed. 
(12)  A notice stating: "Any change in the information in this application, such as a change of address, shall be submitted to the department within seven days after the change." 
(b)  Site plan. Three copies of a sketch illustrating where the sign will be on the site with setbacks accurately dimensioned. The sketch should also show the location of all existing buildings, roads, parking areas, signs, entrances and exits on the site. 
(c)  Sign drawing. Three copies of a drawing of the proposed sign(s) shall include all of the following detailed information. 
(1)  Height of the sign above finished grade. 
(2)  Surface of the sign (material, color and dimensions.) 
(3)  Dimensions and display area of the proposed sign. 
(4)  The proposed graphic images and text to be displayed on the sign. 
(5)  Such additional information and detail as the director of community development deems necessary and/or pertinent to the application. 
(d)  Neighborhood identification signs. Applications for neighborhood identification signs shall include the following additional documents and information: 
(1)  A description of the property interest of the applicant and any other parties interest to the site where the identification sign will be located. 
(2)  Evidence, satisfactory to the township attorney, of the right to construct such identification sign on the site. 
(3)  Existing or proposed sign and landscape easement(s) for the identification sign. 
(4)  Existing or proposed neighborhood identification sign construction and maintenance agreement. 
Applications for neighborhood identification signs shall be submitted and reviewed separately from the subdivision or site plan review process. 
(e)  Portable signs. All information required for the submission of permanent signs shall be required for the submission of a portable sign. 
(f)  Review procedures. The department shall have the sole authority to approve or deny applications for portable or permanent signs. The department shall review the application for conformance with the requirements of the article. The department may refer any application for sign approval to the board of appeals for their review. The application shall be either approved or denied within 14 days of the submittal date. Submittals shall comply with the following: 
(1)  Sign applications that conform to all applicable ordinance standards shall be approved. 
(2)  All applications for sign permits that are incomplete or do not meet the requirements of this article shall be denied. 
(3)  An approval of a sign permit may be conditioned upon compliance with reasonable conditions or limitations regarding the character of the sign, the surroundings in which it is to be displayed, and the purpose of this article. 
(4)  Approved applications for permanent signs shall be reviewed by the township building department for conformity with all building codes in effect in the township, and if in compliance therewith, the building inspector shall issue the appropriate sign permit. 
(g)  Permit fees. Permit fees for signs shall be established by resolution of the governing body of this municipality. The permit fees must relate to the cost of issuing the permit and may vary based on the size, type, and height of the sign. 
(h)  False information. A person providing false information under this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction. 
(i)  Permits issued. Applicants meeting the provision of this article shall be issued a permit within 14 of submitting a complete application. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-13. - Administration. 
(a)  Administrator. The department shall appoint personnel to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this article and all other provisions relating to signs. 
(b)  Enforcement. The department shall issue permits, as required by this article. The department shall also ensure signs comply with this article and any other applicable law. The department shall also enforce the requirement that all signs properly comply with this article by procuring a permit. The department shall make such inspections as may be necessary and shall initiate appropriate action to enforce compliance with this article and other applicable sign laws. 
(c)  Department powers. The department shall have the power and authority to administer and enforce this article. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
(1)  Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the department. When deemed advisable, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture. 
(2)  Upon presentation of proper identification to the sign owner or owner's agent, the department may enter the sign area for purposes of inspecting the sign, sign structure, and any fasteners securing the sign to a building or support. 
In cases of emergency, where imminent hazards to persons or property are known to exist, and where the sign owner, or owner's agent, is not readily available, the department may enter the sign area for purposes of inspection or remediation. When on private property, the department shall observe rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security, and fire protection. 
If the department is denied admission to inspect any sign, inspection shall be made only under authority of a warrant issued by a court of proper jurisdiction. When applying for such warrant, the department shall submit an affidavit setting forth a belief that a violation of this article exists with respect to a particular sign, and the reasons for forming this belief. The affidavit shall designate the place and name of the person believed to own or possess the sign. If the court finds probable cause exists for the search of the sign, and supporting structures, then a warrant authorizing the search shall be issued. The warrant shall describe the property with sufficient certainty to identify the same. This warrant shall constitute authority for the department to enter the sign area and to inspect the property. 
(3)  Upon issuance of a stop order from the department, work on any sign that is being conducted in any manner contrary to this article shall be immediately stopped. This notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the parcel, the sign owner, or to the person performing the work. The stop order shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. The police department shall have authority to enforce a stop order. 
(4)  The department has the authority to revoke any permit authorized by this article if the sign violates this article or another law, provided that the department shall offer the sign owner an opportunity to be heard. The person whose permit is under consideration shall be given at least ten days written notice of the time, place, and reason for the hearing. The sign owner and/or person identified in the permit shall be permitted to present relevant facts and legal argument concerning the pending revocation. Following this hearing, the department shall consider the merits of the case and shall present a written opinion prior to any action. If, however, the department believes the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens is endangered by any violation of this article, the department may immediately revoke any sign permits. 
(5)  A sign installed after the effective date of this article, and not conforming to this article, shall be removed by the owner. The sign owner shall not be entitled to compensation for the sign removal and shall reimburse the department for any costs incurred in connection with the removal. 
(6)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a civil infraction. Each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the municipal attorney is authorized to take all action, legal, injunctive and equitable, to assure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004)  
Sec. 48-14. - Sign board of appeals. 
(a)  Sign board of appeals. The Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Board of Appeals shall constitute the sign board of appeals for the purpose of this article and a quorum shall consist of three members. 
(b)  Appeals authorized: 
(1)  Any person aggrieved by a decision of the building inspector or code enforcement officer relative to the placement, area, height and construction of a sign may appeal such decision to the township sign board of appeals. Such appeal shall be taken by the zoning administrator. 
(2)  The sign board of appeals shall have the power to interpret the provisions of this ordinance in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of this ordinance. The authority to alter or change the sign ordinance is reserved to the Township Board. 
(3)  Whenever the strict application of requirements of this article may pose demonstrable practical difficulty with regard to placement, area, height and construction of a sign an appeal for variance from such requirements may be filed with the zoning administrator on a form provided for such purpose. 
(4)  The zoning administrator or his/her designee(s) shall then place the appeal on a regular meeting agenda of the board of appeals within 30 days of filing. 
(5)  Within 60 days of receipt, the board of appeals shall render a final decision in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(6)  A decision of the board shall become final upon approval of the minutes of the meeting or the expiration of five township business days from the date of the decision, whichever occurs sooner, unless the board finds that immediate effect is necessary to preserve a substantial property right, and so certifies in the record of the decision. 
(c)  Fees. Any person filing an appeal with the township sign board of appeals shall fill out the necessary appeal form provided by the zoning administrator and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution of the township board. 
(d)  Appeal procedure. 
(1)  The zoning administrator or his/her designee(s) shall give notice of all hearings to all owners of record of real property within 300 feet of the premises in question; such notice shall be delivered by first class mail addressed to the respective owners at the address given in the last assessment roll. 
(2)  All persons appealing shall be required to appear in person or to be represented by a duly authorized agent. 
(3)  The board of appeals shall prepare an official record for each appeal and shall base its decision on this record. The official record shall include: 
a.  The relevant administrative records and administrative orders issued herein relating to the appeal. 
b.  The appeal form. 
c.  The requisite written findings of fact, the conditions attached, the decisions and orders by the board of appeals disposing the appeal, signed by the chairman of the board. 
d.  Any other documentation submitted in support or opposition of the appeal. 
(4)  The appellant shall be prepared to furnish a site drawing, photograph, and any other means of proof, to the sign board of appeals to demonstrate that a hardship or practical difficulty exists. 
(e)  Action of sign board of appeals. 
(1)  The sign board of appeals shall have the power to modify or reverse, wholly or partly, the notice or order, and may grant an extension of time for the performance of any act required of not more than three additional months, where the sign board of appeals finds that there is a practical difficulty resulting from the application of the provisions of this article, and that such extension is in harmony with the general purpose of this article to secure the public health, safety and welfare. 
(2)  The sign board of appeals shall return a decision upon each petition within 60 days after a request or appeal has been filed, unless a longer time is agreed upon by the parties concerned; however, the sign board of appeals may not order action on a petition until its regularly scheduled meeting. 
(3)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the sign board of appeals shall be necessary to reverse, wholly or partly, or modify any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the building official or code enforcement officer; or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which the sign board of appeals required to consider or to effect any variation the provisions of this article. 
(4)  After a variance has been denied in whole or in part by the sign board of appeals, then such petition shall not be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial, provided however, that a denied variance may be reconsidered by the sign board of appeals within said one-year period, when, in the opinion of the building official, or code enforcement officer or sign board of appeals, newly discovered evidence or changed conditions warrant such reconsideration. 
(5)  Scope of hearing. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to show cause why the notice or order should be modified or withdrawn, or why the period of time permitted for compliance should be extended. 
(f)  Stay. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the building inspector certifies to the sign board of appeals, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, imminent harm to persons or property exists, in which case the proceedings shall not be stayed, except by an order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(g)  Variances. A variance may be allowed by the sign board of appeals in cases only involving practical difficulties when the evidence in the official record of the appeal supports all of the following affirmative findings: 
(1)  That the alleged practical difficulties are exceptional and peculiar to the property of the person requesting the variance, and result from conditions which do not exist generally throughout the township. 
(2)  That the alleged practical difficulties which will result from a failure to grant the variance, include substantially more than mere inconvenience, or mere inability to attain a higher financial return. 
(3)  That allowing the variance will result in substantial justice being done, considering the public benefits intended to be secured by this article, the individual hardships that will be suffered by a failure to grant a variance, and the rights of others whose property would be affected by the allowance of the variance, and will not be contrary to the public purpose and general intent and purpose of this article. 
The above findings of fact shall be made by the sign board of appeals, which is not empowered to grant a variance without an affirmative finding of fact in each of the categories above. Every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the board. 
(4)  In the case of an appeal for extension of the useful life of a nonconforming sign, the sign board of appeals finds that there is significant useful life remaining in the sign based on recent maintenance and initial capital costs that has not been amortized by the owner or leasee. 
(h)  Review by circuit court. Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the board of appeals may obtain a review thereof both on the facts and the law in Saginaw County Circuit Court. 
(Ord. No. 657, 1-26-2004; Ord. No. 700, 2-27-2008)  
Chapter 50 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; trash, rubbish, junk, or junk vehicles, § 26-34; littering, § 38-8. 
State Law reference— Solid waste management, MCL 324.11501 et seq.; littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq.; hazardous waste, MCL 324.11101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Littering and related offenses. 
(a)  Wind blown dust, ashes, or trash. It shall be unlawful to cause or permit to accumulate, except in a covered container, any dust, ashes or trash of such a material that it can be blown away by the wind anywhere in the township. 
(b)  Deposits on streets or alleys. It shall be unlawful to deposit or permit to be deposited or permit to fall from any vehicle any dirt, garbage, refuse building material, rubbish or ashes on any public street or alley in the township; provided, that this subsection shall not be construed to prohibit placing garbage, refuse or ashes in a container or receptacle complying with the conditions of this chapter prior to having such material collected and disposed of in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Accumulation on public/private property. No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited, sort, scatter, or leave any rubbish, refuse building materials, garbage, ashes, cinders, grass, leaves, twigs or shrubs, manure or filth or other offensive materials in any public street, alley, private or public property in the township, or build or maintain any structure or thing whatsoever containing such materials. It shall be the responsibility of every property owner to provide for the removal of all refuse, trash, discarded materials, recyclables, etc., found on his property. 
(d)  Unlawful dumping without owner's consent. It shall be unlawful to dump or place any garbage, refuse or ashes on any premises in the township without the consent of the owner of such premises. 
(Code 1986, §§ 3-02.07.01—3-02.07.04) 
State Law reference— Littering, MCL 324.8901 et seq.  
Secs. 50-2—50-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 50-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction refuse means all unwanted, rejected, discarded or abandoned materials resulting from the alteration, repair, or construction of buildings. 
Dead animals means the carcasses of small animals, fish, or fowl, but does not include carcasses from large animals or from veterinary hospitals or clinics. 
Dwelling unit means a separate dwelling place with a kitchen. 
Garbage means animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, service, and consumption of food. 
Garbage and refuse collection/collection means the taking up and collecting of all garbage and refuse accumulated in containers at single-family and duplex dwelling residences within its jurisdiction, and the transportation to a sanitary landfill or other place of legal disposal to be selected by the contractor and provided at the sole expense of the contractor. 
Hazardous refuse means anything dangerous to the public health, safety, or welfare and shall include drugs, volatile or radioactive materials, gas and oils, poisons, explosives, and diseased or contaminated materials. 
Industrial refuse means rejected, unwanted, discarded, or abandoned materials resulting from industrial operations such as is generally identified with manufacturing, assembling, processing, and distributing plants, large office buildings, hospitals, and clinics, and other producers of quantities of refuse in excess amounts. 
Receptacle, unless specifically provided otherwise, whether referred to as "garbage can," "plastic bag," "suitable container," "cans," or "containers," means a receptacle which shall be of such size and form as to permit collection by one person. 
(1)  Garbage cans shall not exceed 30 gallons in capacity and shall be fitted with handles and lids. 
(2)  All trees, wood, lumber, hedge and tree trimmings or other items, except appliances and furniture, must be in lengths not exceeding 36 inches and bundles not exceeding 24 inches in diameter. 
Recyclable materials means newsprint, unsorted glass (food and beverage containers), unsorted aluminum, steel, bimetal, and "tin" cans (food and beverage containers), and other materials as mutually agreed upon by the township and contractor. 
(1)  Recyclable materials shall also include polyethylene trephthalate (PETE), high density polyethylene (HDPE), corrugated cardboard, and other materials as mutually agreed upon by the township and the contractor. 
(2)  Recyclable materials also include all items of refuse designated by the township to be part of an authorized recycling program and which are intended for transportation for processing and remanufacturing or reuse. 
Recycling containers means uniform receptacles supplied by the township in which recycled materials can be stored and later be placed at curbside or other locations for collection as specified by the contract. 
Recycling service means the picking up of all recyclable materials accumulated in recycling containers at single-family and duplex homes or at locations as mutually agreed upon by the township and the contractor. 
Refuse means all wastes which normally result from the operation of a household, except body waste, garbage, and yard waste, including, but not limited to, rubbish, metal cans, papers, cardboard, glass jars, bottles, wood, ashes, sod, dirt, rocks, household construction materials, cement, bricks, household appliances, furniture, water heaters, water softeners, plastics, and any other household refuse or materials small enough for one person to handle. The term "refuse" shall not include leaves or grass clippings, nor shall it include building materials or other waste or debris resulting from construction or reconstruction of buildings and other improvements by contractors. 
Unacceptable recyclable materials means materials which are not acceptable for reprocessing and use in another form and recyclable materials which have not been properly prepared and/or located in compliance with the provisions of the contract. 
Yard waste means compostible, organic material consisting of grass clippings, hedge and tree prunings, weeds, brush, leaves, and other yard wastes, excluding trees. Brush may be in bundles not exceeding 24 inches in diameter nor 36 inches in length. Only one bundle may be placed for pickup per week. 
Yard waste collection means the taking and receipt of all yard waste accumulated in yard waste receptacles and bundles at all single-family and duplex homes in the township. Yard waste shall be kept unmixed from other types of waste or refuse. Collection shall also include transportation to a township approved compost site. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 50-32. - Intent. 
It is the intent of the township board that this article be liberally construed for the purpose of providing a sanitary and satisfactory method of preparation, collection and disposition of municipal waste. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.03.01)  
Sec. 50-33. - Power and duties of township manager. 
(a)  The township manager is hereby authorized to make such rules and regulations as from time to time appear to him to be necessary to carry out the intent of this article, provided, that such rules are not in conflict with this or any other Code provisions of the township. 
(b)  The collection and removal of waste shall be under the supervision of the township manager or his authorized representative. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the township manager or his authorized representative and the ordinance enforcement officer to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.03.02)  
Sec. 50-34. - Disposal by owner or producer. 
(a)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to prohibit or deny the owner or producer of refuse his right to dispose of his own refuse if in so doing he does not violate any provisions of this article. 
(b)  No person shall contract with any individual, firm or corporation to collect, transport or dispose of refuse within the corporate limits of the township unless such individual, firm or corporation is duly licensed by the township to collect, transport and dispose of refuse. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.07)  
Sec. 50-35. - Authorized recycling material/containers. 
(a)  Due to the rapidly changing technology in the area of recycling, authorized recyclable materials and authorized containers may change from time to time based upon available markets, transportation vehicle sizes, and pickup methods. 
(b)  The township shall provide a leaflet containing a list and details of the current authorized recyclable materials and authorized containers. Such leaflets shall be available for pickup by the public at the manager's office, township hall. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.03.03)  
Sec. 50-36. - Curbside recycling voluntary initially. 
Curbside recycling in the township shall be on a voluntary basis until such time that it will become mandatory. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.03.04)  
Sec. 50-37. - License for refuse collection. 
No person shall engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of refuse in the township without first obtaining a business license. Any license issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked by the township manager for any violation of any law or Code provision pertaining to the operation or maintenance of such establishment. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.04)  
Sec. 50-38. - Storage receptacles. 
(a)  Portable waste receptacles. The owner, occupant or lessee, or their agents, of every building where wastes accumulate, including multiple dwellings as defined in the state housing code, shall cause to be provided for such building, proper receptacles as required in this article. 
(1)  Metal or plastic with cover for garbage. 
a.  For garbage, receptacles shall be portable, so maintained as to be watertight and vermin proof, and not exceed 30-gallon capacity, each. 
b.  Receptacles shall be of substantial metal or plastic construction and provided with handles or bails and a tightfitting cover. 
c.  Receptacles containing more than 50 pounds of rubbish are not acceptable for pickup. 
d.  Receptacles that are broken or otherwise fail to meet the requirements of this article may be deemed to be rubbish and, after due notice to the users, shall be repaired or removed and replaced. 
(2)  Plastic bags. Plastic bags, or portable weathertight containers, may be collected as rubbish without notice, but must be of a size not to exceed 30 pounds in weight when full. 
(b)  Compact bundles. Rubbish that cannot be contained in receptacles must be securely tied in compact bundles, not to exceed 50 pounds in weight or exceed three feet in length or two feet in diameter to be acceptable for scheduled pickup and disposal. 
(c)  Condition of receptacle or contents. No person shall disturb the contents of any portable waste or recycle receptacle or bundle, nor leave the containers or contents in a condition other than this article provides. All containers shall be maintained in a sanitary condition. 
(d)  Refuse collection truck containers. In every case where the owner, occupant or user of any premises shall accumulate more than one cubic yard of refuse in any one week period, it shall be mandatory to provide a container or containers of the type designed to be handled mechanically by refuse collection trucks in place of the normal receptacles provided in this section, commonly referred to as "dumpsters." Such container or containers shall be: 
(1)  Of substantial metal construction having a capacity large enough to contain normal waste, tightfitting covers and handles so that such container or containers may be unloaded into the refuse collection truck by mechanical means provided by the truck; 
(2)  Kept clean and in good condition at all times; 
(3)  Kept only on a concrete or adequate asphalt pad on the premises of the owner, occupant or user of such premises; and 
(4)  Enclosed with an opaque fence or appropriate plantings. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.01)  
Sec. 50-39. - Disturbing refuse receptacles/contents. 
No person, excluding agents or employees of licensees of the township, without the property owners permission, shall disturb, remove, or attempt to remove refuse receptacles, their covers, or the contents of any receptacle or refuse container, or disturb or remove or attempt to remove any refuse and/or recyclable not in containers whether the receptacle or refuse container is on public or private property. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.07.05)  
Sec. 50-40. - Preparation of refuse for disposal. 
(a)  Garbage drained and wrapped. Garbage must be thoroughly drained of liquids and be wrapped in several thicknesses of paper before being placed in receptacles for collection. 
(b)  Combustible refuse. Refuse classified and described in this article as combustible may be placed in the same containers as garbage if all the other requirements of this section are adhered to. Other combustible refuse must be tied in bundles with nonmetallic materials or placed in proper receptacles. 
(c)  Noncombustible refuse. Noncombustible refuse as previously defined shall be placed in proper containers or tied in bundles to facilitate handling wherever possible. In the case of articles not conforming to weight or dimension limitations, special arrangements for pickup and disposal must be made with a licensed refuse hauler. 
(d)  Maximum accumulation period. No garbage, rubbish, or noncombustible refuse shall be stored or allowed to accumulate on property in the township for more than 14 days. 
(e)  Yard waste. Yard wastes, which include grass, leaves, twigs, and branches, may be composted, provided that the accumulation of such waste does not exceed one cubic yard, be maintained in bins or approved enclosures, follow the required setbacks for accessory structures as determined in the township zoning ordinance (appendix A), and does not emit offensive odors or impair the health, comfort, or welfare of neighboring property owners. 
(f)  Construction and building materials. It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor, occupant, or other person responsible for construction work to remove from the premises within a reasonable time after the completion of such construction work, all surplus construction material and all refuse building material and all construction refuse. Such materials shall be removed to an appropriate site. 
(g)  Hazardous refuse. Hazardous refuse as previously defined shall be the responsibility of the producer or owner thereof and shall not be disposed of within the township, or allowed to be stored or transported within the township: 
(1)  Without the written approval of the township manager or his authorized agent; and 
(2)  Then only under the supervision of someone appointed by him who has knowledge of the safety measures necessary to protect the public health and safety during such storing, transporting, or disposing of hazardous refuse. 
(h)  Recyclables. All recyclables must be maintained according to the regulations set forth by the collection agency. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.02)  
Sec. 50-41. - Placement at road edge. 
No refuse and or recyclables shall be placed at the curb or street for collection more than 14 hours prior to the morning of the time scheduled for collection, or between 3:00 p.m. on Fridays and 5:00 p.m. on Sundays unless arrangements have been made for pickup within 14 hours after being placed for collection or pickup scheduled on Saturday due to a holiday. Placement of refuse shall be within three feet at road edge. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.03)  
Sec. 50-42. - Removal of empty receptacles. 
After the collection of container contents have been made, the empty container shall be removed from the curb or street and replaced on the owner's storage area, protected so that they cannot be easily disturbed by animals and in a reasonably inconspicuous place and away from places occupied by other persons and from streets as soon as possible, but in no case later than 12 hours after collection of refuse has been made. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.04)  
Sec. 50-43. - Collection vehicles. 
Vehicles used for collection and transportation of refuse within or through the township shall be watertight, covered, and conform to all laws regulating axle and road limitations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.05)  
Sec. 50-44. - Disposal of collected refuse. 
All refuse collected for disposal from within the corporate limits of the township shall be disposed of at an approved facility, licensed landfill or refuse disposal authority. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.05.06)  
Sec. 50-45. - Rates and charges. 
The rates for refuse collection for single-family residences, or duplex units shall be established by resolution of the township board based on contract costs and other township expenses and relevant considerations. 
(Code 1986, § 3-02.06)  
Chapter 54 - SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); administration, ch. 2; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Notice and hearings for special assessments, MCL 211.741; assumpsit to collect permit assessments, MCL 211.501 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 54-1—54-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SPECIAL ASSESSMENT HARDSHIP DEFERMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 696, adopted May 29, 2007, amended Art. II in its entirety by repealing Ord. No. 589, adopted Jan. 25, 1999, from which derived §§ 54-31—54-36, and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. II pertained to street repaving special assessment hardship deferment. 
State Law reference— Deferment of special assessments on homesteads, MCL 211.761 et seq. 
 
Sec. 54-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Committee means a three-person panel comprised of the township supervisor, the township clerk and the director of assessing or their designated appointees. 
Farm and farm products shall be as defined in MCL 286.471. 
Homestead means a single-family dwelling owned and occupied as a home by the owner thereof, including all contiguous unoccupied real property owned by the person. 
Household income is defined by the Income Tax Act of 1967 (MCL 206.1 et seq.), as the sum of federal adjusted gross income plus all income specifically excluded or exempt from the computation of federal adjusted gross income. 
Owner means any person eligible for the exemption specified in this article, who owns or is purchasing a homestead, as defined in this section, under a mortgage or land contract or who owns and operates a farm as defined in this section. 
Special assessment means any special assessment against real property levied pursuant to Public Act No. 188 of 1954 (MCL 41.721 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 696, 5-29-2007)  
Sec. 54-32. - Deferred payments of special assessments based on hardship. 
(1)  Homestead deferment. 
(a)  The committee may grant deferrals of special assessment payments of persons who, in the opinion of the committee, by reason of hardship are unable to contribute toward the cost thereof, in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  An owner may apply for deferment of any special assessment on the owner's homestead. The application shall be made upon an affidavit form available from the township assessor. 
1.  The affidavit form shall contain the following: 
a.  The name, or names if owned jointly, and social security number of the applicant. 
b.  The homestead address. 
c.  The home and business telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  The length of ownership of the homestead by the applicant. 
e.  Total household income for the past calendar year. The applicant shall attach copies of the most recently filed federal and state income tax forms of all members of the household, including all schedules, to the application. 
f.  Current place of employment. If the applicant is unemployed, the date of termination or resignation from employment shall be stated. 
g.  A statement of the annual income of all household members as of the date of the application. 
h.  The number of dependents, as defined in 26 U.S.C. 1 et seq., of the Internal Revenue Code, as amended, residing with the applicant at the homestead. 
i.  If the applicant is over 65 years of age or totally and permanently disabled, the applicant shall attach a copy of the notice from the treasurer denying deferment of special assessment under MCL 211.765, as amended, to the application. 
j.  The amount of the special assessment installment payment for which deferment is requested and the date such assessment comes or was due. 
k.  A statement located immediately above the applicant's signature: "It is understood that if this deferment is authorized, the Township will place a lien on your property." 
l.  The form shall be signed by the applicant and notarized. If the homestead is owned jointly by husband and wife, both shall sign and file the affidavit. 
2.  In addition to the above, copies of the following documents shall be attached to the application: 
a.  Recorded deed and land contract or mortgage for the homestead property. 
b.  The cover page of the current homeowners or hazard insurance policy covering the homestead. 
c.  A death certificate or divorce decree, if such document affects the title to the homestead property. 
d.  Any other document that the township may require to process the application for deferment. 
(2)  Farm hardship deferment. 
(a)  An owner may apply for deferment of a special assessment on the owner's farm. The application shall be made upon an affidavit form available from the township treasurer. 
1.  The affidavit form shall contain the following: 
a.  The name, or names if owned jointly, and social security number of the applicant. 
b.  The farm address. 
c.  The home and business telephone number of the applicant. 
d.  The length of ownership of the farm by the applicant. 
e.  A certificate of survey of the farm or, if none available, an accurate legal description. 
f.  A certificate as to the nature and extent of operations on all of the property in order to meet the definition of "farm" and "farm products." 
g.  A statement that the farm is not eligible for relief from special assessments under MCL 324.36108. 
h.  The amount of the special assessment installment payment for which deferment is requested and the date such special assessment comes or was due. 
i.  A statement located immediately above the applicant's signature: "It is understood that if this deferment is authorized, the Township will place a lien on your property." 
j.  The form shall be signed by the applicant and notarized. If the farm is owned jointly by husband and wife, both shall sign and file the affidavit. 
2.  In addition to the above, copies of the following documents shall be attached to the application: 
a.  Recorded deed and land contract or mortgage for the farm property. 
b.  All documents which confirm existence of farm operation. 
c.  A death certificate or divorce decree, if such document affects the title to the homestead property. 
d.  Any other document that the township may require to process the application for deferment. 
e.  Application for deferment of a special assessment must be made no later than 30 days after the due date of a special assessment for which deferment is requested. 
f.  To qualify for a deferment of a special assessment for a homestead, the applicant must meet all of the following requirements: 
(i)  Total household income attributed to the applicant in the past calendar year cannot exceed $25,000.00, adjusted, annually, by the Consumers Price Index, with 2007 used as the base year. 
(ii)  The homestead must be the primary residence of the applicant; 
(iii)  The homestead must have been owned and occupied by the applicant for at least three years; 
(iv)  The applicant cannot be eligible for deferment of special assessment under MCL 211.761, et seq., as amended; 
(v)  Property taxes on the homestead property should not be more than two years delinquent. 
g.  To qualify for a deferment of a special assessment for a farm, the applicant must meet all of the following requirements: 
(i)  The parcel for which deferment is requested must be ten acres in size or larger and must have been in operation as a farm and producing farm products for at least one year prior to application. 
(ii)  The applicant cannot be eligible for relief from a special assessment under MCL 324.36108, as amended. 
(iii)  Property taxes on the farm property should not be more than two years delinquent. 
h.  Immediately upon receipt of the affidavit form, the assessor shall stamp the application with the time and date of receipt. The assessor shall promptly examine the application to determine if the applicant meets the requirements of this chapter. 
(i)  The assessor shall make an inspection of the property and property records and conduct an investigation and survey as he deems necessary. An applicant shall not be compelled to supply information not reasonably necessary to a proper determination of the eligibility of the owner and the homestead for the relief provided under this section. 
(ii)  The committee shall promptly make a decision and shall notify the applicant of this decision not later than 30 days after the receipt of the application. In lieu of a deferment the committee may grant an extension in the number of years and other terms over which an assessment must be paid. The decision of the committee shall be final. 
i.  The payment of any special assessment due and payable on a homestead or farm for which the owner meets all the eligibility requirements of this section shall be deferred until the occurrence of the first of the following events: 
(i)  For a homestead deferment the homestead or any part of the homestead is conveyed or transferred to another provided, however, that: 
A.  The original applicant for the deferral may convey or transfer an interest in the homestead to another person jointly with the applicant provided that the original applicant continues to reside at the homestead; or 
B.  An owner who owns the property jointly with another may convey or transfer that interest to the original applicant for the deferral provided that the original applicant to whom the property is conveyed continues to reside at the homestead; 
(ii)  A land contract selling the homestead is entered into; 
(iii)  The owner fails to maintain adequate homeowners and hazard insurance as required herein; or 
(iv)  One year after the original applicant's death, subject to further order of the probate court; however, the death of a spouse shall not terminate the deferment of a special assessment for a household owned by husband and wife as long as the spouse does not remarry. 
(v)  The owner leases or rents the property to a third party and ceases to occupy it as a principal residence. 
j.  For a farm deferment the farm or any part of the farm is conveyed or transferred to another, or the property is split into parcels of less than ten acres or a permit is sought from the township to improve the parcel. 
k.  Payment of deferred amounts. 
l.  A change in one or more of the original conditions for granting of a deferment under f.(i)—(v) or g.(i)—(iii) above, which would render the applicant ineligible for a deferment. 
(i)  Any special assessment deferred under this section may be paid at anytime. 
(ii)  Upon the occurrence of any one of the events terminating a deferment of a special assessment under subsection 54-31.e. or f., above, the deferred amount plus interest shall be paid in full. 
(iii)  If the owner fails to make such payment when the deferment is terminated, the provisions of this chapter regarding the collection of special assessments shall again apply to the deferred payment as if no deferment had been granted and the township may enforce the lien upon the property in any manner permitted by law. 
m.  Interest shall accrue on deferred special assessments at the monthly rate provided for nondeferred installment payments within the special assessment district. 
n.  The treasurer shall send to the owner, by first class mail, a yearly statement showing the amounts of a deferred assessment on the homestead and the interest outstanding thereon. 
o.  Notice of lien. 
(i)  Upon grant of a deferment, the township shall record a notice of lien in its favor at the Saginaw County Register of Deeds stating that there exists a lien upon such property for deferred special assessments. The lien created shall include the amount of interest provided hereunder. 
(ii)  The owner shall sign all documents necessary for the filing of such lien as a condition to receiving a deferral. 
p.  For homestead deferments and for the duration of the deferment, the owner shall maintain homeowners and hazard insurance on the homestead in an amount not less than the amount of the deferred assessment(s) and accrued interest plus the balance of any mortgage or other lien or encumbrance superior to the township's lien. On or before June 1st of each year for the duration of the deferment, the owner shall provide the treasurer with proof of such homeowners and hazard insurance in the form of a certificate of insurance, and such certificate of insurance shall show the township as an additional insured and shall further contain a clause requiring the insurance company to give the township 30 days advance notice of cancellation, termination or material change in the insurance coverage. 
q.  Nothing in this chapter shall give any person a vested right to receive a deferment or in the standards to be applied in granting such a deferment. 
(i)  The township may change, modify, or delete any of the terms and conditions of this section or repeal it in its entirety at any time without notice to any applicant or recipient of a deferment. 
(ii)  However, once a deferment is granted, it cannot be revoked and payment be required prior to the time set forth in this section. 
r.  Penalties. 
(i)  In addition to all other penalties imposed by this chapter, if any person shall make a false or misleading statement on an application for deferment under this section, such person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and all amounts deferred shall be immediately due and payable. 
(ii)  Failure to pay such deferrals within 30 days of receiving notice from the treasurer shall result in the foreclosure of the liens placed upon the subject property pursuant to this section. 
(iii)  Violation of this article is a municipal civil infraction and the sanction for such violation shall be a civil fine in the amount as provided by this Code or any other ordinance plus costs, damages, expenses and other sanctions as authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 696, 5-29-2007)  
Chapter 58 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance levying or imposing any special assessment saved from repeal, § 1-11(9); any ordinance dedicating, establishing, naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley saved from repeal, § 1-11(10); any ordinance establishing the grade of any street or sidewalk saved from repeal, § 1-11(11); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; obstructing public places, § 38-153; parks and recreation, ch. 42; peddlers, charitable solicitors and temporary businesses, ch. 46; peddlers, § 46-31 et seq.; special assessments, ch. 54; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; design standards for streets and alleys, § 62-75; required improvements of streets and roads, § 62-98; telecommunications, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 74; riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 74-43; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A; arterial street access driveway regulations, app. A, § 2401 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 58-1. - Operation of off-road vehicles. 
(1)  The definitions set forth in Section 81101(a) through (ff) of Act 451 of 1994, as amended, (MCL 81101(a)—(ff)) are hereby adopted. 
(2)  Effective February 12, 2014, the operation of off-road vehicles (ORVs) on all roads and streets within Saginaw Charter Township is prohibited. 
( Ord. No. 738, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-2014 )  
Secs. 58-2—58-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SIDEWALKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 58-31. - Areas where required. 
Areas in which sidewalks may be required by the township board are as follows: 
(1)  All section line and quarter section line roads; 
(2)  Brockway; 
(3)  Wieneke; 
(4)  Fashion Square Boulevard and Fortune Boulevard; 
(5)  Towne Center Road (west side only); 
(6)  Midland Road from Gratiot to Winterstein Drain (west side only); 
(7)  Midland Road from Winterstein Drain to State Street (east side only). 
(Code 1986, § 4-02.02)  
Sec. 58-32. - Obstructions prohibited. 
No person shall allow any sidewalk which crosses or adjoins any property owned or occupied by him to be obstructed by vehicles, bicycles, trailers, equipment, signs, snow, ice, or in any other manner that prevents the normal use of the sidewalk. 
(Code 1986, § 4-02.04.03)  
Sec. 58-33. - Responsible party liable for damages. 
Any damage to a sidewalk caused by construction work occurring on any adjoining property shall be repaired at the expense of the adjoining property owner; provided, however, that responsibility for repair of damage to a sidewalk caused by a utility or construction company not in connection with work done on the adjoining property shall be paid for by the responsible utility or construction company. 
(Code 1986, § 4-02.04.04)  
Secs. 58-34—58-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR 
 
Sec. 58-51. - Generally. 
(a)  Permit. No person shall construct or repair any sidewalk without first obtaining a written authorization therefor from the township community development department. 
(b)  Specifications. Construction or repair shall be in accordance with all standards of the township. 
(c)  Sidewalk committee. There is created a township sidewalk committee to be appointed by the township board consisting of one member of the township planning commission, one member of the township board, and three members of the public at large, who shall serve for terms of three years. The committee shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  To prepare and recommend to the township board an annual budget relating to sidewalks; 
(2)  To determine and recommend to the township board an annual sidewalk construction program; 
(3)  To act on requests for extensions of time relating to installation of sidewalks as provided in this article; 
(4)  To consider and approve or reject requested variances in the location or specifications as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-02.03)  
Sec. 58-52. - Sidewalk and drive approach maintenance. 
(a)  Crossing or adjoining property. No person shall permit any sidewalk which crosses or adjoins property owned by him to fall into a state of disrepair, be unsafe, or impassable. 
(b)  Between lot line and street curb. Except as to sidewalks located along streets set forth in section 58-31, which shall be the responsibility of the township, all sidewalks and driveway approaches between the lot line and the street curb or improved street, shall be repaired and maintained by the abutting property owner and shall comply with all requirements of this article. If any owner shall neglect to keep or maintain these sidewalks and driveway approaches in good repair and safe for use of the public, the owner shall be liable to the township for any damages recovered against the township sustained by any person by reason of such sidewalk being unsafe and out-of-repair, in addition to the other penalties provided for in this article. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-02.04.01, 4-02.04.02)  
Sec. 58-53. - Expenses. 
(a)  Before the township board may require any owner of any lot or premises to construct, maintain, or to pay for the expense of construction or maintenance of a sidewalk across or adjoining their lot or premises by the township, the township board shall first hold a public hearing relative to the requiring of the sidewalk construction or repair and shall notify all property owners involved of the time and place of the hearing by regular first-class mail directed to the last-known address of such owners as indicated by the township tax rolls; provided, however, that a public hearing need not be held for sidewalks required to be constructed in newly developed subdivisions and for new construction developments. 
(b)  Unless otherwise approved by the township board, the expense of construction of such sidewalks as designated in section 56-31 shall be charged as follows: 
(1)  In newly developed subdivisions: Entire cost to be borne by the developer. 
(2)  Adjacent to all new construction, regardless of zoning: Entire cost to be borne by developer or builder. 
(3)  Adjacent to all existing developments containing any multifamily use with more than two units and all developments zoned or used for R-3, R-4, M-1, M-2, and all B zoning purposes: The cost will be shared equally by the township and owners of the premises. 
(4)  Along designated roads adjacent to existing R-1 and R-2 development: The entire cost of original construction shall be borne by the township. 
(c)  When the cost of sidewalk construction in existing developed areas is to be borne wholly or in part by property owners, the cost may, at the request of such property owners, be assessed and spread over not more than five years against such abutting property owners and the cost shall be collected and treated in the same manner as taxes assessed under the general laws of the state. When such request is made, interest at a rate established from time to time by the township board, not exceeding the rate of eight percent per annum, shall be added to the amount spread on the tax rolls. 
(d)  Alternatively, the township board may require the owners of any lot or premises to build or repair the sidewalks within such time and in such manner as the township board may require, including before a building permit is issued for an improvement on the premises. If the owner shall fail to build or repair the sidewalks as ordered, the township board may cause such sidewalks to be built or repaired; and the expense thereof shall be assessed against such property owners. The expense shall be collected and treated in the same manner as taxes assessed under the general laws of the state. 
(Code 1986, § 4-02.05)  
Chapter 62 - SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER DIVISIONS OF LAND[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance dedicating, accepting or vacating any plat or subdivision saved from repeal, § 1-11(12); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; vegetation, ch. 82; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference— Land Division Act, MCL 560.101 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 62-1—62-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SUBDIVISIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 62-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alley means a public or private right-of-way shown on a plat which provides secondary access to a lot, block or parcel of land. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(z). 
Block means a city square, also the length of one side of such a square. 
Board means the board of county road commissioners. 
Board's specifications means the Requirements and Specifications for New Street Construction, dated December 27, 1967, as issued by the board of county road commissioners. 
Caption means the name by which the plat is legally and commonly known. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(t). 
Commission means the planning commission of the township. 
Comprehensive plan means the master plan or development plan which has been adopted by the planning commission as specified in Public Act No. 168 of 1959 (MCL 125.321 et seq.). 
Construction standards means standards and specifications of construction and installation as established and administered by the township or the county road commission. 
County plat board means the register of deeds, who shall act as chair, the county clerk who shall act as secretary, and the county treasurer. If the offices of county clerk and register of deeds have been combined, the chairman of the board of supervisors shall be a member of the plat board and shall act as chairman. In a county where a board of auditors is authorized by law such board may elect to serve on the county plat board by adopting a resolution so ordering. A copy of the recorded resolution shall be sent to the state treasurer. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(r). 
Cul-de-sac means a minor street with only one open end and with the other end being terminated by a vehicular turnaround. 
Division means the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The term "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or the requirements of applicable ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(f). 
Easement means a nonprofitable interest in land owned by another that entitles its holder to a specific limited public or private use. 
Floodplain means that area of land adjoining the channel of a river, stream, watercourse, lake or other similar body of water which will be inundated by a flood which can reasonably be expected for that region. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(ee). 
Governing body means the township board. 
Government survey means the land surveyed, subdivided and monumented by the United States Public Land Survey. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(x). 
Health department means the state department of environmental quality, a city, county or district health department having jurisdiction. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(aa). 
Improvements means street construction and surfacing, curb and gutter, water mains, storm and sanitary sewers, sidewalks, walkways, graded outlawns and bridges or culverts. 
Land means all land areas occupied by real property. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(b). 
Lot means a measured portion of a parcel or tract of land which is described and fixed in a recorded plat. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(m). 
Major street and thoroughfare plan means the master plan of highways, major streets and parkways adopted by the planning commission. 
Michigan Coordinate System means the system defined in Public Act No. 9 of 1964 (MCL 54.231 et seq.). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(y). 
Municipality means the township. 
Outlot (when included within the boundary of a recorded plat) means a lot set aside for purposes other than a building site, park, or other land dedicated to public use or reserved to private use. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(n). 
Parcel means a continuous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in this article. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(g). 
Planner means the planning consultant, planning director, building inspector, township clerk or any person designated to administer this article. 
Plat means a map or chart of a subdivision of land. 
(1)  Preliminary plat means a map showing salient features of a proposed subdivision submitted to an approving authority for purposes of preliminary consideration. 
(2)  Final plat means an instrument by which the subdivision is recorded. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(a), (c). 
Proprietor means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation or combination of any of them which may hold any ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(o). 
Public sewer means a sewerage system as defined in section 4101 of Public Act No. 450 of 1994 (MCL 324.4101). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(bb). 
Public utility means all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships or municipal or other public authority providing gas, electricity, water, steam, telephone, sewer or other services of a similar nature. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(s). 
Public water means a system of pipes and structures through which water is obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures, intakes, and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended for use for the purpose of furnishing water to the public for household or drinking purposes. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(cc). 
Replat means the process of changing, or the map or plat which changes, the boundaries of a recorded subdivision plat or part thereof. The legal dividing of an outlot within a recorded subdivision plat without changing the exterior boundaries of the outlot is not a replat. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(u). 
School board means the board of education or legislative body of the local school district. 
School, superintendent, means the administrative head for the local school district. 
Street means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, drive, boulevard, lane, place, court or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Arterial street. A street which is used primarily for high volume and high speed traffic and designated as arterial in the comprehensive plan. 
(2)  Collector street. A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Minor street. A street which is used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
Subdivider means a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or a combination of any of them, intending to subdivide land as defined and controlled by this article. 
Surveyor means either a land surveyor who is registered in the state as a registered land surveyor or a civil engineer who is registered in the state as a registered professional engineer licensed under article 20 of the Occupation Code (MCL 339.2001 et seq.). 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(v). 
Topographical map means a map showing existing physical characteristics, with contour lines at sufficient intervals to permit determination of proposed grades and drainage. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(dd). 
Township engineer and engineer mean the resident or consulting engineer designated as the official engineer for the township. 
Walkway means a public or private right-of-way across a block to be used by pedestrians and/or for underground utilities and located so as to connect two or more streets or a street and a public land parcel. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-32. - Scope. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived nor is it intended by this article to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere: 
(1)  With existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this article; 
(2)  With private restrictions placed upon property by deed, covenant or other private agreement; or 
(3)  With restrictive covenants running with the land to which the township is a party. 
(b)  Where this article imposes a greater restriction upon land than is imposed or required by such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this article shall control. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.03)  
Sec. 62-33. - Amendments. 
The governing body may, by ordinance, amend, supplement or change this article; provided that prior to such amendment, a public hearing is held by both the commission and the governing body after giving notice of hearing at least 15 days prior to the date of hearing, by publication in an official paper of general circulation in the township and by United States mail to each public utility company and railroad company within the township. A copy of such amendment, supplement or change shall be filed with the county register of deeds. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.08)  
Sec. 62-34. - Variances. 
(a)  For hardship or because impracticable. 
(1)  The township planning commission may recommend to the township board a variance from the provisions of this article on a finding that undue hardship may result from strict compliance with specific provisions or requirements of the article or that application of such provision or requirement is impracticable. 
(2)  The planning commission shall only recommend variances that it deems necessary to or desirable for the public interest. 
(3)  In making its findings, as required in this section, the planning commission shall take into account: 
a.  The nature of the proposed use of land and the existing use of land in the vicinity; 
b.  The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision; and 
c.  The probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(4)  No variance shall be recommended unless the planning commission finds after a public hearing: 
a.  That there are such special circumstances or conditions affecting such property that the strict application of the provisions of this article would clearly be impracticable or unreasonable. In such cases the subdivider shall first state his reasons in writing as to the specific provision or requirement involved and submit them to the planning commission. 
b.  That the granting of the specified variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the area in which such property is situated. 
c.  That such variance will not violate the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
d.  That such variance will not have the effect of nullifying the interest and purpose of this article and the comprehensive development plan of the township. 
(5)  The planning commission shall include its findings and the specific reasons therefore in its report of recommendations to the township board and shall also record its reasons and actions in its minutes. 
(b)  Topographical-physical limitation. Where in the case of a particular proposed subdivision, it can be shown that strict compliance with the requirements of this article would result in extraordinary hardship to the subdivider because of unusual topography, other physical conditions, or other such conditions which are not self-inflicted, or that these conditions would result in inhibiting the achievement of the objectives of this article, the planning commission may recommend to the township board that variance modification or a waiver of these requirements be granted. 
(c)  Planned unit development. The developer may request a variance from specified portions of this article in the case of a planned unit development. 
(1)  Considerations. The planning commission shall take into account: 
a.  The nature of the proposed use of land and existing use of land in the vicinity; 
b.  The number of persons to reside or work in the proposed subdivision; and 
c.  The probable effect of the proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. 
(2)  Findings. If in the judgment of the planning commission such a plan provides adequate public spaces and includes provisions for efficient circulation, light and air and other needs, it shall make findings, as required in this section. The planning commission shall report to the township board whether: 
a.  The proposed project will constitute a desirable and stable community development. 
b.  The proposed project will be in harmony with adjacent areas. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.09)  
Sec. 62-35. - No building permit issued. 
The township building official shall not issue a building permit for any building to be constructed on land subdivided in violation of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.10)  
Secs. 62-36—62-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PLATTING 
 
Sec. 62-51. - Required. 
No subdivider proposing to subdivide land within the limits of the township to which these regulations are applicable, shall enter into any contract for the sale of any of the proposed lots until he has obtained from the commission, the board and the governing body approval of the preliminary and final plat of the proposed subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.04.01)  
Sec. 62-52. - Preliminary plat specifications and approval. 
(a)  Specifications. The preliminary plat shall be filed with the township clerk in conformity with the requirements and specifications as set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications and the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be drawn to a scale not greater than 200 feet to one inch. 
(2)  The existing development, including officially platted or dedicated streets within areas adjacent to the proposed plat shall be shown on the plan. 
(3)  Date and north points shall be shown. 
(4)  Locations and pertinent dimensions of proposed lots and parks. 
(5)  The location, size and essential invert elevations of the nearest available public sanitary and storm sewers and water main, existing and proposed, shall be shown. If no sanitary sewer is available and the subdivider proposes the use of individual systems for water supply and/or sewage disposal, the systems shall conform to the requirements as set forth by the county department of health. 
(6)  The proposed numbers of lots shall be shown by numerical order commencing with number "1" and with no omissions or duplications. 
(7)  There shall be no block numbers or letters. 
(8)  Type and width of proposed roadway construction shall be shown. 
(9)  A written statement of intent and what action has been taken relative to the installation of utilities and roadway construction shall be furnished. 
(10)  When the proposed plat includes only a portion of the subdivider's total tract of land, there shall be shown in sketch form the proposed development for the remaining portion of such tract proposed to be subdivided in the future. 
(b)  Approval by commission. 
(1)  Upon receipt of the preliminary plat from the governing body, the planning commission shall review such plat for the purpose of checking its compliance with the comprehensive plan, major street and thoroughfare plan and other specifications of this article, the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the board's specifications. 
(2)  Before acting on the preliminary plat, the commission shall hold a public hearing, notice of which shall contain the date and place of hearing, and shall be sent by United States mail to the subdivider and owners of unplatted land of five acres or more immediately adjacent to the proposed subdivision at least seven days prior to the hearing date. 
(3)  Recommendations of approval of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the governing body for their consideration. Written approval by the commission shall be indicated on the preliminary plat along with any changes or requirements that the commission may make, constituting acceptance thereof as a basis for the preparation of the final plat. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-01.04.02, 4-01.04.03) 
State Law reference— Preliminary plats, MCL 560.105 et seq.  
Sec. 62-53. - Final plat specifications and approval. 
(a)  Specifications. The final plat shall be filed with the township clerk in compliance with the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications, and the following: 
(1)  Water and sewers feasible and adequate. A statement by the township engineer that the proposed water mains, sanitary sewers and combined sewers, as shown on the preliminary plat, are feasible and adequate to serve the proposed lots and that they conform to the general plan of the district. 
(2)  Financial assurance for sanitary sewers. Proof of cash deposit or other financial assurance acceptable to the governing body, in the amount of the township engineer's estimated cost for sanitary sewer construction in accordance with section 62-97. 
(3)  Financial assurance for water mains. Proof of a cash deposit or other financial assurance acceptable to the governing body, in the amount of the township engineer's estimated cost for water main construction in accordance with section 62-97. 
(4)  County drain commission sewer petition. Proof that a petition has been processed by the county drain commission to construct storm sewers in proposed plats where sanitary sewers are available or combined sewers in proposed plats located within combined sewer districts. 
(5)  Plat restrictions. Plat restrictions, if such are proposed by the subdivider, shall be submitted with the final record plat. These restrictions shall become a part of the final record plat and shall be recorded along with the plat in the office of the county register of deeds. 
(b)  Security to insure improvements complete. In lieu of making improvements, the subdivider may, prior to final approval of the plat, provide a cash deposit, certified check or surety bond, or an irrevocable letter of credit drawn on a form generally acceptable and by a financial institution familiar to the governing body, whichever security the proprietor selects, to insure the completion of such improvements. 
(c)  Approval. 
(1)  Final record plat approval will be granted only under the following conditions: 
a.  That the subdivider has submitted through the governing body the final record plat, being one lithoprint thereof. 
b.  That the subdivider has submitted through the governing body necessary engineering drawings, as required by this article, and such drawings have been checked and approved for engineering accuracy by the township engineer. 
c.  That the subdivider has installed all improvements, or in lieu thereof, has made arrangements for the installation of such improvements in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  After final approval, the commission shall submit recommendations of approval, along with the necessary agreements, restrictions and fees, as required in this article, and the final lithoprint to the governing body. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the approval of the final plat and other material from the planning commission, the governing body shall take action upon such plat in accordance with the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications, this article and any other township Code provisions or regulations. 
(4)  In case of disapproval, the reasons for such action shall, by written communication, be transmitted to the subdivider and the commission. Both the subdivider and the commission shall, within a reasonable time, resubmit to the governing body any changes or alterations stipulated in the governing body's action of disapproval. 
(5)  Upon approval of the final plat, the township clerk shall, in accordance with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications and any other applicable requirements, file such lithoprint, agreements, restrictions and fees with the county clerk. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-01.04.04, 4-01.04.05) 
State Law reference— Final plats, MCL 560.105, 560.133 et seq.; authority to require bond, MCL 560.188(2).  
Secs. 62-54—62-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 62-71. - Generally. 
Specifications and standards for subdivisions shall be in conformity with the provisions as set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this division. Requirements and specifications not specifically stipulated in this article shall comply with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and the board's specifications. 
(Code 1986, §§ 4-01.06.01, 4-01.06.04(E))  
Sec. 62-72. - Variations and exceptions. 
In cases where variations and exceptions from the dimensional standards, improvement requirements and open space requirements are deemed necessary due to unusual physical conditions or new design techniques, such variations shall be considered by the commission and appropriate recommendations made to the governing body in accord with the provision of section 62-34. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.04(B))  
Sec. 62-73. - Acquisition of open space for public use. 
When held appropriate by the commission, open spaces suitably located and of adequate size for parks or other public use shall be made available for acquisition by the township. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.04(A))  
Sec. 62-74. - Dedicated ingress and egress. 
Every subdivision shall have dedicated means of ingress and egress. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.04(C))  
Sec. 62-75. - Streets and alleys. 
(a)  Generally. The subdivision of land or the dedication of land for streets, alleys, highways, parks or other public uses shall conform to the major street and thoroughfare plan and comprehensive plan. 
(b)  Location and arrangement. 
(1)  In the preparation of new subdivision, provisions shall be made for the continuation of existing or platted streets in adjoining or adjacent subdivisions or parcels of land, insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. The centerlines of such streets shall continue with the centerlines of existing streets. 
(2)  In general, the streets shall extend to the boundary of the subdivision to provide for proper connection with the street system for contiguous and adjacent land. 
(3)  Contours, when required by the commission or if topography dictates, shall be provided. 
(4)  If there exists a dedicated and recorded one-half street on an adjoining plat, the other one-half must be dedicated on the proposed plat to make the street complete. 
(c)  Right-of-way widths. Minimum right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(1)  Arterial, collector, parkways, and local. Major arterial, collector streets, parkways, and local streets, in accordance with the minimum requirements as set forth in the adopted rules and regulations known as requirements and specifications for new street construction of the board of county road commissioners, effective January 1, 1968, and any amendments thereof, or as may be otherwise required by the term of the major street plan adopted by the township board upon the advice of the township planning commission. 
(2)  Alleys and service drives. For alleys and service drives the minimum right-of-way width shall be 40 feet. 
(3)  Walkways. For walkways the minimum right-of-way width shall be ten feet. 
(4)  Culs-de-sac. Width of right-of-way and roadway design for culs-de-sac shall be in accordance with requirements and specifications for new street construction of the board of county road commissioners. The length of a cul-de-sac street shall not exceed an overall developed length of 700 feet. The length shall be measured starting at a point where the centerline of the cul-de-sac street intersects the centerline of the nearest intersecting street to the center point of the circular portion of the street as shown in the drawing below. 
 
Cul-de-sac Streets 
A cul-de-sac street may have either a circular or elliptical dimension, but in no case shall any radius exceed 700 feet. 
(d)  Alleys in residential districts. Alleys shall not be accepted in residential districts unless specifically required by the commission. 
(e)  Street names. Street names shall not be the same as any other street name presently existing in the county. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.01) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
Sec. 62-76. - Blocks. 
(a)  Length. No block shall be more than 1,320 feet in length except along major roads. 
(b)  Easements. In blocks 900 feet in length the commission may require an easement for public utilities at or near the middle of the block. 
(c)  Intersecting streets. The number of intersecting streets along highways and major streets shall be held to a minimum. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.02)  
Sec. 62-77. - Lots. 
(a)  Accessible to a public street. All lots shall have access to a public street. 
(b)  Side lot lines. The side lines of lots shall be approximately radial or perpendicular to the street upon which the lots face. 
(c)  Corporate boundary lines. No lot shall be divided by a corporate boundary line. Such boundary line may be the lot line or centerline of streets or alleys. 
(d)  Widths, depths, and area. Lot widths, depths and area shall conform to the stipulations as set forth in the zoning ordinance. 
(e)  Corner lot width. Corner lots shall be of sufficient width to allow conformance with building lines as established in the zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Restrictive covenant. Where lots are developed so that they abut an arterial street, highway or parkway and are provided with an alternate means of access, when practicable the subdivider shall record with the county register of deeds, a restrictive covenant running with the land providing that no right to access by vehicular traffic to the arterial street, highway or parkway is permitted from or onto such lots. 
(g)  Partitioning or dividing. An existing lot may be partitioned or divided where each of the resulting parcels is to be developed or used in conjunction with an immediately contiguous lot as a single building site. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.03)  
Sec. 62-78. - Adequate water or sewage disposal. 
No plat shall be approved where inadequate water supply, or sewage disposal conditions exist. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.06.04(D)) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78.  
Secs. 62-79—62-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Improvements, MCL 560.188. 
 
Sec. 62-96. - Compliance. 
Improvements shall be installed in conformity with the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications and as provided in this division. The minimum improvements which shall be installed according to the township construction standards are as provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01)  
Sec. 62-97. - Financing. 
The financing of the installation of road and street construction (including storm sewer and drainage facilities) shall be accomplished in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the board's specifications and for other improvements as follows: 
(1)  Water mains and sanitary sewers. 
a.  In areas where water mains are available within a distance of 500 feet of a proposed plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the township treasurer, the estimated cost as determined by the township engineer of the water mains required to serve the lots in such plat; provided however, that the estimated cost shall not include the additional cost of water mains larger than six inches in diameter. 
b.  In areas where sanitary sewers are available within a distance of 500 feet of a proposed plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the township treasurer, the larger of the estimated costs as determined by the township engineer, of the sanitary sewers required to serve the lots in such plat or an amount equal to the number of lots times unit assessment for the district in which the property is located less the amount of previous assessments against the property; provided, however, that the estimated cost shall not include the additional cost of sewer mains larger than eight inches in diameter. 
c.  When water mains larger than six inches and sewer mains larger than eight inches are required and water and sewer lines have to be extended to the plat, the additional cost will be payable from township funds. 
d.  Upon receipt of deposit for the cost of sanitary sewer and water mains, the governing body shall order construction plans, receive bids, award contracts and have such utilities installed as soon as possible. 
e.  When construction is completed, the final accounting of the funds deposited will be made with the subdivider. 
f.  The subdivider may request, by petition of the governing body, the installation of the improvements required by the subdivider, wherein the governing body may install all or any of the required improvements, and assess the subdivider for such improvements costs, under conditions which the governing body may determine. 
(2)  Combined sewer districts. 
a.  When proposed subdivisions are located in a combination sewer district, the subdivider shall petition the county drain commission to construct the required combination sewers to serve the subdivision, in accordance with the Drain Code of 1956 (MCL 280.1 et seq.). A copy of such petition approved by the drain commission shall be filed with the planning commission at the time the final plat is submitted for approval. 
b.  When such subdivision is in an incorporated area, a petition for the construction of combined sewers shall be filed with the governing body. 
(3)  Pavements and storm drainage. 
a.  Pavements and storm drainage in subdivisions under the jurisdiction of the board of county road commissioners shall be constructed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the board of county road commissioners; provided however, that the improvements required by this article for curb, gutter, pavement type and width, shall be the minimum requirements. 
b.  In subdivisions not under the jurisdiction of the board of county road commissioners arrangements shall be made with the township in the same manner as for sanitary sewers and water mains. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.02)  
Sec. 62-98. - Streets and roads. 
(a)  Subdivisions with sanitary sewers. In subdivisions where sanitary sewers are available a street shall be constructed with curb and gutter on both sides of the street and hard surfaced at the permanently established elevation to the width specified in this division, of which the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation. 
(b)  Subdivisions with no sanitary sewers. In subdivisions where no sanitary sewer is available, a hard surface street shall be provided at the permanently established elevation, to the width specified in this division, of which the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation. 
(c)  Roadway construction. Roadway construction shall be in accordance with requirements and specifications for new street construction of the board of county road commissioners. Exception: If sanitary sewer is not available, the street surface may be installed without curb and gutter. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(A)) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
Sec. 62-99. - Culverts and bridges. 
Culverts and bridges shall be constructed when determined to be necessary by the township official having jurisdiction. The subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed to construct such culvert and/or bridge. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(B))  
Sec. 62-100. - Sanitary sewer lines. 
Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed, when an adequate sanitary sewer main exists within 500 feet by way of an easement from any portion of the proposed subdivision, of which the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation of up to and including eight-inch-diameter sewer mains within the subdivision being platted. Sanitary sewer line shall include service connection from the sewer main to the property line. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(C)) 
Cross reference— Utilities, ch. 78.  
Sec. 62-101. - Water lines. 
(a)  In easements by subdivider. Water lines shall be installed in all proposed subdivisions by way of an easement of which the subdivider shall pay 100 percent of the labor and materials needed for the installation of such water line. 
(b)  Size. The township engineer shall determine the size for all new water mains. In residential areas, the size shall be eight-inch diameter with the minimum size being six-inch for hydrant leads. In commercial, industrial, or high density residential areas, the distribution lines shall be 12-inch diameter. 
(c)  Hydrants. Hydrants shall be provided at all intersections within all plats. In residential areas, hydrants shall have a maximum spacing of 550 feet. Hydrant spacing in commercial, industrial, or high density residential areas shall not exceed 300 feet. All hydrants will be considered as part of the township water supply and easements shall be provided along the main and hydrant lead for access, repair, and/or replacement. 
(d)  Looping requirement. All water mains shall be looped at the developer's expense. Exceptions from the looping requirement may be granted on appeal to the township board at a public hearing only upon the recommendation of the township engineer, fire chief, and director of public services. An appeal may be granted only if sufficient water service and fire protection can be provided, and there is a physical obstacle preventing the loop that cannot be overcome. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(D))  
Sec. 62-102. - Wells and sewage disposal fields. 
If no municipal water supply is available, the subdivider shall record with the county register of deeds at the time of recording the plat and furnishing proof of such recording to the township, a restrictive covenant running with the land. The restrictive covenant shall provide that all owners of any land in the plat shall follow the recommendations of the county health department when establishing the location of wells and sewage disposal fields. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(E))  
Sec. 62-103. - Storm sewer lines. 
Storm sewer lines, including catchbasins and manholes, shall be installed in accordance with the adopted rules and regulations of the county drain commissioner. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(F))  
Sec. 62-104. - Rear lot provisions. 
(a)  Utility easement. A utility easement shall be provided in the plat over the rear ten feet of each lot. 
(b)  Storm drainage. Rear lot storm drainage shall be provided as approved by the township engineer. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(G))  
Sec. 62-105. - Sidewalks. 
Sidewalks shall be constructed in such places as are provided for in chapter 58, article II of this Code. The subdivider shall deposit with the township treasurer such sum, letter of credit, or performance bond to cover the cost of construction of the sidewalk in such amount as determined by the township engineer and shall pay for and/or install such sidewalk. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(H))  
Sec. 62-106. - Removal and replacement of monuments. 
If, during the process of the installation of improvements, it is deemed necessary to remove any monuments or benchmarks, the subdivider or his contractor shall obtain permission from the township engineer to make such removal. All monuments or benchmarks removed, relocated or destroyed shall be replaced in their proper location, by the subdivider, at his expense. 
(Code 1986, § 4-01.07.01(I))  
Secs. 62-107—62-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LAND DIVISIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Zoning, app. A. 
 
Sec. 62-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrator means the township zoning administrator. 
Applicant and proprietor mean a natural person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of any of them that holds an ownership interest in land whether recorded or not. 
Divided and division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns for the purpose of sale, or lease of more than one year, or of building development that results in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent, and that satisfies the requirements of sections 108 and 109 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108, 560.109). The term "division" does not include a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel; and any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or the requirements of applicable ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(d). 
Exempt split and exempt division mean the partitioning or splitting of a parcel or tract of land by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators, legal representatives, successors, or assigns that does not result in one or more parcels of less than 40 acres or the equivalent. For a property transfer between two or more adjacent parcels, if the property taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, any resulting parcel shall not be considered a building site unless the parcel conforms to the requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) or the requirements of applicable ordinance. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(e). 
Forty acres or the equivalent means either 40 acres, a quarter-quarter section containing not less than 30 acres, or government lot containing not less than 30 acres. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(l). 
Governing body means the township board. 
Land division committee means the committee designed to review all property divisions that occur within the township. This committee is comprised of the township assessor and zoning administrator. 
Parcel means a contiguous area or acreage of land which can be described as provided for in section 102(g) of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.102(g)). 
Parent parcel and parent tract mean a parcel or tract, respectively, lawfully in existence on March 31, 1997. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(i). 
Resulting parcel means one or more parcels which result from a land division. 
Road authority means the governmental authority having jurisdiction over a public road or public street. 
Tract means two or more parcels that share a common property line and are under the same ownership. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 560.102(h). 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.02, 1-12-1999) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 62-142. - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this article is to carry out the provisions of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), to prevent the creation of parcels of property which do not comply with applicable township ordinances and such Act, to minimize potential boundary disputes, to maintain orderly development of the community, and otherwise provide for the health, safety and welfare of the residents and property owners of the municipality by establishing reasonable standards for prior review and approval of land divisions within the municipality. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.01, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-143. - Prior approval requirement for land divisions. 
Land within the township shall not be divided without the prior review and approval of the Land Division Committee, in accordance with this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.); provided that the following shall be exempted from this requirement: 
(1)  A parcel proposed for subdivision through a recorded plat pursuant to article II of this chapter and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(2)  A parcel proposed for site condominiums pursuant to any township condominium ordinance or the Condominium Act (MCL 559.101 et seq.) and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(3)  A lot in a recorded plat proposed to be divided in accordance with article II of this chapter and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(4)  An exempt split as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.03, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-144. - Application for land division approval. 
(a)  An applicant shall file all of the following information with the township assessor for review and approval of a proposed land division before making any division either by deed, land contract, lease for more than one year, or for building development: 
(1)  A completed application on such written form as the township may provide, including any exhibits described therein. 
(2)  Proof of fee ownership of the land proposed to be divided or written consent to the application, signed by the owner of such land. 
(3)  A copy of each deed or other instrument of conveyance which contains the statements required by sections 109(3) and 109(4) of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.109(3),560.109(4)) as outlined as follows: 
a.  Assignment of division rights. If transfer of division rights are proposed in the land transfer, detailed information about the terms and availability of the proposed division rights transfer is mandatory and must be outlined in the deed. A statement shall be in substantially the following form: "The grantor grants to the grantee the right to make (insert number) divisions(s) under section 108 of the Land Division Act, Act No. 288 of the Public Acts of 1967." 
b.  Right to farm act. All deeds for parcels of unplatted land must contain the following statement, regardless of whether the parcel is located in a downtown metropolitan area or in a remote region of the state. "This property may be located within the vicinity of farmland or a farm operation. Generally accepted agricultural and management practices which may generate noise, dust, odors, and other associated conditions may be used and are protected by the Michigan right to farm act." 
(4)  A survey map of the land proposed to be divided, prepared pursuant to the survey map requirements of Public Act No. 132 of 1970 (MCL 54.211 et seq.) by a land surveyor licensed by the state. The survey map shall include: 
a.  The dimensions and legal descriptions of the existing parcel and the parcels proposed to be created by the division; 
b.  The location of all existing structures and other land improvements; 
c.  The accessibility of the parcels for vehicular traffic and utilities from existing public roads. 
(5)  In lieu of such survey map, at the applicant's option, the applicant may waive the 45-day statutory requirement for a decision on the application until such survey map and legal description are filed with the township assessor. In order to take advantage of this requirement, the applicant shall submit a tentative preliminary parcel map drawn to scale on not less than that provided for on the application form, for preliminary approval, and/or denial by the land division committee prior to a final application under this section. The preliminary parcel map shall depict: 
a.  An accurate legal description of each proposed division; 
b.  The boundary lines and dimensions of each proposed division; 
c.  The accessibility of each division from existing or proposed public roads for vehicular traffic and public utilities. 
(6)  Proof that all standards of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article have been met. (See the checklist accompanying the ordinance from which this article is derived). 
(7)  The history and specifications of any previous divisions of land of which the proposed division was part of which is sufficient to establish the parcel to be divided was lawfully in existence as of March 31, 1997, the effective date of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(8)  Proof that all due and payable taxes or installments of special assessments and deferred assessments pertaining to the land proposed to be divided are paid in full. 
(b)  Unless a division creates a parcel which is acknowledged and declared to be "not buildable" under section 62-147, all divisions shall result in "buildable" parcels containing sufficient "buildable area outside of unbuildable wetlands, floodplains and other areas where buildings are prohibited therefrom, and with sufficient area to comply with all required setback provisions, minimum floor areas, off-street parking spaces, on-site sewage disposal and water well locations (where public water and sewer service is not available), and maximum allowed area coverage of buildings and structures on the site. 
(c)  A fee may be established by resolution of the township board for land division reviews pursuant to this article to cover the costs of review of the application and administration of this article. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.04, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-145. - Procedure for review of applications for land division approval. 
(a)  Upon receipt of the land division application package, the township assessor shall meet with the township zoning administrator to either: 
(1)  Approve; 
(2)  Approve with reasonable conditions to assure compliance with applicable ordinances and the protection of public health, safety and general welfare; or 
(3)  Disapprove the land division. 
(b)  Such action must take place within 45 days of a complete submittal of the land division application package conforming to the requirements of this article. The administrator shall promptly notify the applicant of the decision and the reasons for any denial. If the application package does not conform to the requirements of this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.), the administrator shall return the application package to the applicant for completion and refilling in accordance with this article and the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(c)  Any person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the land division committee may, within 30 days of such decision, file a written appeal to the township manager or such other board or person designated by the township board which shall consider and resolve such appeal by a majority vote of such board at its next regular meeting or session or by the designee. At least ten days' written notice of the date, time and place of the meeting at which the appeal is to be considered shall be given to the applicant by regular, first class mail, directed to the applicant's address as shown in the application or in the written appeal. The township manager or other board or person designated by the township board may affirm or reverse the decision of the land division committee, in whole or in part, and its decision shall be final. 
(d)  A decision approving a land division is effective for 90 days, after which it shall be considered revoked unless within such period a document is recorded with the county register of deeds office and filed with the township assessor accomplishing the approved land division or transfer. 
(e)  Any notice of approval for a resulting parcel of less than one acre in size shall contain a statement that the township is not liable if a building permit is not issued for the parcel for the reason that the parcel fails to satisfy the requirements of section 109a of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.109a), including approval of on-site water supply and on-site sewage disposal under the standards set forth in section 105(g) of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.105(g)). 
(f)  The township assessor shall maintain an official record of all approved and accomplished land divisions or transfers. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.05, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-146. - Standards for approval of land divisions. 
A proposed land division shall be approved if the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The proposed land division complies with all requirements of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.) and this article. 
(2)  All the parcels to be created by the proposed land divisions fully comply with the applicable lot (parcel), yard and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, including, but not limited to, minimum lot (parcel) frontage/width, minimum road frontage, minimum lot (parcel) coverage and minimum setbacks for existing buildings/structures. 
(3)  All parcels created and remaining have existing adequate accessibility, or an area available therefor, to a public road for public utilities and emergency and other vehicles not less than the requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance, major thoroughfare plan, road ordinance or this article. In determining adequacy of accessibility, any ordinance standards applicable to plats shall also apply as a minimum standard whenever a parcel or tract is proposed to be divided to create four or more parcels. 
(4)  The ratio of depth to width of any parcel created by a division which is ten acres or less in size can not exceed four to one (4:1), exclusive of access roads or easements. A property transfer between two or more contiguous parcels must also comply with the 4:1 lot depth to width ratio. Width shall be measured by using the road frontage. If the width of the parcel is irregular, the average width of the parcel shall be calculated and used for purposes of this provision. 
a.  The permissible depth of a parcel created by a land division shall be measured within the boundaries of each parcel from the abutting road right-of-way to the most remote boundary line point of the parcel from the point of commencement of the measurement. 
b.  The permissible minimum width shall be as defined in the applicable zoning ordinance. 
c.  The depth to width ratio requirements of this article do not apply to: 
1.  A parcel larger than ten acres, unless such parcel is zoned A-2, agriculture. 
2.  The remainder of the parent parcel or parent tract when it is retained by the proprietor. 
d.  The land division committee may allow a depth to width ratio of greater than four to one if failure to allow a greater depth to width ratio would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship. Such practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship may consist of, but is not limited to, exceptional topographic or physical conditions with respect to the parcel and compatibility with surrounding lands. 
(5)  Where accessibility is to be provided by a proposed new dedicated public road, proof that the county road commission or the state department of transportation has approved the proposed layout and construction design of the road and of utility easements and drainage facilities connected therewith. 
(6)  The number of parcels to be created by division must not exceed the number of parcels allowed by section 108 of the Land Division Act (MCL 560.108). 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.06, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-147. - Allowance for approval of other land divisions. 
Notwithstanding disqualification from approval pursuant to this article, a proposed land division which does not fully comply with the applicable lot, yard, accessibility and area requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance or this article may be approved in any of the following circumstances are present: 
(1)  Where the applicant executes and records an affidavit or deed restriction with the county register of deeds, in a form acceptable to the township, designating the parcel as "not buildable." Any such parcel shall also be designated as "not buildable" in the township records, and shall not thereafter by the subject of a request to the township zoning board of appeals for variance relief from the applicable lot and/or area requirements, and shall not be developed with any building or above ground structure. 
(2)  Where the zoning board of appeals has, previous to this article, granted a variance from the lot, yard, ratio, frontage and/or area requirements with which the parcel failed to comply. 
(3)  Where the proposed land division involves only the minor adjustment of a common boundary line or involves a conveyance between adjoining properties which does not result in either parcel violating this article, any applicable zoning ordinance, or Land Division Act (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.07, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-148. - Consequences of noncompliance with land division approval requirement. 
Any parcel created in noncompliance with this article shall not be eligible for any building permits, or zoning approvals, such as special land use approval or site plan approval, and shall not be recognized as a separate parcel on the assessment roll. In addition, violation of this article shall subject the violator to the penalties and enforcement actions set forth in section 62-149, and as may otherwise be provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.08, 1-12-1999)  
Sec. 62-149. - Penalties and enforcement. 
Any person or other entity who violates any of the provisions of this article is responsible for a municipal civil infraction and subject to a civil fine of not more than $500.00 plus costs, which may include all direct or indirect expenses, to which the township has been put in connection with the violation. A violator of this article shall also be subject to such additional sanctions, remedies, and judicial orders as are authorized under state law. Each day a violation of this article continues to exist constitutes a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 612, § 4-05.09, 1-12-1999)  
Chapter 66 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of any bonds or other instruments of indebtedness saved from repeal, § 1-11(3); any ordinance levying, imposing or otherwise relating to taxes saved from repeal, § 1-11(13); administration, ch. 2; finance, § 2-211 et seq. 
State Law reference— The General Property Tax Act, MCL 211.1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 66-1. - Property tax administration fee. 
On all tax sums voluntarily paid before February 15 of the succeeding year, the township treasurer shall add one percent for a property tax administration fee. 
(Code 1986, § 1-06.03) 
State Law reference— Property tax administration fee, MCL 211.44(3).  
Sec. 66-2. - Late penalty charge. 
On all taxes paid after February 14 and before March 1, the township treasurer shall add to the tax a one percent property tax administration fee and a late penalty charge equal to three percent of such tax. 
(Code 1986, § 1-06.04) 
State Law reference— Late penalty charge and property tax administration fee, MCL 211.44(3).  
Secs. 66-3—66-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAX EXEMPTIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES IN LIEU THEREOF 
 
Sec. 66-31. - Housing project tax exemption eliminated. 
(a)  The tax exemption provided for in section 15a(1) of the State Housing Development Authority Act of 1966 (MCL 125.1415(1) for a housing project owned by a nonprofit housing corporation, consumer housing cooperative, limited dividend housing corporation, mobile home park corporation or mobile home park association financed with a federally-aided or authority-aided mortgage or advance or grant from the authority shall not apply to all or any class of housing project or projects constructed or operated after the effective date of Ordinance No. 619, adopted June 6, 2001, and such project or projects shall be subject to all ad valorem property taxes imposed by the state or by any political subdivision, public body, or taxing district located within the township as provided in section 15a(5) of such act (MCL 125.1415(5)). 
(b)  This section shall not affect the tax exemptions grants to any housing project approved prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 619, adopted June 6, 2001. 
(Ord. No. 619, §§ 1-08.01, 1-08.02, 6-6-2001)  
Sec. 66-32. - Lakeside elderly housing project. 
(a)  In this section: 
Contract rents are as defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development in regulations promulgated pursuant to the United States Housing Act of 1937, as amended by the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974. 
Elderly means those persons 62 years of age or older or who otherwise qualify pursuant to the rules and regulations or practices of the Department of Housing and Urban Development for residency in an elderly housing project. 
Elderly housing project means a specific parcel of property improved for rental to a low or moderate income individual which qualifies as an elderly housing project under the rules and regulations or standard practices of the Department of Housing and Urban Development to the extent it is occupied by the elderly or held for rental exclusively to the elderly, excluding one unit for a development manager or caretaker. 
HUD means the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States of America. 
Specified project means a housing development identified as Lakeside Limited Dividend Housing Association ("Lakeside") on certain property located in the township, more particularly described as follows: 
A parcel of land in the Northwest ¼ of the Southeast ¼ of Fractional Section 2, Township 12 North, Range 4 East, Saginaw Township, Saginaw County, Michigan, described as follows: Commencing on the North and South ¼ line of said Section 2 at a point 1,728.03 feet, N. 00;deg; 22;min;19;sec; E., of the South ¼ corner of Section 2; thence N. 00;deg; 22;min; 19;sec; E., on said North and South ¼ line, 507.00 feet; thence S. 89;deg; 41;min; 07;sec; E., on a line which is parallel to and 2,235.03 feet, measured at right angles, North of the South line of said Section, 750.00 feet; thence S. 00;deg; 18;min; 53;sec; W., perpendicular to such South Section line, 396.00 feet; thence S. 36;deg; 16;min; 03;sec; W., 137.12 feet to a line which is parallel to and 1,728.03 feet, measured at right angles, North of the South line of Section 2; thence N. 89;deg; 41;min; 07;sec; W., on such line which is parallel to the South Section line, 670.00 feet to the point of beginning, containing 8.63 acres (375,910 square feet) of land and subject to highway use of the West 33 feet thereof. 
Sponsor means persons or entities which have applied to HUD for a mortgage loan insurance to finance an elderly housing project. 
Utilities means fuel, water, sanitary sewer service and/or electrical service which are paid by the project or tenants. 
(b)  It is hereby determined that the class of housing projects to which the tax exemption shall apply and for which a service charge shall be paid in lieu of such taxes shall be elderly housing projects for elderly persons as defined in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  That portion of the specified project exclusively and especially designated for and occupied by elderly persons of low and moderate income developed and constructed upon a parcel of land within the township sufficient for the operation of such project (but no larger) shall be exempt from all property taxation beginning in the year following commencement of construction and continuing as long as: 
(1)  The mortgage loan insured by HUD remains outstanding and unpaid and as long as the HUD has any interest in such property; and 
(2)  The annual service charge is paid timely and all requirements of special use permit 78-02 to be issued are met. 
(d)  That portion of the specified project described in this section shall be subject to a service charge in lieu of such property taxes in an amount equal to four percent of 95 percent of contract rents of the preceding calendar year exclusive of utility charges paid by tenants and/or the project and the amount paid to the township during the preceding calendar year of the annual service charge. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, in no event shall the service charge, at any time, be less than the property taxes upon the subject property for the tax year prior to the date when construction was commenced. 
(e)  The service charge in lieu of taxes as determined under this section shall be payable in the same manner as general property taxes are payable in the township except that the annual payment shall be paid on or before December 31 of each year. The entire tax collection procedure provided by the general property tax act shall be effective with respect to such payment including, but not by way of limitation, the provisions providing for interest and penalties on late payments, return of delinquent taxes, and the sale of lands for delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1-04.03—1-04.07) 
State Law reference— Authority for above, MCL 125.1415.  
Sec. 66-33. - South Colony elderly housing project. 
(a)  In this section: 
Authority means the state housing development authority. 
Mortgagor means a limited dividend housing association to be formed by Nathan Schafer and Associates. 
Project means the Saginaw Township Elderly Project MSHDA No. 514, to be constructed at 5285 Gratiot Road. 
(b)  Pursuant to Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1401 et seq.), the township, acknowledging the reliance of the mortgagor and the authority on exemption of the project from all ad valorem property taxes, hereby exempts the project from all property taxes from and after commencement of construction of the project. The specific property and improvements thereon which is granted property tax exemption hereby is described as follows: 
All that portion of the following described property located North and West of South Colony Drive as extended, as finally accepted by the county road commission. 
A parcel of land in the North ½ of the Southeast ¼ of Section 29, T.12 N - R.4 E., Saginaw Township, Saginaw County, Michigan described as follows: Commencing on the East and West ¼ line of said Section at a point 1,321.99 feet, N. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; W., of the East ¼ corner of Section 29; thence S. 00;deg; 03;min; 05;sec; W., on a line which is parallel to and 1,302.50 feet, measured parallel to the East and West ¼ line, East of the North and South ¼ line of said Section, 500.01 feet; thence S. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; E., on a line which is parallel to and 500.00 feet, measured at right angles, South of said East and West ¼ line, 169.19 feet; thence S. 00;deg; 12;min; 00;sec; E., on a line which intersects said East and West ¼ line at a point 1,155.00 feet, N. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; W., of said East ¼ corner and also intersects the Northwest corner of Stroebel Subdivision, 453.03 feet; thence N. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; W., on a line which is parallel to and 953.00 feet, measured at right angles, South of said East and West ¼ line, 566.16 feet; thence N. 00;deg; 03;min; 05;sec; E., parallel to said North and South ¼ line, 800.02 feet to a point which is 153.00 feet S. 00;deg; 03;min; 05;sec; W., of said East and West ¼ line; thence S. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; E., parallel to said East and West ¼ line, 110.00 feet; thence N. 00;deg; 03;min; 05;sec; E., parallel to said North and South ¼ line, 153.00 feet to a point on said East and West ¼ line which is 1,017.50 feet, S. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; E., of the center post of said Section 29; thence S. 89;deg; 33;min; 40;sec; E., on said East and West ¼ line, 285.00 feet to the point of beginning, containing 10.02 acres of land and subject to an existing highway easement being that portion thereof which lies North of a line which is 60.00 feet, measured at right angles, South of the constructed centerline of Highway M-46 and also subject to an easement for the Seidel Drain. 
(c)  In consideration of the provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of this section and on behalf of the township, the township hereby agrees to accept payment of an annual service charge for public services in lieu of all property taxes in the amount equal to the greater of: 
(1)  The tax on the property on which the project is located for the tax year prior to the date when construction of the project was commenced; or 
(2)  Four percent of 95 percent of the contract rents (as defined by the rules pursuant to the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974, as amended) of the preceding calendar year exclusive of utilities and the amount paid to the township during the preceding calendar year of the annual service charge, and in any event, such annual service charge shall not be less than the service charge provided by Public Act No. 346 of 1966 (MCL 125.1411 et seq.). 
(d)  This section shall remain in effect and shall not terminate: 
(1)  So long as the mortgage loan anticipated to be obtained from the authority remains outstanding and unpaid or the authority has any interest in the project; and 
(2)  So long as the annual service charge is paid timely and all requirements of special use permit 76-08 to be issued are met, including limitation of occupancy to senior citizens as defined by the township zoning ordinance. 
(Code 1986, §§ 1-03.02—1-03.05) 
State Law reference— Authority for above, MCL 125.1415.  
Chapter 70 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; utilities, ch. 78; zoning, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 70-1—70-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CABLE TELEVISION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 70-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Cable television means the business of transmission and distribution of television signals, including radio signals and other signals, or any other type of closed circuit transmission by means of electrical impulses, by means of cable to private subscribers and does not include the operation of a master television antenna system, the distribution system of which is confined to private property. 
Gross subscriber revenues means gross receipts from all revenues received by the permittee from subscribers located within the township including all revenues from cable service including premium service. The term "gross subscriber revenues" shall include revenues received by the permittee as charges for installations, reconnections and modifications of any installations, but not fees for inspections or repairs thereto. The term "gross subscriber revenues" shall not include unrelated business income and/or income received from the lease and/or sale of real or personal property, bad debts, deposits or refunds to subscribers and/or taxes on services furnished by the permittee imposed upon any subscriber by state, township, or other governmental unit and collected by the permittee on behalf of such governmental unit. 
Permittee means the holder of a permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 70-32. - Cablecasting commission. 
The township board may create a cablecasting commission, referred to in this article as the "commission" which will be composed of five members who serve for five-year staggered terms, the members to be appointed by the supervisor with the consent and approval of the township board. The township board may delegate to the commission such duties as it may from time to time deem necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.08) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-291 et seq.  
Sec. 70-33. - Conditions of street occupancy. 
(a)  Location. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the permittee or on its behalf within the township shall be so located as to cause minimum interference with: 
(1)  The reasonable use of streets; and 
(2)  The rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of such streets. 
(b)  Restoration. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the permittee shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the township engineer, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surfacing of any street or alley disturbed, in as good condition as before such work was commenced. 
(c)  Relocation. If any time during the existence of a permit granted under this article the township shall lawfully widen, realign or otherwise alter the street right-of-way, or construct, reconstruct, realign, change the grade of or otherwise alter pavement of any water main, fire hydrant, sewer or appurtenance, the permittee and anyone acting for it in connection with the use of the streets, upon reasonable notice by the township, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense. 
(d)  Conduit districts. In areas of the township in which telephone lines and electric utility lines are underground, all permittees' lines, cables and wires shall be underground. 
(e)  Construction standards. The permittee's distribution system in the public streets shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations and Code provisions and all its wires and cables suspended from poles in the streets shall comply with the minimum clearances above ground required for telephone lines, cables, wires and conduits. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.05)  
Sec. 70-34. - Operation of cable television system. 
(a)  Signal quality. The permittee's receiving and distribution equipment and facilities shall be constructed, operated and maintained so as to provide usable signals at subscribers' television receivers essentially of the same quality as received at the antenna site. 
(b)  Compliance with laws and regulations. Permittee shall in the operation of its cable television system, comply with all applicable laws, this Code, and rules, regulations and requirements of regulatory agencies. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.06)  
Sec. 70-35. - Services to be provided. 
(a)  Cable television to designated residents. The permittee shall make its cable television service available to all residents of the township who can be reached by its distribution system as mutually agreeable between the township board and the permittee. 
(b)  Public service channels. The permittee shall make available for public use a number of channels as mutually agreeable between the township board and the permittee. 
(c)  Free service to public buildings. The permittee shall furnish free, without monthly fees, installation or service charges, a single television outlet to all schools, fire and police stations in the township: 
(1)  Provided such building is within 400 feet of an existing line of the system; and 
(2)  Provided further that the permittee will not have any responsibility or cost as to any wiring inside the public buildings. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.07)  
Sec. 70-36. - Rate regulation. 
(a)  Basic service and associated equipment. The township adopts by reference rules of the Federal Communications Commission set forth in Subpart N (Cable Rate Regulation) of Part 76 (Cable Television Service) of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding the regulation of cable television rates for basic service and associated equipment, as amended. 
(b)  Public notice of rates and costs. After a cable operator has submitted for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment costs or a proposed increase in these rates, the township clerk shall publish a public notice of the rates and costs giving interested parties, including the cable operator, a reasonable opportunity to file written comments which shall be available in the office of the township clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(c)  Confidential business information procedures. The township adopts by reference procedures set forth in 47 CFR 0.459 regarding confidential business information submitted by a cable operator in a rate regulation proceeding. 
(d)  Forfeiture for failure to comply. A cable operator which willfully or repeatedly fails to comply with a rate decision or refund order directed specifically at the cable operator shall be subject to a monetary forfeiture not to exceed $25,000.00 for each violation or each day of a continuing violation not revised to exceed $250,000.00 as determined by the township board following the procedures set forth in 47 USC 503(2)(D), (3)(A) and (B), (4)(A), (B), and (C) which the township adopts by reference. 
(e)  Copy available for inspection or copying. A copy of the rules and procedures adopted by reference in this article are available in the office of the township clerk for public inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.09)  
Secs. 70-37—70-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 70-56. - Required. 
No person shall provide cable television service within the limits of the township without first obtaining a permit as provided in this division. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.01)  
Sec. 70-57. - Application. 
(a)  Generally. Permits to provide cable television service under this article will be granted by the township board as provided in this article and shall be applied for by written application in a form approved by the township supervisor and filed with the township clerk, which application shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Local business address; 
(3)  Principal officers or owners; 
(4)  Principal stockholders if a corporation; 
(5)  Location of antenna tower or towers; 
(6)  General description of proposed distribution system in the township, showing area proposed to be served and indicating whether applicant will require poles in the streets within the township or whether cables and appliances to be utilized by it in the streets in the township will be located on existing poles of utility companies; and 
(7)  Service to be provided. 
(b)  Financial statement. Each applicant for a permit under this article shall attach to his application an authenticated statement of financial condition and net worth, sufficient in form and content so that the township board may readily determine its financial responsibility and its ability to finance the proposed undertaking. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-06.03.02, 6-06.03.03)  
Sec. 70-58. - Indemnification. 
(a)  Township held harmless. The permittee shall indemnify and hold the township harmless at all times during the term of this permit and specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties which the township may be legally required to pay as a result of operation of a cable system. 
(b)  Damages and penalties included. Such damages and penalties shall include, but not be limited to, damages arising out of copyright infringements and other damages arising out of the installation, operation, or maintenance of the cable television system authorized in this article, whether or not any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed, or prohibited by this permit, or this article. 
(c)  Payment of reasonable expenses. The permittee shall pay and by the acceptance of this permit specifically agrees, that it will pay all reasonable expenses incurred by the township in defending itself with regard to all damages, penalties, or other claims resulting from the acts of the permittee, its assigns, employees, agents, invitees, or other persons. 
(d)  Legal fees and services. Expenses shall include all out-of-pocket expenses such as attorney fees, and shall include the value of any services rendered by the township attorney or any other officers or employees of the township. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.04)  
Sec. 70-59. - Insurance. 
(a)  Limits. The permittee shall provide insurance in such form as shall protect the township and itself from and against any and all claims for injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, resulting from the construction, erection, operation or maintenance of such television system pursuant to the authority of the permit granted under this article, in limits of not less than $1,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of any one person, $2,000,000.00 for personal injury or death of two or more persons in any one occurrence and $300,000.00 for damage to property resulting from any one occurrence. 
(b)  Workers' compensation. The permittee shall provide workers' compensation insurance as provided by the laws of the state, as amended. 
(c)  Notice of cancellation. All of such insurance coverage shall provide a 30-day notice to the township in the event of material alteration or cancellation of any coverage afforded in such policies prior to the date such material alteration or cancellation shall become effective. 
(d)  Copies filed with clerk. Copies of all certificates of insurance required hereunder shall be furnished to and filed with the township clerk prior to the commencement of operations or the expiration of prior policies as the case may be. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.05)  
Sec. 70-60. - Issuance. 
(a)  The township board shall grant a cable television permit under this article to each applicant who makes proper application, establishes its qualifications as set forth in this article, furnishes the required insurance and assurances, and who establishes that its operations will not impose an unreasonable burden on township streets. 
(b)  No permit granted under this article shall be exclusive. 
(c)  An agreement to provide cable television service entered into by the township board and an applicant shall be considered the permit. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.06)  
Sec. 70-61. - Renegotiation of terms. 
A permit is granted subject to the right of the township or the permittee to renegotiate the terms of the permit at any time after the effective date of the permit upon 30 days' notice to the permittee if federal or state regulations substantially alter the service, conditions or standards upon which the cable television system is to operate. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.07)  
Sec. 70-62. - Fee. 
(a)  A permittee shall pay to the township for the privilege of operating a cable television system under the permit granted pursuant to this article a sum equivalent to five percent of the annual gross subscriber revenue received by the permittee. The permit fee is payable quarterly. 
(b)  Nothing in this article shall exempt any permittee from the payment of ad valorem taxes on its property or equipment or on the income earned by it or from any other tax which it might be validly obligated to pay if it were not subject to the permit fee imposed in this article. 
(c)  The permittee shall file with the township clerk, annually, a statement of revenues received from its operations under its permit issued pursuant to this article within 60 days after the close of its fiscal year, and shall make its financial records relating thereto available to the township for inspection at a place designated by it within the township, at any reasonable time. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.08)  
Sec. 70-63. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Each permit issued under this article shall be for a term of not to exceed 20 years, as agreed to by the township and the permittee or until terminated as provided in this article if termination occurs sooner. The permit granted under this article shall be deemed to constitute a contract between the township and the permittee. 
(b)  Nothing in subsection (a) of this section shall prohibit the permittee from seeking a renewal or extension of a permit. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-06.03.09, 6-06.03.10)  
Sec. 70-64. - Transfer. 
(a)  Permits granted under this article are not transferable except upon approval of the township board. 
(b)  The proposed transferee shall file an application in a form approved by the township supervisor and shall satisfy all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Any transfer of the permit by the permittee to one of its subsidiaries shall not be considered transferred with respect to this section. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.11)  
Sec. 70-65. - Rights of permittee. 
(a)  Utilizing streets. A permittee shall have the right, so long as its permit is in force and effect, to utilize the streets of the township to the extent set forth in its application, or as otherwise provided by the township board in its permit for the transmission of television and radio and other signals as therein authorized from its antenna location or locations to the premises of subscribers. 
(b)  Erecting cables and appurtenances. 
(1)  By permittee. A permittee may erect all such wires, cables and appurtenances in the streets, subject to approval of the township engineer of the placement of any such poles; or 
(2)  By others. A permittee may, at its option, authorize, subject to the same conditions as to the placement of poles, the installation of such cables and appurtenances by others on a lease, rental, fee or other basis, and all such wires, cables, conduits, appurtenances and poles placed or installed by others for the use of the permittee shall exist and continue to exist solely by authority of the permission granted to the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.04)  
Sec. 70-66. - Termination. 
(a)  A permittee may surrender its permit at any time, in which event it shall refund to subscribers all prepaid and unearned service and other charges collected from subscribers. 
(b)  In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the township by virtue of this article or otherwise, the township preserves the right to terminate and cancel this permit and all rights and privileges of the permittee under this article in the event that the permittee: 
(1)  Violates any provision of the permit or any rule, order or determination of the township, township board or their agents made pursuant to the permit, except where such violation is without fault or through excusable neglect; 
(2)  Becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or is adjudged as bankrupt; 
(3)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this article or practices any fraud or deceit upon the township; or 
(4)  Unless otherwise agreed to: 
a.  Fails to begin the design of the system within 90 days after necessary governmental approvals and pole-leasing agreements from utilities owning such poles; 
b.  Fails to begin construction within six months thereafter; 
c.  Fails to make reasonable efforts to complete construction within 18 months after commencement of such construction; or 
d.  Fails to complete such construction substantially within two years from the effective date of the franchise. 
(c)  A permittee shall be given 60 days' written notice to correct any such default or noncompliance before the township board may proceed to terminate the permit as provided for under this section. 
(d)  A permittee shall be entitled to a hearing before the township board to determine the findings of fact and the propriety of the termination of the permit. 
(e)  The determination of the township board and its decision shall be final. 
(f)  Upon termination of its permit, a permittee shall at its own expense remove from the streets in the township all its facilities and equipment therein utilized by it in its cable television operation, unless the township board shall specifically authorize it to leave all or part of such facilities and equipment in place. 
(Code 1986, § 6-06.03.12)  
Secs. 70-67—70-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY BY TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS 
 
Sec. 70-101. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this article are to regulate access to and ongoing use of public rights-of-way by telecommunications providers for their telecommunications facilities while protecting the public health, safety, and welfare and exercising reasonable control of the public rights-of-way in compliance with the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002) ("Act") and other applicable law, and to ensure that the city qualifies for distributions under the Act by modifying the fees charged to providers and complying with the Act. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 1, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-102. - Conflict. 
Nothing in this article shall be construed in such a manner as to conflict with the Act or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 2, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-103. - Definitions. 
The terms used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
Act means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Act (Act No. 48 of the Public Acts of 2002), as amended from time to time. 
Township means the Charter Township of Saginaw. 
Township board means the Township Board of Saginaw Charter Township or its designee. This section does not authorize delegation of any decision or function that is required by law to be made by the township board. 
Township manager means the township manager or his or her designee. 
Permit means a non-exclusive permit issued pursuant to the Act and this article to a telecommunications provider to use the public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities. 
All other terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined or as provided in the Act, including without limitation the following: 
Authority means the Metropolitan Extension Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Oversight Authority created pursuant to Section 3 of the Act. 
MPSC means the Michigan Public Service Commission in the Department of Consumer and Industry Services, and shall have the same meaning as the term "commission" in the Act. 
Person means an individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or any other legal entity. 
Public right-of-way in the township means the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, alley, easement or waterway. Public right-of-way does not include a federal, state, or private right-of-way. 
Telecommunication facilities or facilities means the equipment or personal property, such as copper and fiber cables, lines, wires, switches, conduits, pipes, and sheaths, which are used to or can generate, receive, transmit, carry, amplify, or provide telecommunication services or signals. Telecommunication facilities or facilities do not include antennas, supporting structures for antennas, equipment shelters or houses, and any ancillary equipment and miscellaneous hardware used to provide federally licensed commercial mobile service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of title III of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, and service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. 
Telecommunications provider, provider and telecommunications services mean those terms as defined in Section 102 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2102. Telecommunication provider does not include a person or an affiliate of that person when providing a federally licensed commercial mobile radio service as defined in Section 332(d) of part I of the Communications Act of 1934, chapter 652, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 332 and further defined as commercial mobile radio service in 47 CFR 20.3, or service provided by any wireless, two-way communication device. For the purpose of the Act and this article only, a provider also includes all of the following: 
(1)  A cable television operator that provides a telecommunications service. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided by the Act, a person who owns telecommunication facilities located within a public right-of-way. 
(3)  A person providing broadband internet transport access service. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 3, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-104. - Permit required. 
(a)  Permit required. Except as otherwise provided in the Act, a telecommunications provider using or seeking to use public rights-of-way in the township for its telecommunications facilities shall apply for and obtain a permit pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Application. Telecommunications providers shall apply for a permit on an application form approved by the MPSC in accordance with Section 6(1) of the Act. A telecommunications provider shall file one copy of the application with the township clerk, one copy with the township manager, and one copy with the township attorney. Applications shall be complete and include all information required by the Act, including without limitation a route map showing the location of the provider's existing and proposed facilities in accordance with Section 6(5) of the Act. 
(c)  Confidential information. If a telecommunications provider claims that any portion of the route maps submitted by it as part of its application contain trade secret, proprietary, or confidential information, which is exempt from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, pursuant to Section 6(5) of the Act, the telecommunications provider shall prominently so indicate on the face of each map. 
(d)  Application fee. Except as otherwise provided by the Act, the application shall be accompanied by a one-time nonrefundable application fee in the amount of $500.00. 
(e)  Additional information. The township manager may request an applicant to submit such additional information which the township manager deems reasonably necessary or relevant. The applicant shall comply with all such requests in compliance with reasonable deadlines for such additional information established by the township manager. If the township and the applicant cannot agree on the requirement of additional information requested by the township, the township or the applicant shall notify the MPSC as provided in Section 6(2) of the Act. 
(f)  Previously issued permits. Pursuant to Section 5(1) of the Act, authorizations or permits previously issued by the township under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251 and authorizations or permits issued by the township to telecommunications providers prior to the 1995 enactment of Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act but after 1985 shall satisfy the permit requirements of this article. 
(g)  Existing providers. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, within 180 days from November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, a telecommunications provider with facilities located in a public right-of-way in the township as of such date, that has not previously obtained authorization or a permit under Section 251 of the Michigan Telecommunications Act, 1991 PA 179, MCL 484.2251, shall submit to the city an application for a permit in accordance with the requirements of this article. Pursuant to Section 5(3) of the Act, a telecommunications provider submitting an application under this subsection is not required to pay the $500.00 application fee required under subsection (d) above. A provider under this subsection shall be given up to an additional 180 days to submit the permit application if allowed by the authority, as provided in Section 5(4) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 4, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-105. - Issuance of permit. 
(a)  Approval or denial. The authority to approve or deny an application for a permit is hereby delegated to the township manager. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, the township manager shall approve or deny an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit under subsection 70-104(b) of this article for access to a public right-of-way within the township. Pursuant to Section 6(6) of the Act, the township manager shall notify the MPSC when the township manager has granted or denied a permit, including information regarding the date on which the application was filed and the date on which permit was granted or denied. The township manager shall not unreasonably deny an application for a permit. 
(b)  Form of permit. If an application for permit is approved, the township manager shall issue the permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, in accordance with Sections 6(1), 6(2) and 15 of the Act. 
(c)  Conditions. Pursuant to Section 15(4) of the Act, the township manager may impose conditions on the issuance of a permit, which conditions shall be limited to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way. 
(d)  Bond requirement. Pursuant to Section 15(3) of the Act, and without limitation on subsection (c) of this section, the township manager may require that a bond be posted by the telecommunications provider as a condition of the permit. If a bond is required, it shall not exceed the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunications provider's access and use. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 5, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-106. - Construction/engineering permit. 
A telecommunications provider shall not commence construction upon, over, across, or under the public rights-of-way in the township without first obtaining a construction or engineering permit for construction within the public rights-of-way. No fee shall be charged for such a construction or engineering permit. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 6, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-107. - Conduit or utility poles. 
Pursuant to Section 4(3) of the Act, obtaining a permit or paying the fees required under the Act or under this article does not give a telecommunications provider a right to use conduit or utility poles. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 7, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-108. - Route maps. 
Pursuant to Section 6(7) of the Act, a telecommunications provider shall, within 90 days after the substantial completion of construction of new telecommunications facilities in the township, submit route maps showing the location of the telecommunications facilities to both the MPSC and to the township. The route maps should be in [paper or electronic] format unless and until the MPSC determines otherwise, in accordance with Section 6(8) of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 8, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-109. - Repair of damage. 
Pursuant to Section 15(5) of the Act, a telecommunications provider undertaking an excavation or construction or installing telecommunications facilities within a public right-of-way or temporarily obstructing a public right-of-way in the township, as authorized by a permit, shall promptly repair all damage done to the street surface and all installations under, over, below, or within the public right-of-way and shall promptly restore the public right-of-way to its preexisting condition. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 9, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-110. - Establishment and payment of maintenance fee. 
In addition to the nonrefundable application fee paid to the township set forth in subsection 70-104(d), a telecommunications provider with telecommunications facilities in the township's public rights-of-way shall pay an annual maintenance fee to the authority pursuant to Section 8 of the Act. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 10, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-111. - Modification of existing fees. 
In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(1) of the Act, the township hereby modifies, to the extent necessary, any fees charged to telecommunications providers after November 1, 2002, the effective date of the Act, relating to access and usage of the public rights-of-way, to an amount not exceeding the amounts of fees and charges required under the Act, which shall be paid to the authority. In compliance with the requirements of Section 13(4) of the Act, the township also hereby approves modification of the fees of providers with telecommunication facilities in public rights-of-way within the township's boundaries, so that those providers pay only those fees required under Section 8 of the Act. The township shall provide each telecommunications provider affected by the fee with a copy of this article, in compliance with the requirement of Section 13(4) of the Act. To the extent any fees are charged telecommunications providers in excess of the amounts permitted under the Act, or which are otherwise inconsistent with the Act, such imposition is hereby declared to be contrary to the township's policy and intent, and upon application by a provider or discovery by the township, shall be promptly refunded as having been charged in error. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 11, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-112. - Savings clause. 
Pursuant to Section 13(5) of the Act, if Section 8 of the Act is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, the modification of fees under section 70-111 shall be void from the date the modification was made. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 12, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-113. - Use of funds. 
Pursuant to Section 10(4) of the Act, all amounts received by the township from the authority shall be used by the township solely for rights-of-way related purposes. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 13, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-114. - Annual report. 
Pursuant to Section 10(5) of the Act, the township manager shall file an annual report with the authority on the use and disposition of funds annually distributed by the authority. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 14, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-115. - Cable television operators. 
Pursuant to Section 13(6) of the Act, the township shall not hold a cable television operator in default or seek any remedy for its failure to satisfy an obligation, if any, to pay after November 1, 2002, the effective date of this Act, a franchise fee or similar fee on that portion of gross revenues from charges the cable operator received for cable modem services provided through broadband internet transport access services. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 15, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-116. - Existing rights. 
Pursuant to Section 4(2) of the Act, except as expressly provided herein with respect to fees, this article shall not affect any existing rights that a telecommunications provider or the township may have under a permit issued by the township or under a contract between the township and a telecommunications provider related to the use of the public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 16, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-117. - Compliance. 
The township hereby declares that its policy and intent in adopting this article is to fully comply with the requirements of the Act, and the provisions hereof should be construed in such a manner as to achieve that purpose. The township shall comply in all respects with the requirements of the Act, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Exempting certain route maps from the Freedom of Information Act, 1976 PA 442, MCL 15.231 to 15.246, as provided in section 70-104(c) of this article; 
(2)  Allowing certain previously issued permits to satisfy the permit requirements hereof, in accordance with section 70-104(f) of this article; 
(3)  Allowing existing providers additional time in which to submit an application for a permit, and excusing such providers from the $500.00 application fee, in accordance with section 70-104(g) of this article; 
(4)  Approving or denying an application for a permit within 45 days from the date a telecommunications provider files an application for a permit for access to and usage of a public right-of-way within the township, in accordance with section 70-105(a) of this article; 
(5)  Notifying the MPSC when the township has granted or denied a permit, in accordance with section 70-105(a) of this article; 
(6)  Not unreasonably denying an application for a permit, in accordance with section 70-105(a) of this article; 
(7)  Issuing a permit in the form approved by the MPSC, with or without additional or different permit terms, as provided in section 70-105(b) of this article; 
(8)  Limiting the conditions imposed on the issuance of a permit to the telecommunications provider's access and usage of the public right-of-way, in accordance with section 70-105(c) of this article; 
(9)  Not requiring a bond of a telecommunications provider which exceeds the reasonable cost to ensure that the public right-of-way is returned to its original condition during and after the telecommunication provider's access and use, in accordance with section 70-105(d) of this article; 
(10)  Not charging any telecommunications providers any additional fees for construction or engineering permits, in accordance with section 70-106 of this article; 
(11)  Providing each telecommunications provider affected by the township's right-of-way fees with a copy of this article, in accordance with section 70-111 of this article; 
(12)  Submitting an annual report to the authority, in accordance with section 70-114 of this article; and 
(13)  Not holding a cable television operator in default for a failure to pay certain franchise fees, in accordance with section 70-115 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 17, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-118. - Reservation of police powers. 
Pursuant to Section 15(2) of the Act, this article shall not limit the township's right to review and approve a telecommunication provider's access to and ongoing use of a public right-of-way or limit the township's authority to ensure and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 18, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-119. - Severability. 
The various parts, sentences, paragraphs, sections, and clauses of this article are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, paragraph, section, or clause of this article is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid by a court or administrative agency of competent jurisdiction, the unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect the constitutionality or validity of any remaining provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 19, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-120. - Authorized township officials. 
The township manager or his or her designee is hereby designated as the authorized township official to issue municipal civil infraction citations (directing alleged violators to appear in court) or municipal civil infraction violation notices (directing alleged violators to appear at the municipal chapter violations bureau) for violations under this article as provided by the Township Code. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 20, 11-25-2002)  
Sec. 70-121. - Municipal civil infraction. 
A person who violates any provision of this article or the terms or conditions of a permit is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, and shall be subject to Ordinance 601, Section 2-10.02. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the remedies available to the township in the event of a violation by a person of this article or a permit. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 21, 11-25-2002)  
Chapter 74 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Trash, rubbish, junk, or junk vehicles, § 26-34; fires lanes, § 30-121 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 38; transportation of persons to illegal places, § 38-6; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; general off-street parking and loading, app. A, § 401 et seq. 
State Law reference— Michigan Vehicle Code, MCL 257.1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, MCL 257.606 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 74-1. - Michigan Vehicle Code adopted. 
The Michigan Vehicle Code (MCL 257.1 et seq.) is hereby adopted by reference. 
(Ord. No. 603, § 2, 11-22-1999; Ord. No. 639, 3-10-2003; Ord. No. 643, 7-14-2003; Ord. No. 648, 9-22-2003; Ord. No. 728, § 1, 5-29-2012) 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt statutes by reference, MCL 42.23.  
Sec. 74-2. - Skateboards. 
(a)  In this section, the term "skateboard" means a single platform mounted on wheels, which is propelled solely by human power and which has no mechanism or other device with which to steer or control the movement or direction of the platform. 
(b)  A person who is on a skateboard or who is riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall not ride, operate or in any manner use the vehicle or device on any publicly owned property, including school and township property, except streets and sidewalks within the township. 
(c)  The restrictions contained in this section shall be posted on signs within the areas affected by this section. 
(d)  A police officer apprehending a person for violating this section may impound the skateboard or other device. In the case of a person who is 18 years of age or older, the device shall be released by the police department if the accused appears at the police department and provides identification. To obtain release of a skateboard or other device, persons under the age of 18 years must appear at the police department with a parent or guardian; the skateboard or other device may be released if its owner provides a letter from a parent or guardian requesting that it be released. 
(e)  A person who violates this section is responsible for a civil infraction. 
(Ord. No. 610, §§ 1—5, 4-1-2000)  
Sec. 74-3. - Uniform traffic code. 
The uniform traffic code for cities, townships and villages as promulgated by the director of the Michigan Department of State Police pursuant to the administrative Procedures Act of 1969, 1969 PA 306, MCL 24.201 to 24.328 and made effective October 30, 2002, and all future amendments and revisions to the uniform traffic code when they are promulgated and effective in this state are incorporated by reference. 
(Ord. No. 635, §§ 1—4, 11-25-2002)  
Secs. 74-4—74-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BICYCLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Bicycles generally, MCL 257.656; authority to regulate bicycle operation and license and register bicycles, MCL 257.606(1)(i). 
 
Sec. 74-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bicycle means a device powered by human power with two or more wheels in tandem, having handlebars for steering and a saddlelike seat. 
Certificate of title means a document issued at the time of bicycle registration which states the name and address of the owner, the serial number, and the license number of the bicycle. 
Dealer means every person engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, exchanging or dealing in bicycles of a type required to be registered under this article and every person who negotiates the purchase, sale, deal or exchange of such bicycles and who has an established place of business for such purposes in the township. 
License means a decalcomanic print displaying an identification number which is securely affixed to a bicycle in a conspicuous place on the seat pole or the handlebar pole of the bicycle. 
Serial number means the number which a manufacturer stamps into the frame of a bicycle unless the number is not a unique number or there is no manufacturer's serial number, in which case the serial number is a number assigned to a bicycle by the police chief and stamped into the frame of the bicycle. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 74-32. - Administration. 
The provisions of this article shall be administrated by the police chief. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.03.01) 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2.  
Sec. 74-33. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Authority of supervisor to make rules and regulations. The township supervisor is hereby empowered, subject to the approval of the township board, to make reasonable and necessary rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this article regarding the use, operation and maintenance of any bicycle. No person shall violate any such rule or regulation. 
(b)  Rules effective with published notice. Public notice of all rules and regulations which are made under this article shall become effective when notice of the rules and regulations shall have been given by publication. 
(c)  Authority to temporarily prohibit riding. If the police chief shall determine that conditions believed to be temporary make bicycle riding on any sidewalk or roadway unduly hazardous to either the bicycle riders or to the public, he is authorized to erect signs on any sidewalk or roadway prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person; and when such signs are in place no person shall disobey them. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-06.03.02, 7-06.03.03)  
Sec. 74-34. - Use of revenues. 
All revenues derived from the registration of bicycles shall be used in financing the provisions of this article and in the promotion of bicycle safety education. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.03.05)  
Sec. 74-35. - Impoundment. 
(a)  Any police officer of the township shall have the power at any time to seize and to take into custody any bicycle found upon the streets, alleys or public places of the township which does not properly display its license and serial number, and anyone found using or operating any such bicycle shall give the police officer his name and address upon request and also a statement as to whether or not such bicycle is registered. 
(b)  Upon such seizure an investigation shall be made to determine whether the bicycle has been properly registered, and if it is found that it is registered, it may be returned to the owner of such bicycle. If the bicycle has not been registered, the owner thereof, upon showing satisfactory proof of ownership, may be permitted to register the bicycle. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall prevent the prosecution of anyone using or operating a bicycle without registration. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-06.06.01—7-06.06.03)  
Sec. 74-36. - Parental responsibility. 
No person being the parent or guardian of any child under 17 years of age shall knowingly permit or authorize such child to violate any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.03.04)  
Sec. 74-37. - Registration and license. 
(a)  Required. No resident of the township shall operate a bicycle upon any street, alley or public place of the township unless the bicycle is registered as provided in this section and properly displays a license and serial number. 
(b)  Application; certificate of title. The application for registration under this article shall be on a form furnished by the police chief. The application shall be in duplicate and shall constitute a certificate of title. One copy of the application shall be given to and retained by the applicant, and the other copy shall be placed on file with the police chief. 
(c)  Condition for issuance. Bicycle certificates of title shall be issued by the police chief or by any designated dealer as provided in this article but only after ascertaining that the bicycle desired to be registered is in good mechanical condition. 
(d)  Duration. A bicycle registration shall be permanent so long as it is owned by the licensee. 
(e)  Fee. The fee for bicycle registration shall be as established by resolution. 
(f)  License. The police chief shall also furnish a license, which must be displayed on the registered bicycle at all times and shall not be used on, or transferred to, any bicycle other than that for which it was issued. 
(g)  Tampering prohibited. No person shall willfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate or alter the serial number, or the license issued under this article. 
(h)  Replacement. Replacement serial number or license shall be issued by the police chief in event the original serial number or license is lost, removed, defaced or destroyed, upon repayment of the initial sum of registration. 
(i)  Issued by selling dealer. All bicycle dealers located within the township shall be required to issue a certificate of title and a license and to record the make and serial number of any bicycle sold by the dealer to a resident of the township. 
(j)  Replaced free. A duplicate certificate of title shall be furnished to the owner at no cost by the police chief in the event that the original certificate of title is lost, defaced, or destroyed. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-06.04.01—7-06.04.04, 7-06.04.07)  
Sec. 74-38. - Reports of sales or transfers of ownership. 
(a)  All sales of bicycles to residents of the township by bicycle dealers located within the township shall be reported semimonthly to the police chief. The reports shall be on forms provided by the police chief which shall include, among other things, the make of the bicycle, the serial number of the bicycle, the license number, and the purchaser's name, address and phone number. 
(b)  Any person who sells or transfers ownership of any registered bicycle shall report the sale or transfer by returning to the police chief the certificate of title issued, together with the name and address of the person to whom such bicycle was sold or transferred. Such report shall be made within five days from the date of the sale or transfer. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the purchaser or transferee to apply for transfer of registration within seven days after the sale or transfer. The transfer of registration shall be made upon the condition that the bicycle is in good mechanical condition. The charge for a transfer of title shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1986, §§ 7-06.04.05, 7-06.04.06)  
Sec. 74-39. - Obey traffic regulations. 
No person riding a bicycle shall fail to obey the instructions of the traffic regulations of this township applicable to the driver of a vehicle: 
(1)  Except as to special provisions contained in this article; 
(2)  Except as to those provisions of the traffic regulations which by their nature can have no application. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.01(A)) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 257.657.  
Sec. 74-40. - Reasonable speed. 
No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.04(C))  
Sec. 74-41. - Obey direction of authorized turn signs. 
Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or "U" turns are permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the direction or any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle to make any such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations applicable to pedestrians. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.01(C))  
Sec. 74-42. - Emerging onto sidewalk or roadway. 
The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop the bicycle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching such roadway. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.03)  
Sec. 74-43. - Riding on sidewalks. 
(a)  Persons operating bicycles upon a sidewalk shall ride in single file. 
(b)  No person shall ride a bicycle upon a sidewalk when to do so interferes in any way with convenience or safety of pedestrians. 
(c)  No person riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall fail to yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian. 
(d)  Persons riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk shall give audible signal before overtaking and passing or before meeting such pedestrian. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.02) 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58. 
State Law reference— Bicycles on sidewalks, MCL 257.660.  
Sec. 74-44. - Parking. 
No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or against a building or at the curb, in such a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic. 
(Code 1986, § 7-06.05.05) 

Chapter 78 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2; buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; public utility maintenance easements, § 34-109; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; design standards of adequate water or sewage disposal, § 62-78; required improvements of sanitary sewer lines in subdivisions, § 62-100; telecommunications, ch. 70. 
State Law reference— Township water supply and sewage disposal services and facilities, MCL 41.331 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 78-1. - Stormwater drains. 
(a)  Whenever used in this section, except otherwise indicated by the context: 
Readiness-to-serve charge means the amount charged to each premises that received a deferred assessment when it is part of a special assessment district for the improvement of a stormwater drain. 
Stormwater management plan means the current plan regarding stormwater management within the township on file with the director of community development. 
(b)  Any parcel of real estate in the township which is located within the boundaries of a special assessment district created to provide for the improvement of a stormwater drain shall be limited in the amount of stormwater which may be discharged from the premises to the capacity provided, upon which the special assessment was determined. If there is additional stormwater drain capacity available in the special assessment district in which the parcel is located, the property owner may, at the option of the township, purchase from the township additional capacity. Before any improvements are made, a stormwater drain plan shall be approved by the township engineer in accordance with the requirements of the township's stormwater management plan. 
(c)  Where improvements are to be made in the areas of the township which are not located in a special assessment district created to provide for the improvement of a stormwater drain, the owner or developer shall comply with the requirements of the township's stormwater management plan. 
(d)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, it will be necessary that a grading survey, prepared or approved by a registered civil engineer or land survey be submitted to the township building department attesting to the fact that the site is graded in accordance with the drainage pattern approved at the time of issuance of the building or land use permit. 
(e)  If a parcel received a deferred assessment when the assessments were originally spread in a special assessment district for improving a stormwater drain then, at such time as the owner seeks a permit to improve the parcel or at such time as the owner materially alters the imperviousness of the ground, the owner shall pay to the township a readiness-to-serve charge. If a parcel which received a deferred assessment is split into parcels less than ten acres in size, in that event, the property owner shall at that time pay the readiness-to-serve charge provided in this section. The readiness-to-serve charge shall be determined by the amount of the deferred assessment as shown on the assessment roll of the special assessment district in which the property is located plus interest of payment at the same rate as provided for in the special assessment district for unpaid assessments. 
(f)  No permit shall be issued by the township until readiness-to-serve charge is paid. No site plan shall be approved or building or any other permit issued unless the owner has complied with all requirements of the township's stormwater management plan, as determined by the township engineer. 
(Ord. No. 583, § 6-04.08, 6-15-1998)  
Secs. 78-2—78-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-31. - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
System means the township water supply and distribution system. 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-32. - Supervision and control. 
The operation, maintenance and management of the system shall be under the immediate supervision and control of the township board or of such officer or board as shall be designated or created by the township board and subject to its control. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.01)  
Sec. 78-33. - Fiscal year. 
The system shall be operated upon the basis of a fiscal year beginning on April 1 of each year and ending on March 31 of the following year. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.12)  
Sec. 78-34. - Connections and extensions. 
(a)  Connections by authorized representative. Water connections to the system water mains shall be installed only by the authorized representative of the township board. 
(b)  Inspection prior to covering. No water main, water connection or water extension shall be covered until inspected and approved by the authorized representative of the township board, who shall be notified when such construction is ready for inspection. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.02(A), (B))  
Sec. 78-35. - Water service turn on or shut off. 
No person, other than the authorized representative of the township board, shall turn on or shut off water service, except that a licensed plumber may turn on a water service for testing his work (then it must be immediately turned off). 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.02(C))  
Sec. 78-36. - Cross connections prohibited. 
No person shall make or permit to be made any cross connection whatsoever between the water system, or any extension thereof or connection therewith, and any other water system or supply of water, whether such other system or supply be public or private and whether any such cross connection be in or upon public or private property. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.02(D))  
Sec. 78-37. - Water meters. 
(a)  Requirement established. Except as otherwise provided in this article, water to be furnished by the system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the township. 
(b)  Outdoor registers. All individual meters shall be equipped with an outdoor register, such register to be installed by the township and charges therefor will be paid for and borne by the water users and customers. 
(c)  Tampering prohibited. No person other than an authorized employee or representative of the township shall break or injure the seal on or change the location of, alter or interfere in any way with any meter that is the property of or has been furnished by the township. 
(d)  Faulty metering. If a meter shall fail to register properly, the township supervisor is empowered to estimate the quantity of water used on the basis of former consumption and bill accordingly. 
(e)  Inspection and reading. No person shall refuse to admit to premises owned or occupied by him or hinder any authorized agent of the township entering such premises for the purpose of reading a water meter or inspecting a water meter or any piping in connection with the water distribution system. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.03)  
Sec. 78-38. - Water hydrants. 
(a)  Unauthorized use. No person other than an authorized employee of the township shall break, injure, or turn on or turn off, or use or interfere in any way with any water hydrant. 
(b)  Obstructions prohibited. No person shall place any building material or any other obstruction, nor shall any person responsible for such material or obstruction, nor any person owning property immediately adjoining a fire hydrant, shall permit such material or obstruction within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or fire plug. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.06.04) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, ch. 30.  
Sec. 78-39. - Installation, maintenance and repair costs. 
(a)  Meters, connections and extensions. Each water customer of the system shall pay the costs of such water meter or meters, water connections, water extensions, including the installation, maintenance and repair thereof. 
(b)  Water main connections. 
(1)  Service fee. The owner of each premises in the township abutting a street or easement in which a water main is located, at such time as a connection is made, shall pay a service fee to the township in an amount determined by multiplying the frontage of the parcel times the rate per foot as established by resolution of the township board, except those parcels in platted subdivisions where water mains were paid for by the developer and except those parcels which have been assessed for a water main improvement; provided any structure farther than 200 feet from the front property line being serviced by the connection shall pay an additional service fee in such amount as determined by the township manager to be reasonable under the circumstances there existing. Such costs shall be no more than the estimated costs to be incurred by the township in making the connection. 
(2)  Hookup fees. The owners of all premises connecting to a water main shall pay a service fee and also a connection fee to the township in amounts to be determined from time to time by resolution of the township board for a water main. 
(3)  Payment. The service and connection fees set forth in this section for each lot or parcel must be paid prior to issuance of any building permits and prior to providing the water connection to a premises that is not currently served. 
(4)  Water main extensions not required. The township shall not be required or obligated to extend any water mains within the township. 
(c)  Damaged meters or hydrants. Whenever a water meter or a water hydrant is injured because of any act or negligence on the part of the owner or occupant of the premises where such meter is installed or hydrant is located, the expense to the township caused thereby shall be charged to and collected from such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.07)  
Sec. 78-40. - Water main deferred assessments; readiness-to-serve charge. 
(a)  The township board may defer a portion of the sum to be assessed as provided in section 9a of Public Act No. 188 of 1954 (MCL 41.729a) if a parcel to be assessed is ten acres or more or if a parcel owner can demonstrate additional facts showing the proposed assessments would constitute a hardship. 
(b)  Such deferred assessment shall be a lien upon the property receiving the assessment upon recording of a notice of deferred assessment. Such notice of deferred assessment shall be recorded prior to the date the assessments can be paid without interest. 
(c)  If a parcel received a deferred assessment when the assessments were originally spread in a special assessment district created for improving water mains then, at such time as the owner seeks a permit to improve the parcel, the owner shall pay the township a readiness-to-serve charge. If a parcel which received a deferred assessment is split into parcels less than ten acres in size, in that event the property owner shall at that time pay the readiness-to-serve charge provided in this section. The readiness-to-serve charge shall be determined by the amount of the deferred assessment as shown on the assessment roll of the special assessment district in which the property is located plus interest until paid at the same rate as provided for in the special assessment district for unpaid assessments; provided, interest shall not accrue on unpaid assessments for more than 15 years. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall be enforceable through the bringing of appropriate action for injunction, mandamus, or otherwise, in any court having jurisdiction. 
(e)  To improve parcel or alter ground. Parcels, which received a deferred assessment when the assessments were originally spread in special assessment districts for the Hospital Road water main on October 22, 1979, and where the owner of a parcel consents in writing, shall pay to the township a readiness-to-serve charge on or before November 1, 2003. 
(f)  The readiness-to-serve charge for those parcels set forth in subsection (e) shall be determined by the amount of the deferred assessment as shown on the assessment roll of the special assessment district in which the property is located. However, the assessment shall not include interest at the same rate as provided for in the special assessment district for unpaid assessments after November 1, 2003. Thereafter, the readiness to serve charge, excluding any interest, may be paid in full at any time prior to November 1, 2003. Any readiness-to-serve charge not paid, will be divided by November 1, 2003 into ten equal annual installments beginning December 1, 2003 and the same amount on the same day of the same month each year thereafter until fully paid. Said installments shall bear interest from November 1, 2003 at the rate of six percent per annum. Such readiness-to-serve charge, or any installments, not paid when due shall be considered delinquent and shall constitute a lien upon the respective parcel and shall be collected in the same manner as delinquent taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.08; Ord. No. 647, 9-8-2003)  
Secs. 78-41—78-55. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - USER RATES AND CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Rates, MCL 141.121. 
 
Sec. 78-56. - Meter charges per quarter. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, water to be furnished by the system to each premises shall be measured by a meter installed and controlled by the township. Charges for water service to each premises within the water system connected with the water supply system, for each quarterly (three-month) period, shall be as established by resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.01)  
Sec. 78-57. - Consumption charge per quarter. 
In addition to the quarterly meter charge for use of water, there shall be a quarterly consumption charge in accordance with the schedule established by resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.02; Ord. No. 566, § 6-02.09.02, 1-27-1997)  
Sec. 78-58. - Electrical power cost for pumping. 
There shall be an additional charge in cents per 1,000 gallons, based upon the township's costs for the purchase of electrical power for pumping purposes as determined by the most recent Consumers Power Company billing. This charge will be computed by multiplying the township's cost for electrical power, in cents per kilowatt-hour, times 4.354. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.03)  
Sec. 78-59. - Minimum quarterly charge. 
The minimum quarterly water charge shall be the meter charge. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.04)  
Sec. 78-60. - Private fire line connection charges. 
The minimum charge for private fire line connections shall be as established by resolution. The township board reserves the right to meter any private fire line. The charge for metered fire lines shall be the quarterly meter charge plus the quarterly connection charge or the quarterly meter charge plus the quarterly consumption charge, whichever is the largest. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.05)  
Sec. 78-61. - Premises outside water system. 
Charges for water service to premises outside the water district shall be fixed by the township board but shall be not less than those for services within the district. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.06)  
Sec. 78-62. - Rate revisions authorized. 
The rates established are estimated to be sufficient to provide for the payment of the expenses of administration and operation of the system and such expenses for the maintenance thereof as may be necessary to preserve the system in good repair and working order; to provide for the payment of the interest upon and the principal of all bonds payable therefrom, as and when the bonds shall become due and payable, and for the creation of reserves for the payment of principal and interest as required in this article; and to provide for such other expenditures and funds for the system as are required by this article. Rates shall be fixed and revised from time to time by the township board so as to produce the foregoing amounts, and the township covenants and agrees to maintain at all times such rates for services furnished by the system as shall be sufficient to provide for the foregoing. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.11)  
Sec. 78-63. - Billing frequency. 
Charges for services furnished by the water system shall be billed and collected quarterly or as often as shall be determined by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.07(A))  
Sec. 78-64. - Due date. 
Water charges shall become due at such time not exceeding 20 days from date of billing which shall be within a reasonable time after the reading of the meter. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.07(B))  
Sec. 78-65. - Nonpayment penalty. 
If water charges are not paid on or before such due date, then a penalty of five percent shall be added thereto for any late payment in excess of one occurring within two years. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.07(C))  
Sec. 78-66. - Discontinuance of service. 
If the charges for any such services furnished to any premises shall not be paid within 30 days after the due date thereof, then all services furnished by the system to such premises shall be discontinued. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.07(D))  
Sec. 78-67. - Shutoff and turn-on charges. 
Water services discontinued for nonpayment of bills shall not be restored until all sums then due and owing, including penalties, shall be paid, plus a shutoff charge and a turnon charge in the amount established by resolution. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.07(E); Ord. No. 566, § 6-02.09.07, 1-27-1997)  
Sec. 78-68. - Other collection remedies. 
(a)  Lien on property. Charges for services furnished by the system to any premises shall be a lien thereon. 
(b)  Charges added to tax roll. On September 1 of each year, the person or agency charged with the management of the system shall certify any such charges which have been delinquent six months or more to the supervisor who shall enter the charges upon the next tax roll against the premises to which such services shall have been rendered, and such charges shall be collected and the lien shall be enforced in the same manner as provided in respect to taxes assessed upon such roll. 
(c)  Tenants excluded. 
(1)  Filing of notice with lease. Provided, that when a tenant is responsible for payment of any such charge against such premises, and the township board is so notified in writing, with a copy of the lease of the affected premises (if there is one) attached, then no such charge shall become a lien against such premises from and after the date of such notice. 
(2)  Security cash deposit. However, in the event of the filing of such notice, no further service shall be rendered by the system to such premises until a cash deposit equal to three times the average quarterly (three-month) charge to such premises shall have been made as security for the payment of charges thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 6-02.09.08) 
State Law reference— Lien for charges, MCL 141.121(3), 123.161 et seq.  
Secs. 78-69—78-85. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - WATER EMERGENCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Lien for charges, MCL 141.121(3), 123.161 et seq. 
 
Sec. 78-86. - Determination of water emergency. 
When the township board and/or the township supervisor shall determine that the consumption of water by the township has or is about to equal or exceed the total supply available to the township, they shall declare that a critical water consumption period exists and place in effect the restrictions set forth of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.02)  
Sec. 78-87. - Declaration of water emergency. 
At such time as the township board and/or the township supervisor shall determine that water consumption within the township has or is about to equal or exceed the supply available to the township, they shall declare that a water emergency exists. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.03)  
Sec. 78-88. - Notice of water emergency. 
When the township board and/or the township supervisor shall have declared that a water emergency exists as provided in section 78-87, notice thereof shall be given by releasing the notice to a newspaper of general circulation in the township and to all radio and television stations maintaining offices or studios within the township or within the City of Saginaw. Such notice shall advise of the time of commencement of such emergency and that the emergency will continue until notice of termination thereof is given by the township board through the same media. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.04)  
Sec. 78-89. - Uses prohibited. 
When the township board and/or the township supervisor shall have declared that a water emergency exists as provided in section 78-87, the use and withdrawal of water by any person from the township water distribution system for any of the following purposes is hereby prohibited: 
(1)  Watering of yards. The sprinkling, watering or irrigation of shrubbery, trees, lawns, grass, ground covers, plants, vines, gardens, vegetables, flowers, or any other vegetation. 
(2)  Cleaning outdoor surfaces. The washing of sidewalks, driveways, filling station aprons, porches and other services. 
(3)  Swimming pools. Swimming and wading pools not employing a filter and recirculating system. 
(4)  Escape through defective plumbing. The escape of water through defective plumbing, which shall mean the knowing permission for defective plumbing to remain out of repair. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.05)  
Sec. 78-90. - Termination of water emergency. 
When the township board and/or the township supervisor shall determine that the conditions which caused the declaration of the emergency under section 78-87 no longer exists, they shall so declare and give notice of such determination as provided in section 78-88. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.06)  
Sec. 78-91. - Violations. 
Any person who shall knowingly, during any such water emergency, use or withdraw water from the township water-distribution system for any of the purposes prohibited in section 78-89, shall be responsible for a civil infraction and shall in addition, if he refuses to discontinue such violation, be subject to the discontinuance of water service during the continuance of such emergency. 
(Code 1986, § 8-03.07)  
Secs. 78-92—78-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 78-121. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building sewer means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the sewer connection, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Connection means the sewer connection from the public sewer in the street or easement to the property line. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of produce. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid and/or solid waste from industrial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, river, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, or group. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
Readiness-to-serve charge means the amount charged to each premises that received a deferred assessment when it is part of a special assessment district for the improvement of a storm drain. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted. 
Service fee means the amounts as determined by subsections 78-126(a) and (b). 
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such groundwaters as may be present. 
Sewage treatment plant means any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
Sewage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean a sewer which carries stormwaters and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes. 
Superintendent means the superintendent of the sewage works or in each instance the authorized deputy, agent, or representative. 
Unit means that quantity of sanitary sewage ordinarily arising from a residential building occupied by a single family. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-122. - Superintendent. 
(a)  The township board shall appoint a sewage works superintendent who shall under the direction of the township board have charge of the operation and maintenance of the sewage works of the township and shall direct and control all other employees of the sewage works system. 
(b)  The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the township bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of meter reading, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The compensation of such employees including the superintendent, shall be fixed, determined, and may be changed from time to time by the township board. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.04)  
Sec. 78-123. - Violation of article. 
(a)  Any person found to be violating any provision of this article except section 78-1, subsection 78-124(e), subsections 78-126(a) through (e) and section 78-125, shall be served by the township with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notices, permanently cease all violations. 
(b)  Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be responsible for a civil infraction. 
(c)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article covered by subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall become liable to the township for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the township by reason of such violation. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.11)  
Sec. 78-124. - Unlawful disposal; prohibited discharges; connection to sewer required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the township, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or watercourse within the township, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the township, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes, or other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this article. 
(c)  The owner of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the township and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located, or may in the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the township, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within six months after date of official notice to do so. 
(d)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property not now served by a public sanitary sewer, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this article, and any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, and similar private sewage disposal facilities thereon located shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(e)  The connection to the sewer shall be completed within six months after the date of the occurrence of the last of the following events: 
(1)  Availability of the public sanitary sewage collection facility; 
(2)  Improvement of the property so as to become property from which sanitary sewage emanates; 
(3)  April 1, 1987. 
(f)  In the event of failure to connect to the public sanitary sewage collection facility as above provided, and if such failure to connect shall continue for an additional 90 days after notice has been sent by the township by first class mail or posted on the property stating that the structure shall be connected and giving the approximate location of the public sanitary sewer system which is available for connection of the structure involved and of the requirements and the enforcement provisions of this section and section 78-126, the township may bring an action for a mandatory injunction or order in the district or circuit court in the county to compel the owner to connect to the available sanitary sewer system forthwith. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-04.03, 6-04.10)  
Sec. 78-125. - Destruction of sewage works facilities prohibited. 
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the township's sewage works. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.09.01)  
Sec. 78-126. - Service and connection fees. 
(a)  Residential service fees. Each residence in the township abutting or within 300 feet of a street or easement in which a sanitary sewer or combined sewer is installed shall be connected to such sewer and at the time of connection shall pay a service fee to the township in an amount determined by applying the number of units as derived from subsection (f) of this section to the amount of the unit assessment as determined from time to time by resolution of the township board. 
(b)  Nonresidential service fee. Each business, or commercial structure other than a single-family residence, from which sanitary sewage is generated and which abuts a street or easement in which a sanitary sewer or combined sewer is installed, shall connect to such sewer. At the time of original connection, or expansions, or change of existing use, a service fee shall be paid to the township in an amount determined by applying the number of units, as derived from subsection (f) of this section to the amount of the unit assessment. In cases of changes of existing use, the calculated service fee shall be reduced by the amount of service fee paid on previous uses after April 1, 1987. In cases of expansion of a use existing prior to April 1, 1987, the service fee shall be based on the expansion only. Where two or more categories of business are served by one connection, the total service fee shall be the sum of the individual service fees calculated for all such categories. 
(c)  Connection fee. All premises connecting to a sanitary sewer or combined sewer shall pay a service fee to the township in amounts to be determined from time to time by resolution of the township board. 
(d)  Credits cancelled. All existing credits, except those provided for by legal and binding agreements entered into by the township board, are hereby cancelled as of April 1, 1987, unless a building permit is applied for before April 1, 1987, and construction begins prior to July 1, 1987. 
(e)  Cash prepayments. All parcels having paid previous service and connection fees prior to April 1, 1987, shall be charged for the service fees under the provisions of this article, less the amount of cash prepayments. 
(f)  Unit schedule. 
(1)  Schedule for determining number of units. 
Land Use 	Unit Dwelling 
Residential 	1.00 per dwelling unit 
Commercial 	0.25 per 1,000 square feet gross building area 
Eating and drinking establishments 	2.25 per 1,000 square feet gross building area 
Car wash (automatic) 	18.50 per wash line 
Car wash (self-serve) 	4.50 per stall 
Motel 	0.27 per unit 
Warehouses 	0.10 per 1,000 square feet gross building area 
Industrial (exclusive of industrial waste) 	0.50 per 1,000 square feet gross building area 
Laundromat 	0.50 per washer 
Retirement village (including eating and laundry facilities) 	1.00 per dwelling unit 
 
(2)  Special additional charge. In addition to the above unit schedule, there shall be added a charge of $4,625.00. Pursuant to Ordinance No. 430 interest on this amount accrues at eight percent per annum. A record owner of any parcel of land on Fashion Square Boulevard between McCarty Road and Vogue Commercial Park connecting to the sewer system after September 1, 2004 and prior to September 1, 2006 and, who applies in writing, shall have all accrued interest on the connection fee capped as of August 31, 1996. For parcels connecting on or after September 1, 2006 interest at six percent per annum shall be charged from that date on the capped amount. 
(3)  Minimum charge; special situations. The minimum charge shall be one unit. Special situations or categories not specifically covered in this unit schedule shall be determined by the township manager in consultation with the director of community development, director of public services, and the township engineer. 
(Code 1986, §§ 6-04.05, 6-04.0A; Ord. No. 671, 9-13-2004)  
Secs. 78-127—78-145. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS 
 
Sec. 78-146. - Connection permit. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the superintendent. No charge will be made for this permit. 
(b)  Applications for service connections to the sanitary sewer system of the township shall be made in writing on forms furnished by the township. 
(c)  The required service fee for each lot or parcel must be paid prior to the issuance of any building or sewer connection permits. 
(d)  The superintendent shall be notified at least 24 hours in advance of the installation of a sewer connection from the public sewer to the property line so that such connection may be properly inspected and approved. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.01)  
Sec. 78-147. - Installation responsibility. 
If a connection does not exist, it is the responsibility of the property owner to construct or to provide for the construction of such connection according to the requirements and specifications of the township. That portion of the sewer connection from the property line to the building sewer shall be installed by the applicant at his own expense, and this portion of the sewer connection shall not be backfilled until inspected and approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.02)  
Sec. 78-148. - Connection specifications. 
A separate and independent sewer connection shall be provided for every building. Except where one building stands at the rear of another or on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the sewer connection from the front building may be extended to the rear building. Old sewer connections may be used in connection with existing or new buildings only when they are found, upon examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.03)  
Sec. 78-149. - Excavations. 
All excavations required for the installation of sewer connections shall be in open cut unless otherwise approved by the superintendent. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.04)  
Sec. 78-150. - Connection into public sanitary sewer. 
(a)  Existing opening. The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewers shall be made at a Wye or Tee opening provided for that purpose if such opening is available at a suitable location. 
(b)  New opening. Connections to the sanitary sewer at places other than at a Wye or Tee opening, shall be made under the direct supervision of the superintendent in a manner to provide a water tight joint with no obstructions in the public sanitary sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.05)  
Sec. 78-151. - Building sewers. 
(a)  Materials. The sewer connections from the sanitary sewer in the street or easement to within five feet of the inside wall of any house or building shall consist of vitrified clay sewer pipe conforming to ASTM Specifications for Clay Sewer Pipe Designation C-13 or PVC pipe as approved by the Michigan Plumbing Code, Class 2400 and the latest revisions thereof. 
(b)  Size and slope. The size and slope of the sewer connection shall be subject to the approval of the superintendent, but in no event shall the diameter from the public sewer to the property line be less than six inches. From the property line to the sewer outlet at the building the size may be reduced to four inches, otherwise the size shall be six inches. The slope of such six-inch pipe shall be not less than one-eighth inch per foot, unless otherwise permitted. 
(c)  Depth and location. Whenever possible the sewer connection shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No sewer connection shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth to invert shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost and not less than five feet below the grade line at the house. The sewer connection shall be laid at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(d)  Low drains. In all buildings in which any building sewer is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the sewer connection. 
(e)  Shared trench with water service. Sewer connections may be laid in the same trench with a water service only when the water service is at least one foot above and 1½ feet horizontally from the sewer connection and both places on undisturbed earth. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.06)  
Sec. 78-152. - Joints. 
Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Joints on vitrified clay sewer pipe shall conform to standard specifications of ASTM Designation: C-425-58T, Type I or Type III or the latest revisions thereof. Joints on PVC pipe shall be as specified by the pipe manufacturer. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.07)  
Sec. 78-153. - Pipe laying and backfilling. 
Pipe shall be laid and backfilled in accordance with the best construction practice providing uniform bearing throughout the entire length of the pipe. No backfill shall be placed until the pipe in place has been inspected and approved by the superintendent. The backfill shall be placed by hand shovels and thoroughly tamped under on both sides of the pipe to the level of the top of the pipe. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.08)  
Secs. 78-154—78-170. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL DISCHARGE RESTRICTIONS 
 
Sec. 78-171. - Unpolluted drainage. 
(a)  Roof water. 
(1)  In all cases where the building is equipped with eaves troughs or other means for the collection of roof water, the downspouts and/or roof water conductor pipes shall be discharged on the ground or paved surface at a distance of at least 36 inches from the building wall, unless otherwise approved by the building official. 
(2)  The grade line at the building wall in all cases shall be such that the slope is away from the wall at the rate of at least one-quarter inch per foot. In cases where settlement of the ground has occurred at the building wall, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner to add fill to correct the condition to conform with the slope requirement of this subsection. 
(b)  Window well drainage. There shall be no direct connection from the window wells to the foundation drain. 
(c)  Basement perimeter tile drainage. Basement perimeter tile, or footing drains shall not be connected to sanitary sewers unless the township manager or his designee determines that it is not feasible to discharge such stormwater or clear water into an open ditch and if an enclosed storm drainage system is not available. 
(d)  Applicability of drainage requirements. The requirements of this section shall apply to all sanitary sewers, combined sewers and storm sewers in the township. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.07.01)  
Sec. 78-172. - Clear water or stormwater drain connections. 
(a)  Surface drains, groundwater drains, and foundation footing drains shall be connected whenever possible to an enclosed storm sewer and shall not be connected to a building sewer which discharges into a sanitary sewer or private wastewater treatment plant, except that clear water or stormwater drains that have been connected to sanitary sewers and approved by the township prior to July 4, 1980, may continue to be connected without penalty, until such time as an enclosed stormwater sewer is installed. All clear water or stormwater hookups not specifically prohibited in other Code provisions are and will be permitted in the Weiss and Center Road Drainage Districts. 
(b)  Footing drains that have been terminating at and emptying onto the surface or into drainage ditches shall be connected to an enclosed stormwater drainage system or connections thereto whenever such systems or connections are available. 
(c)  If unapproved stormwater or clear water is being discharged into a sanitary sewer, the township shall give the offending property owner 30 days notice to disconnect. Failure to disconnect after such notice shall authorize the township to cause disconnection and assessment of the costs of such disconnection against the property involved. The township may, in the alternative, institute action for violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.06.02)  
Sec. 78-173. - Cooling or unpolluted process water. 
Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may and/or shall be discharged to a storm sewer or natural outlet, as directed by the superintendent. 
(Code 1986, § 6-04.07.03)  
Secs. 78-174—78-190. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - INDUSTRIAL DISCHARGES 
 
Sec. 78-191. - Definitions. 
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this division and related regulations shall be as follows: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, PL 92-500 (33 USC 1251 et seq.), which is on file in the office of the director. 
Authorized representative of industrial user means: 
(1)  In the case of a corporation, a president, secretary, treasurer or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation, or the principal manager of one or more manufacturing, production or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures of more than $25,000,000.00, in second-quarter 1980 dollars, if the authority to sign the documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures; 
(2)  In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or proprietor; 
(3)  In the case of a limited liability company, a member; and 
(4)  An authorized representative of the individual designated above if: 
a.  Such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the discharge into the POTW originates; 
b.  The authorization is in writing; and 
c.  The written authorization is submitted to the POTW. 
Baseline monitoring report means the initial report provided by the user when making out an application for an industrial waste sewer user permit, signed by the person in charge of the entire facility or an assigned subordinate of such person, and which shall comply with the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(7) as a minimum. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees Celsius expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge of soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the sewer extension beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
Bypass means the intentional diversion of wastewater from any portion of a user's treatment facility, needed for noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
Categorical standards and categorical pretreatment standards mean and refer to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or a pretreatment standard as promulgated under 40 CFR 403 under authority of the act, which apply to a specific category of users. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter with a strong chemical oxidant under standard laboratory procedure and expressed in milligrams per liter. 
Commencement of construction means the owner or operator has begun, or caused to begin: 
(1)  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; 
(2)  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement of new construction; or 
(3)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. 
Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Compatible pollutants means those pollutants that the wastewater treatment plant has been designed for specific removal of and BOD, TSS, fecal coliform bacteria, total phosphorous and any other constituent that may be determined effectively treatable and added as such to the NPDES permit in the future. 
Compliance monitoring report means the discharge report submitted in June and December of each year, or other times as deemed necessary or appropriate by the director, as noted in section 78-194(k)(5). 
Corporate officer means the person being a president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation, or a person given significant policies or decision-making power for the corporation, or a general partner of a partnership, or any proprietor or owner. 
Director means the director of public services for the township, or the authorized deputy, agent or representative of such person. 
Discharger, industrial discharger means any nonresidential user who discharges an effluent, other than sanitary sewage, into a POTW by means of pipes, conduits, pumping stations, force mains, constructed drainage ditches, surface water intercepting ditches, intercepting ditches and all constructed devices and appliances appurtenant thereto. 
Dissolved solids means the solids in wastewater, other than suspended solids. 
Domestic sewer user means a person in any residence in the township or any service area provided sewage treatment services by the township. 
Domestic wastes means normal wastes from residential living units resulting from day-to-day activities, such as, but not limited to, dishwater, laundry water, bath water, sink water, shower water, toilet water and ground garbage, but shall not include incompatible pollutants. 
Excessive discharge means a discharge of wastes in such magnitude that, in the judgment of the director, it will cause damage to any facility, will be harmful to the sewage treatment process, cannot be removed in the sewage treatment plant to the degree required to meet the act, can otherwise endanger life, limb or public property, and/or can constitute a public nuisance. 
Existing site construction means a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure or facility, or meet the definition of the term "new construction," but does alter, replace or add to an existing process or production equipment. 
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking or serving of food, from the handling, storage and sale of produce or from the canning or packaging of food. Garbage is composed largely of putrescible organic matter and its natural or added moisture content. 
Incompatible pollutant means any pollutant which is not defined in this section as a compatible pollutant. 
Industrial sewer user permit means a sewer user permit required of any nondomestic sewer user determined to need a permit. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid, solid or gaseous wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, food processing, laboratories, trades or businesses, as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
Industry means an establishment with facilities for industrial manufacturing processes, food processing, laboratories, trades or businesses. 
Manager means the township manager, or the authorized deputy, agent or representative of such person. 
May is permissive. See Shall. 
Milligrams per liter (mg/l) means measured concentrations of substances present, and is considered equal to parts per million. 
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit (NPDES permit) means the permit issued to the township by the state department of environmental quality. 
Natural outlet means any outlet into a watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or subsurface water. 
New construction means: 
(1)  A building, structure, facility or installation that is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  A building, structure, facility or installation that totally replaces process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The wastewater generating processes of a building, structure, facility or installation that are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of the proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Clean Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of subsection (1)b. or (1)c. of this definition, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this definition has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work, including clearing, excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities, which is necessary for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
Nondomestic sewer user means any nonresidential sewer user. 
Operational upset means any disruption to the treatment plant process caused by any materials alone or in combination with other materials. 
Pass through means a discharge from the treatment plant into waters of the state in quantities or concentrations that cause the plant to violate this division or its NPDES permit. 
Person means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, group, trust, governmental authority or other legal entity. 
pH means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions in moles per liter of solution. 
Pollutant means any substance discharged into a POTW or its collection system, listed in section 78-206. 
POTW means publicly owned treatment works and shall include the entire gravity collection system, pump stations and force mains in addition to an actual sewage treatment plant. 
Properly shredded garbage means garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, if any, and which is controlled by public authority. 
Receiving waters means any watercourse, river, pond, ditch, lake, aquifer or other body of surface or subsurface water receiving discharge of sewage. 
Sanitary sewage means domestic wastes from residences and domestic-type wastes from business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and all other sources, and shall also include groundwater seepage into the sanitary sewer pipe. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and subsurface waters are not intentionally admitted. 
Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes the facilities to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Such term does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
Sewage means a combination of water and water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial establishments and any other sources, together with such subsurface water, surface water and stormwater as may be present. 
Sewer means a pipe or conduit for carrying stormwaters and/or wastewaters. 
Sewer connection means the part of the sewerage system connected to and extending from the sewer main to the lot line of abutting property or extended to that distance from the sewer main as considered necessary by the director. 
Sewer extension means the part of the sewerage system extending from the sewer connection onto the premises served. 
Sewer main means the part of the sewerage system intended to serve one or more sewer connections, catchbasins, inlets or other permitted connections or conduits. 
Sewerage system means all properties, structures, manholes, catchbasins, inlets, pipes, equipment and conduits for the purpose of collecting, treating, testing and dispensing of domestic wastewater and/or industrial waters or other wastewaters, as existing, added to, expanded or improved. 
Shall is mandatory. See May. 
Shall discharge means discharging, causing or allowing to be discharged, either directly or indirectly. 
Significant industrial user means any industrial user subject to categorical standards or a noncategorical discharger to the sewerage system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per day; or contributes five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW; or has any toxic materials in the EPA priority pollutant list; or has any materials on the site listed in the MDEQ critical materials register; or has on the site any materials in the MDEQ land application unit test list for land application of sludge; or is designated as such by the township on a basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement; or has any material on the site that is found by the township, MDEQ or EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with wastes from other contributing users on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of the sludge, the treatment plant effluent quality, the receiving water quality or air emissions generated by the sewerage system. 
Sludge contamination means any material deposited in the sludge that will, by itself or with other materials, render the sludge unusable for land application or landfilling and/or violate the NPDES permit. 
Slug loading means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including, but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) means a classification based on the most current publication of the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Office of Management and Budget of the United States of America. 
Standard Methods means the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by the American Public Health Association, the American Waterworks Association and the Water Pollution Control Federation, which is available for review at the POTW. 
State means the State of Michigan, its departments and offices. 
Storm sewer and storm drain mean any drain or sewer, either natural or artificial, which is expressly intended for the conveyance of stormwater and uncontaminated water. 
Stormwater means all rainfall runoff, all other surface water and all subsurface water, seeping, percolating or flowing through the soil. 
Total phosphorous means any phosphorous that is bound up in any organic or inorganic compound. 
Total suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering and are referred to as nonfilterable residue in the laboratory test prescribed in the Standard Methods. 
Township means the Saginaw Charter Township. 
Toxic substance means any pollutant defined by the EPA and any material or substance which alone or with other materials or substances can cause sickness or illness in animal or fish life, cause operational upset and shall include petroleum products. 
Treatment plant means the Saginaw Charter Township Southwest Wastewater Treatment Plant and all other structures or devices under the control and/or ownership of the township and used for controlling and/or treating sewage. 
Uncontaminated water means any water that has been taken in and used by a person and discharged without chemical change and meets the same physical requirements as exhibited before use. 
Upset means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
User means any person that discharges sewage, wastewater, wastes or uncontaminated water into the sewerage system. 
Wastes means substances in liquid, solid or gaseous form that is added to discharge water, or otherwise placed, dumped or allowed into the sewerage system by any person. 
Wastewater means combined sewage, together with any water that has been used and degraded or altered physically and/or chemically by any commercial, industrial or private use and discharged as an unwanted substance. 
Wastewater treatment plant means a publicly owned treatment works. 
Watercourse means a channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2.02, 6-10-2002) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2.  
Sec. 78-192. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the following meanings: 
BOD 	— 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CFR 	— 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	— 	Chemical oxygen demand 
CSO 	— 	Combined sewer overflow 
EPA 	— 	Environmental Protection Agency 
l 	— 	Liter 
LEL 	— 	Lower explosive limit 
MDEQ 	— 	Michigan Department of Environmental Quality 
MDNR 	— 	Michigan Department of Natural Resources 
mg 	— 	Milligrams 
mg/l 	— 	Milligrams per liter 
NPDES 	— 	National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW 	— 	Publicly owned treatment works (e.g., treatment plant as defined in section 78-191) 
RCRA 	— 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	— 	Standard Industrial Classification 
SWDA 	— 	Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901 et seq. 
TSS 	— 	Total suspended solids 
USC 	— 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 631, § 2.01, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-193. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and authority. The purpose of this division is the protection of the public health, safety and welfare by abating and preventing pollution through the regulation and control of the quantity and quality of industrial, commercial and other wastes admitted or discharged into the wastewater collection and treatment systems of the township and to enable the township to comply with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations, including, among others, the Federal Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and the Environmental Protection Agency general pretreatment regulations, 40 CFR 403. 
(b)  Objectives. The objectives of this division are to prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater system which will: 
(1)  Result in an operational upset; 
(2)  Cause sludge contamination and prevent recycling; 
(3)  Pass through the treatment system into the receiving waters or the atmosphere in violation of township, state and federal regulations; 
(4)  Result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; or 
(5)  In any way inhibit the treatment process at the treatment plant. 
(c)  Policy. By virtue of obligations and authority placed upon the township as an operator of a wastewater collection and treatment system which discharges into public waters, by the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., (PL 92-500), Public Act No. 245 of 1929, as amended; applicable National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permits issued to the township; existing or future contracts between the township and other governmental or private entities or by virtue of common law usage of the township's wastewater collection system, this division shall apply to every industrial, commercial and other nondomestic user whose wastewater is discharged into or flows through the township's sewerage system or is treated at a treatment plant of the township. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 1, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-194. - Regulations. 
(a)  Use of sewerage system required. 
(1)  All wastewaters in the township or areas under the jurisdiction of the township, and all wastewater discharged into the sewerage system by a person or municipality contracting for treatment service by the township, must be treated in accordance with provisions of this division. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to use garbage grinders of any size for grinding the materials described in subsection (d)(4) of this section. No person shall discharge any waste or other substance directly into a manhole, catchbasin or inlet. All discharges to sewers shall be through sewer connections. 
(b)  Discharge to natural outlets. It shall be unlawful to discharge, directly or indirectly, to any natural outlet within the township or in any area under the jurisdiction of, or contracting for treatment service by, the township, any wastes or wastewaters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with provisions of the ordinances and regulations of the township and with state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  Oil and sand interceptors. 
(1)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the determination of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gastight and watertight. 
(2)  Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided and maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. 
(3)  Chemicals and/or chemical additives shall not be added to grease, oil or sand interceptors to soften, disperse, liquify or otherwise treat contents of interceptors without the express written permission of the director. 
(d)  Wastes prohibited. Except as provided in this division, no person shall discharge, cause or allow to be discharged, any pollutant which can pass through or cause interference at the POTW, or any of the following described waters or wastes, directly or indirectly, to any public sewer or POTW: 
(1)  Any liquid, solid or gas pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the sewerage system or POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. Such material may include, but is not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, toluene, benzene, fuel oil, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides or any other substance which the township, state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system. 
(2)  Waters or wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, treatment processes or personnel of the sewerage system. 
(3)  Any waters or wastes having a temperature higher than 120 degrees Fahrenheit at the point of the sewer connection or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius). 
(4)  Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system, such as, but not limited to, stone, gravel, ashes, cinders, sand, concrete, paving materials, mud, straw, sticks, plaster, cement, mortar, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, brewery mash, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, paper dishes and cups, milk containers or any other substance detrimental, or determined by the director to be detrimental, to the sewers or the operation of the sewerage system. 
(5)  Garbage that has not been properly shredded. 
(6)  Any waters or wastes which may contain more than 100 milligrams per liter of fat, wax, oil or grease, or petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin. 
(7)  Contents of septic tanks or other similar facilities. 
(8)  Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that are in noncompliance with regulations issued by the appropriate authority having control over their use and/or which will or may cause damage or hazard to the sewerage system or personnel. 
(9)  Quantities of flow or concentrations, or both, which constitute a "slug loading" as such term is defined in section 78-191. 
(10)  Substances or pollutants which either alone or by interaction with other waters or wastes: 
a.  Solidify or become viscous in the sewerage system. 
b.  Cause excessive discoloration, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions. 
c.  Exert or cause a high concentration of inert suspended solids, such as, but not limited to, lime slurries, diatomaceous earth and lime residues. 
d.  Exert or cause a high concentration of dissolved solids, such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride. 
e.  Cause or exert a COD that would increase operational expense or cause treatment problems. 
f.  Cause a high chlorine demand, such as, but not limited to, nitrite, cyanide, thiocyanate, sulfite and thiosulfate. 
g.  Results in water or waste materials containing toxic or poisonous substances that tend to damage or interfere with any sewage treatment process or that may constitute a hazard to any person, animal, fish or aquatic life or that may tend to be a hazard in the receiving waters of the state. 
h.  Result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the sewerage system. 
i.  Cause acute worker health and safety problems. 
(11)  Collectible floating oil. 
(12)  Any wastewater containing a toxic substance in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the state, or exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any pollutant identified pursuant to section 306(A) of the act, 33 USC 1317, and the state critical materials register. 
(13)  Any noxious or malodorous liquid, gas or solid which either singly or by interaction with other wastes is sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or otherwise sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair. 
(14)  Any substance which may cause the POTW effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residue, sludge or scum, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance be discharged to the POTW and cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria guidelines or regulations developed under section 405 of the act or any criteria, guideline or regulation affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, 42 USC 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act, 15 USC 2601 et seq., or state criteria which is legally applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(15)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES or state disposal system permit or the water quality standards by pass through, sludge contamination or operational upset. 
(16)  Incompatible pollutants in excess of the limits allowed by township, state and/or federal laws and regulations as determined and when amended, including, but not limited to, the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 403, or any other effluent guidelines developed by the Environmental Protection Agency. 
(17)  Wastewaters containing in excess of the lower of the following amounts: 
a.  The allowed pollutant limits, as determined by the EPA; or 
b.  For the following specified pollutants: 
Arsenic 	0.35 mg/l 
Cadmium 	0.03 mg/l 
Chromium 	2.39 mg/l 
Copper 	0.265 mg/l 
Cyanide 	0.76 mg/l 
Lead 	0.82 mg/l 
Mercury 	N.D. 1 
Nickel 	0.743 mg/l 
Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) 	N.D. 2 
Silver 	0.28 < mg/l 
Zinc 	1.24 mg/l 
Selenium 	0.38 mg/l 
PCBs 	ND 
(non-detect) 
 
1 	Mercury sampling procedures, preservation and handling, and analytical protocol for compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with U.S. EPA method 245.1. The detection limit shall not exceed 0.2 ug/l, unless higher levels are appropriate due to matrix interference. 
2 	The detection level shall not exceed 0.1 ug/l. Compliance monitoring shall be in accordance with EPA method 608. Any discharge of these substances at detectable levels is a specific violation of these regulations. 
 
c.  For the pollutants specified in subsection (d)(17)b. of this section, or any other pollutant, any lower limits subsequently established by statute, rule, regulation or permit conditions by the state or the township. 
(18)  The sludge, precipitate or waste which results from any industrial or commercial treatment or pretreatment of wastewater or air discharges. 
(19)  Any waters or wastes of such character and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such waters or wastes in the treatment or sewerage system. 
(20)  Any river water or any water other than that obtained through township water supply lines, or any wastewater or industrial waste which originates outside the service area of the treatment plant unless permission for such introduction is obtained in advance from the director. 
(21)  Any compatible pollutant greater than quantities listed under subsection (h)(2) of this section. 
(e)  Connections prohibited. 
(1)  In the areas served by separate storm and sanitary sewer systems, it shall be unlawful to connect roof downspouts, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff to a building sewer extension which, in turn, is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful to directly connect eave troughs and roof downspouts to the POTW throughout the portion of the POTW tributary to combined sewers. Residential properties shall have until September 26, 2002, to comply with this provision, and commercial and industrial properties shall have until September 26, 2002, to comply. A user may request, in writing to the director, to be exempted from the direct connection prohibition. The request shall include a demonstration that the disconnection of downspouts and eave troughs is not a cost effective means of reducing the frequency or duration of combined sewer overflows or of the township maintaining compliance with its NPDES permit. If the user's request is deemed approvable by the director, in the director's sole discretion, then the director may forward the request to the state department of environmental quality for approval. The user shall be responsible for all costs of making the demonstration and obtaining the approval of the director and the state department of environmental quality. 
(f)  Surface or subsurface water contamination prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited, or to dispose of, any substance in liquid, solid or gaseous form, or any wastewater on any public or private property within the township or in any area under the jurisdiction of or which is provided treatment service by the township that will or may pollute or contaminate any surface or subsurface water, including, but not limited to, water in any watercourse, natural outlet, sewerage system or aquifer. 
(g)  Domestic sewer users. Discharge from any residence within the township or any area that is provided treatment service by the township shall not be in violation of subsection (d) of this section. 
(h)  Nondomestic sewer users. 
(1)  User response. All nondomestic sewer users shall respond to the director's questionnaires and correspondence within 30 days unless a different time is indicated by the director. 
(2)  Discharge limitations. Under federal and state regulations enacted or amended, the township is required to report annually on all significant industrial sewer users and to meet certain effluent limitations. The admission into the public sewerage system, either directly or indirectly, of any waste or water or other pollutants exceeding the limits listed as follows may be subject to review, approval or limitation by the director to meet the applicable state, federal and/or township regulations: 
a.  A five-day BOD greater than 200 milligrams per liter. 
b.  Suspended solids greater than 200 milligrams per liter. 
c.  An average daily flow exceeding two percent of the total average daily flow of the sewerage system. 
d.  Any incompatible pollutant. 
e.  A total phosphorous quantity greater than four milligrams per liter. 
f.  Ammonia nitrogen in excess of 10.0 milligrams per liter. 
g.  COD greater than 300 milligrams per liter. 
If determined necessary by the director, the user shall provide the necessary pretreatment or curtailment to stay within the limitations in this subsection (h)(2). Nothing in this division shall prohibit the director from requiring lower constituent amounts if it is determined necessary for the protection or effective operation of the treatment plant. If the limitations in this subsection (h)(2) are exceeded, the user may be required to pay additional costs if it is determined by the director that additional treatment expenses have been incurred. 
(3)  Incompatible pollutants. Persons discharging incompatible pollutants, other than the constituents described in subsection (d) of this section, which are strictly prohibited from being discharged into the sewerage system, shall comply with section 307 of the act and related regulations in reducing any incompatible pollutant which interferes with, passes through or otherwise is incompatible with the treatment process. Any person discharging or proposing to discharge any toxic pollutant as defined by section 307(a)(1) of the act, shall apply to the director for permission for such discharge. 
(4)  Dilution. The increased use of potable or processed water in any way, or the mixing of separate wastestreams for the purpose of diluting a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards, limitations and/or concentrations set forth in this division is strictly prohibited. 
(5)  Toxic material and petroleum products control. 
a.  All storage of toxic materials in any area or building shall be contained in such a manner that none of the materials may spill or otherwise get into the public sewerage system or contaminate surface or subsurface water in the event of an accident or failure and shall be in accordance with current state and federal laws and regulations and township ordinances. 
b.  All aboveground storage tanks with a toxic liquid solution shall be surrounded by containing walls providing such containment and capacity that the liquid will not splash over the top of the wall in the event of a sudden tank rupture. The minimum containment storage shall be 150 percent of the largest tank in the containment area. A sump shall be provided in the containment area with a sloped floor to remove the toxic liquid. The curbed storage area shall not be connected, directly or indirectly, to the public sewerage system. Underground storage tanks shall not be connected, directly or indirectly, to the public sewerage system. Underground storage tanks shall be controlled in a manner to prevent leakage and discharge into subsurface water and shall be in compliance with all state laws and regulations. 
(6)  Pretreatment. Users shall make wastewater acceptable: 
a.  Under the standards established in this section; 
b.  Within the allowances of the discharge permit as required in subsection (k) of this section; and 
c.  As required under 40 CFR 403; 
before discharging to the sewerage system. All pretreatment costs to the acceptable level shall be at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the facilities and operating procedures and effluent characteristics shall be submitted to the director for review and approval before construction of the facility. The approval of such plans and procedures will in no way relieve such persons from the responsibility of modifying the facility, if necessary, to produce an acceptable effluent. Any changes in the approved facilities or method of operation shall be reviewed and approved by the director. Where required, users shall obtain approval from the applicable state or federal agency. The director may require that any private wastewater treatment facilities, process facilities, sewerage systems, wastestreams or any other potential waste problems be placed under the specific supervision and control of persons who have been certified by an appropriate state agency as being qualified to supervise such facilities or systems. 
(7)  Control manholes and monitoring facilities. 
a.  The director may require a nondomestic user served by a sewer connection to install an approved control manhole on the connection to allow observation, sampling and measurement of all substances discharged therein. The cost of the manhole and equipment determined necessary by the director for sampling and metering, and installation and operation of the equipment shall be at the expense of the user. 
b.  All control manholes shall be located on the user's property within ten feet of the property line. The control manhole shall be constructed on the sewer connection or the stormwater connection. If the property is fenced, a gate shall be provided at the manhole location with provision for a lock to be provided by the director. If the user does not want direct access to his property for security or other reasons, he shall, at his expense, construct a security fence around the control manhole of an area acceptable to the director. The director may allow control manholes in the street right-of-way in an approved manner and location. Control manholes that cannot be constructed within ten feet of the property line shall be in an open and accessible area. 
c.  The user shall provide an approved drawing to the director, showing the locations of all sewer connections and control manholes. The control manholes shall be located both from street lines and building lines. The drawing shall show the roadways and access points to the control manholes and note entry limitations, if any, and shall state the telephone number and person to contact should entrance become necessary, and any other data considered pertinent by the director. Each control manhole shall be identified by name and number. Ample space shall be provided around the control manholes and shall be maintained free and clear, by the owner, at all times. 
d.  The director or other authorized township employee or representative may inspect the facilities of any user to determine whether the purpose of this division is being met and all wastewater requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the director or other township employees and representatives ready access at all reasonable times, and make provisions for emergency access to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection or sampling or otherwise in the performance of their duties. When a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry is permitted into the user's business or premises, the user shall make the necessary arrangements, acceptable to the director, with the user's security personnel, so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the township's employees and representatives shall be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of carrying out the township's responsibilities. 
(i)  Sewer outfalls and sewer meters. Access to and inspection of sewer outfalls to the river and sewer meters shall be as outlined under subsection (h) of this section. 
(j)  Septage and landfill leachate disposal. Septage, landfill leachate and other trucked pollutants may be allowed to be disposed of at the treatment plant solely at the discretion of the POTW at discharge points designated by the director. 
(k)  Discharge permits, reports, surveillance and inspections. 
(1)  Activities and permit conditions. 
a.  Activities requiring permits. Persons engaged in any activities listed in the current list in Appendix C to the EPA Pretreatment Standards, 40 CFR 403, as revised or amended, or any nondomestic sewer user capable of discharging pollutants as determined by the director, shall obtain a permit to discharge into the sewerage system. New significant industrial users must obtain a permit prior to connecting to or discharging into the sewerage systems. Permits may be required of a nondomestic sewer user who stores pollutants or toxic material on his premises. 
b.  Permit time limits and conditions. 
1.  Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years, and shall carry a specific expiration date. 
2.  A permit shall not be reassigned or transferred without written approval of the director. 
3.  Every user presently discharging to any sewerage system delivering wastewater to the treatment plant shall, within 90 days from the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, complete and file a baseline monitoring report and an application for a new permit with the director. The baseline monitoring report shall contain the information required by 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(7) and as may be further required by the director, as a minimum. Any proposed new significant industrial user or new source shall apply for a permit and provide a baseline monitoring report with information on pretreatment methods, production data, flow and amounts of regulated and other pollutants. 
4.  A new source shall install and have in operating condition all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. A significant industrial user shall pretreat and/or control discharge to meet limits determined by the director and this division. A significant industrial user subject to categorical standards shall meet categorical discharge limits as promulgated by the EPA and MDNR and also must meet all local limits as outlined in this sewer use division. All industrial user's shall promptly notify the POTW in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in its discharge, including the listed or characteristic hazardous waste for which the user has submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). 
c.  Permit alterations and hearings. The director may change the conditions or terms of a permit prior to its expiration if circumstances or state or federal laws or regulations may require, or if other good cause exists. The director may modify the pollutant limitations applicable to indirect discharges as specified in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR 403.7 are met and prior approval from the MDNR or EPA is given. A user shall be notified by the director, in writing, of any proposed changes in the user's permit and the reasons for such changes at least 60 days prior to the effective date of the change. 
d.  New source compliance deadline. Before beginning to discharge, new sources shall install, have in operating condition and start up all pollution control equipment needed to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed 90 days. New sources shall meet all applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(2)  Permit application requirements. Nondomestic sewer users required to obtain an industrial sewer user's permit shall complete and file an application with the director, with a baseline monitoring report, in the form prescribed by, and available at the office of, the director or other designated locations, together with a fee of $100.00. Users required to obtain a permit shall procure and complete the application at their own expense. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, all information requested by the director, including, but not limited to, the following, which shall also be included in the baseline monitoring report: 
a.  Within 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging, or scheduled to discharge, to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (k)(2)b. of this section. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (k)(2)b. of this section. A new source user shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source user also shall give estimates of such user's anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
b.  Users described in subsection (k)(2)a. of this section shall submit the following information: 
1.  Identifying information. Name, address and location of the industry, person, facility or other user for which the permit is sought, including the name and address of its operator and owner and the name and address of an individual at the location of the user authorized by the operator or owner to receive, on behalf of such owner or operator, any notice required in this division. 
2.  Environmental permits. A listing of any SIC number applicable to the user and of any environmental control permits held by or for the user. 
3.  Descriptions of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. The description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
4.  Measurement of pollutants. Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not limited to, the discharge of which are affected by this division, as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory (including in-house laboratories utilizing approved EPA methods and procedures), with 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling and analysis performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA. Every laboratory providing sampling and testing results shall be required to have quality control and quality assurance programs in place to provide accurate test data. A minimum of three samples in a two-week period for less than 250,000 gallons per day (gpd) discharge and six samples in a two-week period for a discharge of 250,000 gpd or greater are required. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process shall be reported. Instantaneous, daily maximum and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures described in this subsection (k)(2)b.4. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures described in this subsection (k)(2)b.4. 
5.  Duration. Time and duration of discharge. 
6.  Flow measurement. Measured average daily and maximum daily flow rates, in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any, from regulated process streams and other streams to the sewerage system as necessary to allow use of the appropriate combined wastestream formula described in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
7.  Drawings. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to schematically show all users' sewer lines and discharge points, including sewer connections and appurtenances, from which wastewater may be discharged into the sewerage system from the premises. 
8.  Activities and processes. A description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, and any substances, chemicals and solutions which will be present in such facilities or produced by such activities or processes, including all such materials which are or could be discharged. 
9.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. The pretreatment standards for each process shall be identified and listed. 
10.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in the schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
11.  Pollution incident prevention plan (PIPP). Provision of a PIPP to identify any possible pollutants on the site, minimize any possible spills, and provide a plan for cleanup in the event of a discharge, spill, leak or accident. The plan should state proposed actions to contain and clean up the pollutant and a list of persons to contact in case of such an incident. 
12.  Concentrations. Pollutant concentration shall be reported in milligrams per liter and such report shall include the allowed EPA limits and/or the limits in this division. 
13.  Sampling schedule. The baseline report which shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling, methods of analysis and certification that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the sewerage system, in addition to all of the requirements of 40 CFR 403.12(b)(1)—(7). 
14.  Signature and certification. The application shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user as defined in section 78-191. Such person shall agree to the following: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(3)  Application evaluation. The director will evaluate the data furnished. If insufficient data has been furnished, the director will notify the applicant and further action on the permit application will not be taken until the requested information is received. Upon receipt of all requested information and a determination by the director of its sufficiency, the director may issue a permit with any restrictions. 
(4)  Limitations on discharge. Limitations on the discharge of wastes into the system shall be in accordance and agreement with the applicable EPA administrative regulations as promulgated in the CFR, or as modified by the state or the township by the imposition of more stringent discharge limitations. A federal categorical pretreatment standard for a particular industrial subcategory, if more stringent than criteria imposed under this division for sources in that subcategory or, if not covered by this division, shall supersede the criteria imposed under this division upon the date compliance is required by the federal standard. 
(5)  Compliance/self-monitoring reports. The director shall notify all affected sewer users of all applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR 403. Each person issued a permit shall submit signed compliance monitoring reports to the director during the months of June and December of each calendar year, and such reports must be based upon sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, and shall submit more frequent self-monitoring reports if requested by the director. The user shall be required to initiate any self-monitoring activities to ensure compliance with the permit and make all reports available to the director, upon request. The monitoring report shall be signed by a responsible corporate officer or his designee. All reports and records pertaining thereto shall be retained by the permit holder for a minimum of three years or through any litigation periods related to the reports and records. The monitoring reports shall contain, in addition to any other information which the director may request on a case-by-case basis in furtherance of the enforcement of this division, the following information: 
a.  Any changes not previously reported when filing the permit application and baseline monitoring report or since the last compliance monitoring report. 
b.  Results of sampling and analysis for BOD, COD, TSS, dissolved solids, ammonia nitrogen, phosphorus, cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel, zinc, selenium, molybdenum, arsenic, cyanide, pH, PCB and any categorical parameter. The above-listed parameters shall include what is required in each individual permit and may be altered by the director depending on the process and the probability of the above-listed parameters or other parameters being significant. 
c.  Results based on 24-hour flow-proportional composite sampling reported in mg/l, except pH. 
d.  Provide daily average and daily maximum results at a sample frequency of three times in two weeks for flows less than 250,000 gallons per day and six times in two weeks for flows of 250,000 gallons per day or greater, as a minimum. Provide daily average and daily maximum flow data for the same days sampling is taken. 
e.  Provide ensurance that sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. 
f.  Time, date and place of sampling, and the names of laboratories and persons sampling and analyzing the material. 
g.  Certification that the sampling and analysis are representative of the normal work cycles and the average daily discharge. 
h.  Provide a statement that all laboratories providing test results for the report have an active quality control and quality assurance program in operation to provide reliable and accurate test data. 
i.  Certification that toxic material or material that could cause a slug loading or could have a detrimental effect on the sewerage system is properly stored in a contained area to eliminate any possible discharge into the sewer system. 
j.  An industry governed by categorical standards must report on all required parameters in mg/l and indicate the allowed categorical limits as set by the EPA and this division. All other nondomestic users shall report on all required limits and indicate the allowed limits as set by this division and the permit. 
k.  All reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person who manages the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(6)  Periodic compliance reports. 
a.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
b.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the superintendent, the results of the monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(7)  Compliance schedule progress reports. 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, and such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (k)(7)a. of this section shall exceed nine months; 
c.  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
d.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(8)  Significant noncompliance. The township will provide at least annual public notification, in the area's largest newspaper, of a list of significant industrial or nondomestic users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance of applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements and violations of this division. A significant noncompliance is a violation which meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter; 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC. The TRC equals 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants, except pH; 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer term average) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of township personnel or the general public; 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or the environment or has resulted in the exercise of emergency authority under this division by township personnel to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a letter of communication or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide, within 30 days after the due date, required reports, such as baseline monitoring reports, compliance monitoring reports, other reports as requested and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the pretreatment program. 
(9)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the director monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the director samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of the sampling. 
(10)  Permit enforcement. The conditions of the permit shall be enforced by the director in accordance with the provisions of this division. Any permit holder who exceeds the conditions and provisions of the permit or otherwise discharges or allows or permits the discharge of wastewater or pollutants in violation of the permit or any of the requirements of this division, will be subject to the enforcement provisions of section 78-196 and the penalty provisions of section 78-201. 
(11)  Accidental discharge or bypass notice and requirements. A person discharging wastes or any bypass of the industrial pretreatment system, including any slug loading, to any sewerage system delivering wastewater to the treatment plant shall notify the POTW within 24 hours upon accidentally or nonaccidentally discharging wastes in violation of this division or the user's permit. The telephone number of the POTW shall be posted on the premises of the user. The notification shall be followed, within five days, by a detailed written report, describing the cause of the accident or bypass, duration, discharge limit violations and measures being taken to prevent future occurrence. Dates shall be set for completion of such measures and the completion shall be reported to the director. Notification shall not relieve a user of its responsibility to comply with any conditions, limitations or special requirements which may contain, but not be limited to, the following: 
a.  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulation and equalization. 
b.  Installation of inspection and sampling facilities, including access to such facilities. 
c.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule. 
d.  Requirements for submission of discharge or technical reports. 
e.  Special service charges or fees. 
f.  Pretreatment requirements. 
g.  Obtaining and submitting samples, with chemical analyses, of all substances that may appear in the sewage discharge. 
h.  A continuously updated listing of the inventory of all activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, or of any substance, chemical or solution which is present on the premises or produced by such activities or processes, including all such materials which are or could be discharged, with normal usage and amount on hand shown therein. 
i.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a public sewer as established by the director. 
j.  Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics. 
k.  Requirements for maintaining and returning plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the director, and affording the director access thereto. 
l.  Requirements for notification to the director of introduction of any new wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system. 
m.  Compliance schedules. 
n.  Requirements for containment of specific materials, processes or facilities for the prevention of accidental discharges. 
o.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this division. 
(12)  Permit changes. Any change in the operation, activity, process or material used which affect the accuracy of any information supplied on the permit application form, or in strengths and volumes of waters and wastewaters, shall be reported immediately to the director for determination of whether a need exists to change conditions of the permit and related fees. The director's decision shall be final. The permit shall be modified to include any necessary expense, loss or damage to the system, or for any fines imposed on the township on account thereof. 
(13)  Permit variations. The director may, but shall not be required to, waive the requirement for an industrial permit for any user that does not have a: 
a.  Total wastewater flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average working day; 
b.  Discharge containing measurable toxic pollutants; or 
c.  Discharge of pollutants equal to or less than any of the following amounts: 
BOD 	= 	40 lbs./day 
Suspended solids 	= 	40 lbs./day 
 
(14)  Bypass of pretreatment. 
a.  Bypass is prohibited and the POTW may take enforcement action against the sewer user for the bypass, except when: 
1.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 
2.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated waters or maintenance during, normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance, and the user submitted notices as required under subsection (k)(14)a.3. of this section. 
3.  If the user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
b.  A user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if the bypass is essential for the maintenance to ensure efficient operation. 
c.  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the conditions listed in subsection (k)(14)a. of this section. 
d.  Upset. 
1.  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (k)(14)d.2. of this section are met. 
2.  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of an upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence, that: 
i.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
ii.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
iii.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
A.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
B.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
C.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent the recurrence of the noncompliance. 
3.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
4.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
5.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails. 
(15)  Surveillance, inspection and evaluation. 
a.  The director shall make an on-site inspection of each significant industrial user each year, at any time during the calendar year. The inspection shall be to determine compliance with the sewer user's permit and all pertinent rules and regulations. The director, during the annual inspection, shall notify each site of any applicable requirements under sections 204(b) and 405 of the act and subtitles C and D of the RCRA. 
b.  The director shall evaluate, at least once every two years, whether each significant industrial user needs a plan to control slug discharges as defined under section 78-191. The results of such slug discharge shall be provided upon request. If it is determined by the director that a slug control plan is needed, the plan shall contain a description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; a description of stored chemicals; procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under 40 CFR 403.5(b) with procedures for a followup written notification within five days; and procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, and measures and equipment for emergency responses. 
c.  The director shall sample the discharge from each significant industrial user at least once per year. The director may make random inspections of each significant industrial user. 
(16)  Notification of hazardous waste discharges. 
a.  A nondomestic sewer user shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director and the MDEQ hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the sewerage system of a substance, which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the nondomestic sewer user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such wastes per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the nondomestic sewer user: 
1.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
2.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
3.  An estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
A nondomestic sewer user shall provide the notification no later than 180 days after the discharge of the listed or characteristic hazardous waste. Any notification need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged, but notifications of changed discharges must be submitted as required under 40 CFR 403.12(j). 
b.  A discharger is exempt from the requirements of subsection (k)(16)a. of this section during a calendar month in which the discharger discharges no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e) requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the nondomestic sewer user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
c.  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of the RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the nondomestic sewer user must notify the POTW, the EPA and the MDNR of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
d.  In the case of any notification made under this subsection (k)(16), the nondomestic sewer user shall certify that a program is in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree determined to be economically practical. 
(17)  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
a.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
b.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
c.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by the EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
d.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(l)  Minimum permit contents. 
(1)  Wasterwater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates the wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the POTW, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits are based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and recordkeeping requirements. Such requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample type based on federal, state and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control or construction of appropriate containment devices designed to reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions, including management practices, necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharge to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance will all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 3, 6-10-2002; Ord. No. 734, 11-25-2013 )  
Sec. 78-195. - Restricted information. 
All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the director that the release of such information to the general public would divulge information, or processes or methods that would give a business advantage to competitors. However, all such information shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies or for the use of the director or the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the information. No information regarding wastewater characteristics and constituents shall be considered confidential information and all such information and records shall be available to the director and the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 4, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-196. - Enforcement and termination of service. 
(a)  Corrective measures. If it is determined that a discharge of wastes or other activity or inactivity has been occurring or threatens to occur in violation of this division or provisions of a discharge permit, the director may require the user to submit for approval in a specified time period, with such modifications considered necessary, a detailed time schedule of corrective and/or preventive action. Failure to provide such time schedule of corrective and/or preventive measures within the time limits specified is considered a violation of this division. Enforcement and termination of service procedures are outlined in the township's document entitled "Pretreatment Procedures and Enforcement Response Plan" which is on file at the township office. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the township designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued under this division, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the township. 
(c)  Notification procedure. In the event of any one or more of these actions being taken, the director shall promptly notify the user, in writing, of such action and the specific reasons for such action, which notice shall be personally served upon the individual identified by the user for such purpose. 
(d)  Notice of noncompliance (NON). The township's first response to most violations is the notice of noncompliance (NON). In general, the notice of noncompliance is used for isolated violations that have not caused immediate harm to the environment or the sewerage system. The notice of noncompliance is prepared and issued by the director. The notice of noncompliance discusses the circumstances of the violation and the consequences of continued violation. The director will issue the notice of noncompliance within 30 days from when the director identifies the noncompliance. 
(e)  Notification of violation (NOV). When the POTW finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the POTW may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 14 days of the receipt of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the POTW. Submission of the plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the POTW to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(f)  Consent orders. The director may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include that specific action be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. 
(g)  Cease and desist. The director may issue orders to cease and desist if it is determined that a discharge of wastes has been taking place, or threatens to take place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this division or the provisions of a discharge permit, and direct the persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions to comply immediately, or comply in accordance with a time schedule provided by the director, and to take appropriate or remedial preventive action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(h)  Termination. The director may revoke any discharge permit or terminate, or cause to be terminated, wastewater service to any user if the director has reasonable grounds to believe a violation of this division or of a permit issued pursuant to this division exists or if a discharge of wastes or wastewater threatens to cause a viola-tion of this division or such a permit. If an excessive discharge occurs or threatens to occur, the director may immediately: 
(1)  Reject the waste or wastewater to immediately abate such condition, or any hazard or nuisance resulting therefrom; 
(2)  Upon providing the user informal notice of such action, sever any sewer connection serving the user's premises to immediately and effectively halt or prevent such discharge; or 
(3)  Require immediate pretreatment of the waste to an acceptable condition for discharge to the sewerage system. 
(i)  Civil litigation (see EPA model ordinance). If the director has determined that a user has failed to comply with the township regulations, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any other applicable local, state or federal law, or a notice of violation or order issued by the director, the director may commence judicial proceedings, through the township attorney, for appropriate relief. Generally, the director will utilize civil litigation in response to gross or persistent violations or the discharge of prohibited substances. The township shall be entitled to recover its expenses of enforcement, including its reasonable attorney fees. 
(j)  Criminal prosecution (see EPA model ordinance). Making a false statement or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document, or making a monitoring device or method inaccurate may result in punishment under the criminal laws of the state in addition to civil relief. If the township attorney, after consultation with the director, determines that criminal prosecution is appropriate in a particular case, the township attorney will refer the case to the proper authorities for prosecution. Depending upon the case, the proper authority may be a county prosecuting attorney, the attorney general's office for the state or the Environmental Protection Agency and United States Department of Justice. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 5, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-197. - Charges and fees. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the payment of charges and fees by dischargers to the POTW and sewerage system to compensate the township for the cost of administration and enforcement of this division. 
(b)  Charge and fee schedules. The township shall adopt by resolution of the township board and amend from time to time as required, charge and fee schedules, which may include: 
(1)  Permit application fees; 
(2)  Permit preparation and issuance fees; 
(3)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal; 
(7)  Fees for setup and operating the pretreatment program; 
(8)  Other fees deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 6, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-198. - Appeal procedure. 
There shall be no administrative appeal from orders of noncompliance, including cease and desist orders, or determinations issued by the director interpreting or implementing the provisions of this division, or in any permit issued under this division. Such orders or determinations shall be subject only to judicial review. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 7, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-199. - Agreements. 
No provision of this division shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the township and any person whereby sewage or waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the township for treatment, subject to the payment by such person of such additional charges as may be reasonable, except that the applicable state or federal standards regarding prohibited discharges shall not be waived and a waiver of the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards shall be obtained only through the procedures established in 40 CFR 403. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 8, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-200. - Protection from damage. 
No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper with any property, structure or appurtenance which is a part of the township sewerage system. No person shall, without a permit, uncover or connect to any structure or appurtenance which is a part of the township sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 9, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-201. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Public nuisance. Any discharge of waste into the sewerage system or other activity or inactivity that is in violation of this division, or a violation of any condition of a discharge permit issued pursuant to this division, or of any state, federal or township laws or regulations, including categorical pretreatment standards, or which is, or threatens to be, an excessive discharge, or which does, or threatens to, contaminate any surface or subsurface waters, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance per se. No user or industry, or any person responsible for, or acting on behalf of, such a user or industry, shall cause, create, allow or maintain such a nuisance. 
(b)  Injunction infraction. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a discharge of wastes or other material or pollutants, or other activity or inactivity, is in violation of the provisions of this division, of a permit issued pursuant to this division, or of any state, federal or township law or regulation, or otherwise causes, or threatens to cause, a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the director, acting on behalf of the township, may cause a petition to be filed in the appropriate court of law for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge, and such court may order any such condition, nuisance or violation to be abated immediately and may order whatever further relief is necessary to prevent reoccurrence of any such condition, nuisance or violation. 
(2)  Enforcement activity costs to be recoverable from violator. The township may recover costs incurred as a consequence of sampling and monitoring expenses, increased operational and maintenance expenditures for the sanitary sewer system or treatment plant, or increased sludge handling expenditures, and reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities. Such costs shall be recoverable from the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations or permits issued under this division. 
(c)  Civil penalties. The following regulations shall govern civil infractions: 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this division or a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be responsible for the violation punishable as a civil infraction. 
(2)  The director or his designee is hereby authorized to issue municipal civil infraction citations under this division directing alleged violators to appear in court or to issue municipal civil infraction notices directing alleged violators to appear at the township violations bureau as provided under the ordinances of the township. 
(3)  Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, the amount of a municipal civil infraction found due in response to the issuance of a municipal civil infraction notice for a violation of this division shall be according to the following schedule: 
a.  First offense, $1,000.00; 
b.  Second offense, $2,500.00; 
c.  Third or subsequent offense, $5,000.00. 
A copy of this schedule shall be posted at the township municipal ordinance violations bureau. 
(4)  In the case of a monthly or other longterm average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(5)  In addition to the penalties provided in this division, the township may recover costs incurred as a consequence of sampling and monitoring expenses, increased operational and maintenance expenditures for the sanitary sewer system or treatment plant, or increased sludge handling expenditures and reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement activities. Such costs shall be recoverable from the person found to have violated this division or the orders, rules, regulations or permits issued under this division. 
A civil infraction shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(d)  Misdemeanor. A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 per violation per day, or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 10, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-202. - Supplemental enforcement action. 
(a)  Performance bond. The township may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this division, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the township, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the township to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability, insurance. The township may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any provision of this division, a previous wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that such user has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by such user's discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this division, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued under this division, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence at the user's expense, after such user has satisfactorily demonstrated such user's ability to comply. 
(d)  Contractor listing. Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or services to the township. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services to the township held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of the township. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 11, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-203. - Rules and regulations. 
The township manager may authorize such rules and regulations, not in conflict with the provisions of this division, relative to industrial pretreatment, and no person shall fail to comply with any such rules or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 12, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-204. - Records retention. 
All users subject to this division shall retain and preserve, for no less than three years, any records, books, documents, memoranda, reports, correspondence and any and all summaries thereof, relating to monitoring, sampling and chemical analyses made by or on behalf of a user in connection with such user's discharge. All records which pertain to matters which are the subject of administrative adjustment or any other enforcement or litigation activities brought by the township pursuant to this division shall be retained and preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all appeals have expired. 
(Ord. No. 631, § 13, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-205. - Miscellaneous. 
(a)  Removal credits. Where applicable, the director may elect to initiate a program of removal credits as part of this division to reflect the POTW's ability to remove pollutants in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7. 
(b)  Net/gross calculations. The director may elect to adjust categorical pretreatment standards to reflect the presence of pollutants in the user's intake water, in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(c)  Right of revision. The township reserves the right to amend this division to provide more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to a POTW where deemed necessary to comply with the objectives set forth in section 78-193(b). 
(Ord. No. 631, § 14.01—14.03, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-206. - Pollutants. 
The following is a list of the U.S. EPA priority pollutants consolidated with the current critical materials register compiled by the state department of natural resources: 
ORGANICS 
1. 	Acids 
2. 	Acenaphthene 
3. 	Acetone cyanohydrin 
4. 	2-acetylaminofluorene 
5. 	Acrolein 
6. 	Acrylic acid 
7. 	Acrylonitrile 
8. 	Allyl chloride 
9. 	2-aminoanthraquinone 
10. 	Aminoazobenzene 
11. 	O-aminoazotoluene 
12. 	4-aminobiphenyl 
13. 	3-amino-9-ethylcarbazole 
14. 	1-amino-2-methylanthraquin 
15. 	Aminotriazole (amitrole) 
16. 	Aniline 
17. 	Aniline hydrochloride 
18. 	O-anisidine 
19. 	O-anisidine hydrochloride 
20. 	Benz(a)anthracene 
21. 	Benzene 
22. 	Benzidine 
23. 	Benzidine salts 
24. 	Benzo(a)pyrene 
25. 	Brucine 
26. 	Carbon tetrachloride 
27. 	Chlorinated benzenes: 
	a. 	Chlorobenzene 
	b. 	1,2,4-trichlorobenzene 
	c. 	1,2-dichlorobenzene 
	d. 	1,3-dichlorobenzene 
	e. 	1,4-dichlorobenzene 
28. 	Chlorinated dibenzofurans 
29. 	Chlorinated dioxins 
30. 	Chlorinated ethanes: 
	a. 	1,1,1-trichloroethane 
	b. 	1,1-dichloroethane 
	c. 	Chloroethane 
	d. 	1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane 
31. 	Chlorinated naphthalene 
32. 	2-chloronaphthalene 
33. 	Chlorinated phenols: 
	a. 	2-chlorophenol 
	b. 	Parachlorometa-cresol 
	c. 	2,4-dichlorophenol 
34. 	1-chloro-2,3-epoxypropane 
35. 	Chloroaklyl ethers: 
	a. 	2-chloroethyl vinyl ether (mixed) 
36. 	Bis(2-chloroethyl)ether 
37. 	Chloroform 
38. 	Bis(2-chloromethyl)ether 
39. 	3-(chloromethyl)pyridine hydrochloride 
40. 	1-(4-chlorophenyl)-3,3-dimethyl triazene 
41. 	4-chloro-m-phenylenediamine 
42. 	4-chloro-o-phenylenediamine 
43. 	Chloroprene 
44. 	5-chloro-o-toluidine 
45. 	P-cresidine 
46. 	2,3-diaminoanisole sulfate 
47. 	4,4-diaminodiphenyl ether 
48. 	2,4-diaminotoluene 
49. 	Dibenz(a,h)anthracene 
50. 	Tris(dibromopropyl)phosphate 
51. 	Di-n-butyl phthalate 
52. 	3,3-dichlorobenzidine 
53. 	3,3-dichlorobenzidine salts 
54. 	1,2-dichloroethane 
55. 	Dichloroethylenes: 
	a. 	1,1-dichloroethylene 
	b. 	1,2-trans-dichloroethylene 
56. 	Dichloropropane and dichloropropene: 
	a. 	1,3-dichloropropylene; (1,3-dichloropropene) 
	b. 	1,2-dichloropropane 
57. 	1,2:3,4-diepoxybutane 
58. 	Diethyl sulfate 
59. 	4-dimethylaminoazobenzene 
60. 	Dimethylhydrazines 
61. 	2,4-dimethylphenol 
62. 	4,6-dinitro-o-cresol 
63. 	2,4-dinitrophenol 
64. 	2,4-dinitrotoluene 
65. 	Dinitrotoluene: 
	a. 	2,6-dinitrotoluene 
66. 	Di-n-octyl phthalate 
67. 	1,4-dioxane 
68. 	2,3-epoxy-1-propanal 
69. 	Ethylbenzene 
70. 	Ethylene dibromide 
71. 	Ethyleneimine 
72. 	Ethylene oxide 
73. 	Ethylene thiourea 
74. 	Bis(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate 
75. 	Ethylmethanesulfonate 
76. 	Fluoranthene 
77. 	2-(2-formylhdrazino)-4-(5-nitro-2-furthiazole) 
78. 	Haloethers: 
	a. 	4-chlorophenyl phenyl ether 
	b. 	4-bromophenyl phenyl ether 
	c. 	bis(2-chloroisopropyl) ether 
	d. 	bis(2-chloroethoxy)methane 
79. 	Halomethanes: 
	a. 	Methylene chloride; (dichloromethane) 
	b. 	Methyl chloride; (chloromethane) 
	c. 	Methyl bromide; (bromomethane) 
	d. 	Bromoform; (tribromomethane) 
	e. 	Dichlorobromomethane 
	f. 	Trichlorofluoromethane 
	g. 	Dichlorodifluoromethane 
	h. 	Chlorodibromomethane 
80. 	Hexachlorobenzene (HCB) 
81. 	Hexachlorobutadiene 
82. 	Hexachlorocyclohexane 
83. 	Hexachlorocyclopentadiene 
84. 	Hexachloroethane 
85. 	Hydrazobenzene 
86. 	Hydroquinone 
87. 	N-(2-hydroxyethyl)ethyleneimine 
88. 	Isophorone 
89. 	Lactonitrite 
90. 	Malachite green 
91. 	Methylenebis(2-chloroaniline) 
92. 	4,4-methylenabis(2-methylaniline) 
93. 	4,4-methylenebis(N,N-dimethylaniline) 
94. 	1,2(methylenedioxy)-4-propenyl benzene 
95. 	Methyl hydrazine 
96. 	1-methylnaphthalene 
97. 	2-methyl-1-nitroanthraquinone 
98. 	Mustard gas 
99. 	1,5-naphthalenediamine 
100. 	1-naphthylamine 
101. 	2-naphthylamine 
102. 	5-nitroacenaphthene 
103. 	5-nitro-o-anisidine 
104. 	Nitrobenzene 
105. 	4-nitrobiphenyl 
106. 	Nitrogen mustard 
107. 	2-nitrophenol 
108. 	4-nitrophenol 
109. 	Nitrosamines: 
	a. 	N-nitrosodiphenylamine 
	b. 	N-nitrosodi-n-propylamine 
110. 	N-nitroso-n-butyl-N-(4-hydroxybutyl)amine 
111. 	N-nitrosodiethylamine 
112. 	N-nitrosodimethylamine 
113. 	P-nitrosodiphenylamine 
114. 	N-nitroso-N-ethylurea 
115. 	N-nitroso-N-mathylurea 
116. 	N-nitroso-N-methylurethane 
117. 	N-nitrosomethylvinylamine 
118. 	N-nitrosomiopholine 
119. 	N-nitroso-N-phenylhydroxyl-amine, ammonium salt 
120. 	N-nitrososarcosine 
121. 	Penthachloronitrobenzene 
122. 	Penthachlorophenol 
123. 	Peroxyacetic acid 
124. 	Phenol 
125. 	Phthalate esters 
126. 	a. 	Butyl benzyl phthalate 
	b. 	Diethyl phthalate 
	c. 	Dimethyl phthalate 
127. 	Piperonyl sulfoxide 
128. 	Polybrominated biphenyls (PBB) 
129. 	Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) 
130. 	Polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons: 
	a. 	3,4-benzofluroanthene 
	b. 	Benxo(k)fluoranthane; 
(11,12-benzofluoranthene) 
	c. 	Chrysene 
	d. 	Acenaphthylene 
	e. 	Anthracene 
	f. 	Benzo(ghi)perylene; (1,12-benzoperpylene) 
	g. 	Fluorene 
	h. 	Phenathrene 
	i. 	Indeno(1,2,3-cd)pyrene; 
(2,3-0-phenylenepyrene) 
	j. 	Pyrene 
	k. 	Naphthalene 
131. 	1,3-propane sultone 
132. 	B-proplolactone 
133. 	5-propyl-1,3-benzodioxole 
134. 	Propyleneimine 
135. 	Semicarbazide 
136. 	Styrene 
137. 	Tetrachloroethylene(perchloroethylene) 
138. 	Thioacetamide 
139. 	4,4'-thiodianiline 
140. 	Thiourea 
141. 	Toluene 
142. 	O-toluidine 
143. 	O-toluidine hydrochloride 
144. 	Triaryl phosphate esters 
145. 	1,1,2-trichloroethane 
146. 	Trichloroethylene 
147. 	Trichlorophenols 
148. 	2,4,5-trimethylaniline 
149. 	Trimethylphosphate 
150. 	Vinylchloride 
151. 	Xylene 
 
A. INORGANICS 
152. 	Antimony 
153. 	Arsenic 
154. 	Beryllium 
155. 	Cadmium 
156. 	Chromium 
157. 	Cobalt 
158. 	Copper 
159. 	Cyanides 
160. 	Hypochlorite 
161. 	Lead 
162. 	Lithium 
163. 	Mercury 
164. 	Nickel 
165. 	Selenium 
166. 	Silver 
167. 	Thallium 
168. 	Zinc 
 
B. INOGRANICS 
169. 	Acids 
170. 	Chloramines 
171. 	Chlorine 
172. 	Hydrazine 
173. 	Hydrogen sulfide 
 
C. INORGANICS 
174. 	Asbestos (fibrous) 
 
PESTICIDES 
175. 	Aldricarb 
176. 	Aldrin 
177. 	4-aminopyridine 
178. 	Anilazine 
179. 	Antimycin A 
180. 	Azinphos-ethyl 
181. 	Azinphos-methyl 
182. 	Barban 
183. 	Bendiocarb 
184. 	Benomyl 
185. 	Bromoxynil 
186. 	2(p-tert-butylphenoxy)-isopropyl-2-chloroethylsulfite 
187. 	Captafol 
188. 	Captan 
189. 	Carbaryl 
190. 	Carbofuran 
191. 	Carbophenothion 
192. 	Chlordane 
193. 	Chlordecone 
194. 	Chlorfenvinphos 
195. 	Chlorobenzilate 
196. 	Chlorpyrifos 
197. 	Chlonitralid 
198. 	Coumaphos 
199. 	Crotoxyphos 
200. 	Cycloheximide 
201. 	DDT 
202. 	Demeton 
203. 	Diallate 
204. 	Diazinon 
205. 	Dibromochloropropane (DBCP) 
206. 	Dichlone 
207. 	Dichlorvos 
208. 	Dichrotophos 
209. 	Dieldrin 
210. 	Dimethoate 
211. 	Dinocap 
212. 	Dinoseb 
213. 	Dioxathion 
214. 	Disulfoton 
215. 	Endosulfan 
216. 	Endrin 
217. 	EPN 
218. 	Ethion 
219. 	Fensulfothion 
220. 	Fenthion 
221. 	Fluchloralin 
222. 	Heptachlor 
223. 	Heptachlor epoxide 
224. 	Isomers of hexachlorocyclohexane: 
	a. 	A-BHC-Alpha 
	b. 	B-BHC-Beta 
	c. 	G-BHC-Delta 
225. 	Leptophos 
226. 	Malathion 
227. 	Metabolites of DOT: 
	a. 	4,4'-DDE;(p,p'-DDE) 
	b. 	4,4'-DDD;(p,p'-TDE) 
228. 	Metabolites of endesulfan: 
	a. 	Endosulfan sulfate 
229. 	Metabolites of endrin: 
	a. 	Endrin aldephyde 
230. 	Metabolites of heptachlor: 
	a. 	Heptachlor apoxide 
231. 	Methomyl 
232. 	Methoxyclor 
233. 	Methyl mercaptan 
234. 	Methyl parathion 
235. 	Mevinphos 
236. 	Mexacarb 
237. 	Mirex 
238. 	Monocrotophos 
239. 	Naled 
240. 	Nicotine 
241. 	Nitrofen 
242. 	Oxydemeton-methyl 
243. 	Paraquat 
244. 	Parathion 
245. 	Phorate 
246. 	Phosazetim 
247. 	Phosmet 
248. 	Phosphamidon 
249. 	Rotenone 
250. 	Silvex,propylene glycolbutyl ether ester 
251. 	Sodium fluoroacetate 
252. 	Strychnine 
253. 	Sulfallate 
254. 	Sulfotepp 
255. 	TDE 
256. 	TEPP 
257. 	Terbufos 
258. 	Tetrachlorvinphos 
259. 	Thiram 
260. 	Toxaphene 
261. 	Trichlorfon 
262. 	Trichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4,5-T) 
263. 	Trifluralin 
264. 	Ziram 
 
(Ord. No. 631, app. A, 6-10-2002)  
Sec. 78-207. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Applicability of charge. The sewage disposal charge established in this section shall apply to each lot or parcel of land, building or premises (referred to in this section as "premises") from which sewage is discharged into any public combined sewer or public sanitary sewer, and to each premises for which a connection to any sewer is ordered to be installed, and such charges are to take effect upon the expiration of the time limit for the installation of the sewer connection or upon use of such connection for the disposal of sewage, whichever occurs first. 
(b)  Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this section and related regulations shall be as follows: 
Debt service charges means the costs of retiring sewage disposal bond issues, including reserve fund requirements, which are assessed to users in accordance with the adopted rates. 
Industrial cost recovery and ICR mean the recovery, by the township from the industrial users of the sewer system, the federal grant amount allocable to the treatment of wastes for such users. 
Industrial user class means the users discharging industrial wastes into the sewerage system. 
Operation and maintenance costs means the costs to operate and maintain the sewerage system, excluding capital costs for new construction. 
Replacement costs means the expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment, accessories or appurtenances which are necessary during the service life of the sewerage system to maintain the capacity and performances for which the system is designed and constructed. 
Residential and commercial user class means the users discharging domestic wastes into the sewerage system. 
User charges means the costs of operation, maintenance and replacement of the sewerage system which are assessed to users in accordance with the adopted rates. 
(c)  Basis of charge. 
(1)  The rates established in this section shall be based upon the amount of water used upon the customer's premises, including water from public and private supplies, or at the election of the customer as provided in this section, upon the amount of sewage discharged to the public sewers. All private water supplies, any portion of which reaches the sewer, shall be metered at the customer's expense and the consumption thereof shall be added to the consumption from the public water supply and the resultant total shall be used to establish the sewage disposal charge. Failure to meter any water supply shall not release the customer from paying the sewage disposal charge thereon. In such case, the meter size required and the total water consumption shall be estimated by the director of general services and shall be conclusive. 
(2)  The rates established in this section shall consist of both a user charge and a debt service charge for all users of the sewerage system. Such charges shall be reviewed annually to ensure they properly reflect the cost of service between user classes and the location of service. 
(d)  Optional arrangement. 
(1)  Any customer may elect to establish metering facilities registering the discharge from his premises to the public sewers. All such arrangements shall be subject to the prior approval of the director; and the expense thereof, including installation, maintenance and operation, shall be borne by the customer. 
(2)  When metering facilities registering the discharge from the premises to the public sewers have been installed as permitted by this section, the readiness-to-serve charge provided for in subsection (e)(1)a. or (f)(1)a. of this section shall be based upon the water meter size, as determined by the director, which would be required if all liquids reaching the sewage metering facilities were delivered through the public water supply. The disposal rate charge provided for in subsections (e)(1)b. and (f)(1)b. of this section shall be applied to the flow of sewage. If the metering facilities shall fail to operate or register the flow correctly, the charge shall be based upon the estimate of the director of general services of the flow of sewage for the billing period. 
(e)  Sewage disposal charges for premises within the township. 
(1)  The net rate charged for sewage disposal for premises classified as residential-commercial users within the limits of the township shall be the sum of the following user charges and the debt service charge: 
a.  User charge based on water consumption, or on the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at the rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. An additional charge, in cents per 1,000 gallons, shall be added to such user charge, based upon the township's cost for the purchase of electrical power for municipal pumping purposes during the month immediately preceding the period covered by the customer's bill. Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the township's cost for electrical power, in cents per kilowatt-hour, times 1.550. 
b.  Debt service charge based on the size of each water meter measuring water, any part of which is discharged into a public sewer: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Amount 
(per quarter) 
5/8	$   14.25 
¾ 	22.80 
1 	40.00 
1½ 	92.00 
2 	161.00 
3 	338.00 
4 	623.00 
6 	1,374.00 
8 	2,413.00 
10 	3,800.00 
 
c.  Debt service charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at the rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. 
(2)  The net rate charged for sewage disposal for premises classified as industrial users within the limits of the township shall be the sum of the following user charges and the debt service charge: 
a.  User charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at the rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. An additional charge shall be added to such user charge, in cents per 1,000 gallons, based upon the township's cost for the purchase of electrical power municipal pumping purposes during the month immediately preceding the period covered by the customer's bill. Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the township's cost for electrical power, in cents per kilowatt-hour, times 1.550. 
b.  Debt service charge based on the size of each water meter measuring water, any part of which is discharged into a public sewer: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Amount 
(per quarter) 
5/8	$   14.25 
¾ 	22.80 
1 	40.00 
1½ 	92.00 
2 	161.00 
3 	338.00 
4 	623.00 
6 	1,374.00 
8 	2,413.00 
10 	3,800.00 
 
c.  Debt service charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at a rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. 
(f)  Sewage disposal charges for premises outside the township. 
(1)  The net rate charged for sewage disposal for premises outside the township, classified as residential-commercial users, but excluding the premises for which a different rate is established pursuant to this section, shall be the sum of the following user charges and the debt service charge: 
a.  User charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at the rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. An additional charge shall be added to such user charge, in cents per 1,000 gallons, based upon the township's cost for the purchase of electrical power for municipal pumping purposes during the month immediately preceding the period covered by the customer's bill. Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the township's cost for electrical power, in cents per kilowatt-hour, times 1.550. 
b.  Debt service charge based on the size of each water meter measuring water, any part of which is discharged into a public sewer: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Amount 
(per quarter) 
5/8	$   14.25 
¾ 	22.80 
1 	40.00 
1½ 	92.00 
2 	161.00 
3 	338.00 
4 	623.00 
6 	1,374.00 
8 	2,413.00 
10 	3,800.00 
 
c.  Debt service charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at a rate of $1.05 per 1,000 gallons. Such charge shall include the indirect charges made within the township for such costs as general obligation sewer bond issues and assessments for lateral sewer construction. 
(2)  The net rate charged for sewage disposal for premises outside the township, classified as industrial users, but excluding the premises for which a different rate is established pursuant to this section, shall be the sum of the user charge and debt service charge. 
a.  User charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at the rate of $0.50 per 1,000 gallons. An additional charge shall be added to such user charge, in cents per 1,000 gallons, based upon the township's cost for the purchase of electrical power for municipal pumping purposes during the month immediately preceding the period covered by the customer's bill. Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the township's cost for electrical power, in cents per kilowatt-hour, times 1.550. 
b.  Debt service charge based on the size of each water meter measuring water, any part of which is discharged into a public sewer: 
Meter Size 
(in inches) 	Amount 
(per quarter) 
5/8	$   14.25 
¾ 	22.80 
1 	40.00 
1½ 	92.00 
2 	161.00 
3 	338.00 
4 	623.00 
6 	1,374.00 
8 	2,413.00 
10 	3,800.00 
 
c.  Debt service charge based on water consumption or the discharge into a public sewer, whichever is applicable, at a rate of $1.05 per 1,000 gallons. Such charge shall include the indirect charges made within the township for such costs as general obligation sewer bond issues and assessments for lateral sewer construction. 
(g)  Wastes exceeding discharge limitations. When it is determined by the director that a user is discharging water or wastes to the sewer system which exceed the limits specified, the following additional charges shall be made for that portion of waste load exceeding the limits: 
a.  Five-day BOD, $0.04 per pound. 
b.  Suspended solid, $0.035 per pound. 
c.  Phosphorus, $0.27 per pound. 
(h)  Penalty. A penalty of ten percent of the amount of the charges made under subsection (e) or (f) of this section shall be added to each bill not paid on or before the due date thereon. 
(i)  Free sewage disposal service. No free sewage disposal service shall be furnished to any person, firm or corporation, public or private, or to any public agency. 
(j)  Collection. Charges for sewage disposal service shall be billed by the water division and collected at the same time and in the same manner as provided for water bills. The water division is hereby authorized to enforce the payment of such sewer service bills by shutting off the user's water supply or an action of assumpsit may be instituted by the township against such user. The charges for sewage disposal service, which under the provisions of Public Act No. 94 of 1933 (MCL 141.101 et seq.), are made a lien on the premises to which furnished, are hereby recognized to constitute such lien; and the director of finance shall, annually, on or about May 1, certify to the township assessor all sewage disposal charges which shall be delinquent for six months, whereupon such charge shall be entered upon the next tax roll as a charge against such premises and shall be collected and the lien thereof enforced in the same manner as general township taxes against such premises are collected and the lien thereof enforced. A like lien for such charges and service shall, to the extent permitted by law, be imposed against property outside the township and shall be enforced as provided in such act, observing procedures similar to the procedures in this subsection (j) as appropriate for township taxes. 
(k)  Agreements. No provision of this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the township and any person whereby sewage or waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the township for treatment, subject to the payment by such person of such additional charges as may be reasonable. Charges for such service shall be as provided by resolution of the township board or by written agreement approved by the township board. 
(l)  Agreements with public officers and agencies. The charges for sewage disposal services furnished to the drain commissioner or to any municipality or public agency shall be provided for by written agreement approved by the township board, the schedule of charges to be set forth in such agreement or in a resolution adopted by the township board. In no event shall such charges be less than the total cost, including all direct and indirect costs of comparable service to premises within the township. 
(m)  User charges and fees. 
(1)  It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from users of the township's sewerage system and treatment plant for the implementation and operation of the pretreatment program established. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth in a schedule of charges and fees and shall be sufficient to meet costs of operation of the pretreatment program or as provided by law. 
(2)  The township manager shall adopt charges and fees by rule and regulation, subject to the approval by the township board, and such charges and fees shall include: 
a.  Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the waste control and pretreatment programs established by this section; 
b.  Costs for monitoring, sampling, analysis, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
c.  Costs for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
d.  A fee for filing appeals; 
e.  Costs of consistent removal (by the POTW) of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; and 
f.  Other fees and charges as the township manager may deem appropriate to carry out the requirements of this section. 
The fees and charges established by the township manager shall be based upon the reasonable cost to the township to regulate or perform the action. 
(Ord. No. 631, app. A, 6-10-2002)  
Secs. 78-208—78-230. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - NORTHWEST UTILITY AUTHORITY SEWAGE DISPOSAL REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 78-231. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Saginaw Charter Township is a member of the Northwest Utility Authority, an authority organized pursuant to Public Act 233 of the Michigan Public Acts of 1955, as amended. 
(b)  The Northwest Utility Authority is authorized to adopt rules and regulations, which are enforceable within the boundaries of each of its member municipalities, pursuant to Michigan Complied Laws Section 124.284d, as amended. 
(c)  This township, as a member municipality of the Northwest Utility Authority, is empowered to enforce the rules and regulations of the Northwest Utility Authority within its jurisdictional boundaries, pursuant to MCLA section 124.284d(3), as amended. 
(d)  This township desires to establish concurrent authority to enforce the rules and regulations as adopted by Northwest Utility and approved by this township. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 1, 9-8-2003)  
Sec. 78-232. - Definitions. 
Authority shall mean the Northwest Utility Authority, an authority created under Public 233 of 1955, Michigan Public Acts, as amended. 
Authorized local official shall mean the township ordinance enforcement officer of Saginaw Charter Township. 
Municipal civil infraction action means a civil action in which the defendant is alleged to be responsible for a municipal civil infraction. 
Municipal civil infraction violation notice shall mean a written notice prepared by an authorized township official, directing a person to appear in district court and to pay the fine and costs, if any, prescribed for violation of the authority sewage disposal regulations. 
Sewage disposal regulations shall mean the Northwest Utility Authority Sewage Disposal Regulations, as approved by the township board on September 8, 2003 and adopted by the authority, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 2, 9-8-2003)  
Sec. 78-233. - Municipal civil infraction action; commencement. 
A municipal civil infraction may be commenced for violation of the sewage disposal regulations upon the issuance by an authorized official of the township, of a municipal civil infraction citation directing the alleged violator to appear in district court. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 3, 9-8-2003)  
Sec. 78-234. - Municipal civil infraction citations; issuance and service. 
Municipal civil infraction citations shall be issued and served by authorized township officials as follows: 
(1)  The time for appearance specified in a citation shall be within a reasonable time after the citation is issued. 
(2)  The place for appearance specified in a citation shall be the district court of the County of Saginaw, Michigan. 
(3)  An authorized township official may issue a citation to a person if: 
a.  Based upon investigation, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for a municipal civil infraction; or 
b.  Based upon the investigation of a complaint by someone who allegedly witnessed the person commit a municipal civil infraction, the official has reasonable cause to believe that the person is responsible for an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 4, 9-8-2003)  
Sec. 78-235. - Penalities and sanctions; injunctive relief. 
(a)  Violations and penalties. A person who violates any provision of the sewage disposal regulations, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued there under, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement of the sewage disposal regulations is responsible for a municipal civil infraction, subject to payment of a civil fine of $1,000.00 per day, plus costs and other sanctions, for each infraction. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Fines/schedule of fines. Increased fines may be imposed for repeat offenses. As used in this section, "repeat offense," means a second or any subsequent municipal civil infraction violation of the same requirement or provision of these regulations (i) committed by a person to be responsible. The increased fined for repeat offenses under these regulations shall be in accordance with the following schedule: 
(1)  For a first repeat offense, the fine shall be $2,500.00, plus costs; and 
(2)  For a second or subsequent repeat offense, the fine shall be $5,000.00, plus costs. 
(c)  Authorized official. The township ordinance enforcement officer and the director of environmental protection and water system management, as provided in the authority's disposal sewage regulations, are hereby designated as the authorized officials, to issue municipal civil infraction citations or municipal civil infraction violation notices as provided in this division and the sewage disposal regulations. 
(d)  Other enforcement action. Issuance of a civil infraction and imposition of a civil fine shall not be a bar against, or a pre-requisite for, taking any other action against the user, as authorized under the sewage disposal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 646, § 5, 9-8-2003) 
 
Chapter 82 - VEGETATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; environment, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 42; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; zoning, app. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 82-1—82-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - NOXIOUS WEEDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Noxious weeds, MCL 247.61 et seq. 
 
Sec. 82-31. - Definition. 
The term "noxious weeds" as used in this article shall be defined as such term is defined in Public Act No. 359 of 1941 (MCL 247.61 et seq.). 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.02) 
Cross reference— Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference— Noxious weeds defined, MCL 247.62.  
Sec. 82-32. - Exclusion. 
Nothing contained in this article shall apply to weeds in fields devoted to growing any small grain crops such as wheat, oats, barley or rye. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.09) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 247.64(4).  
Sec. 82-33. - Violations. 
Any owner who shall refuse to destroy such noxious weeds as provided for in sections 82-37 and 82-38 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.00. Such fine when collected shall become a part of the noxious weed control fund of the township. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.08) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 247.64(3).  
Sec. 82-34. - Statutes adopted. 
Any rights, or remedies, granted to townships and in particular to Saginaw Township, under Public Act No. 359 of 1941 (MCL 247.61 et seq.) and not otherwise incorporated in this article, are hereby adopted by reference, it being the intention of this township board to provide a plan of control and eradication of noxious weeds for the township, by the use of this article and such state statute and any other state statutes which may be applicable in whole, or in part, to the township. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.03)  
Sec. 82-35. - Commissioner of noxious weeds. 
(a)  The township board may appoint a competent person to be the commissioner of noxious weeds. The township board shall report the name and address of the person so appointed to the state department of agriculture within ten days after making such appointment. Such person shall take the oath required of township officers. The commissioner of noxious weeds shall hold office for a term of two years, or until a successor is appointed and qualified. The commissioner of noxious weeds shall receive for his compensation such sum as may be fixed by the township board. The township board may, at any time, or good cause shown, remove the commissioner of noxious weeds from office and appoint his successor to serve the remaining portion of his term. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of noxious weeds to make diligent inquiry concerning the introduction and existence of noxious weeds in the township, if such weeds are found to be growing in the township, the commissioner of noxious weeds shall take care that they do not go to seed or otherwise spread, or become a detriment to the public health. The commissioner of noxious weeds shall carefully seek out, and learn, so far as practicable, the best methods of noxious weed destruction. The commissioner of noxious weeds shall persistently apply in proper time such remedy or treatment as shall be best calculated to prevent their spread and to eradicate the noxious weeds. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the commissioner of noxious weeds to prosecute or complain to the proper authorities of any person or corporation who may violate any law now existing, or which may hereafter be passed, on the subject of noxious weeds. 
(d)  The commissioner of noxious weeds shall apply the best known means and use the utmost diligence in eradicating noxious weeds; but he shall not have power to expend in work or materials more than $25.00 on any one infested tract, without the advice, and consent, in writing of the supervisor of the township. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.05) 
State Law reference— Commissioner of noxious weeds, MCL 247.63, 247.66, 247.67.  
Sec. 82-36. - Growth of noxious weeds prohibited. 
It shall be the duty of all owners of lands on which noxious weeds are found growing to destroy the noxious weeds before they reach a seed bearing stage and to prevent such weeds from perpetuating themselves, or to prevent such weeds from becoming a detriment to public health. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.04)  
Sec. 82-37. - Destruction. 
(a)  The commissioner of noxious weeds shall notify by certified mail with return receipt requested, the owner, agent, or occupant, but failure of the commissioner of noxious weeds to give such notice shall not, however, constitute a defense to any action to enforce the payment of any penalty provided for, or debt created under the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In case any such owner, agent or occupant shall refuse to destroy such noxious weeds, or cause the noxious weeds to be destroyed, it shall be the duty of the commissioner of noxious weeds to enter upon such lands and to destroy such noxious weeds or cause the noxious weeds to be destroyed. Express power to so enter upon such lands and destroy such noxious weeds is hereby conferred upon the commissioner of noxious weeds. 
(c)  Any expense incurred in the destruction of such noxious weeds shall be paid by the owner or owners of such land. The township shall have a lien against such lands for such expense, which lien shall be enforced in the manner now provided by law for the enforcement of mechanics liens. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.06) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 247.64(1).  
Sec. 82-38. - Subdivided land. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling and eradicating noxious weeds in subdivided land, in the event the owner, agent or occupant of any subdivided land in any subdivision in which buildings have been erected on 60 percent of the lots included in that subdivision, or the owners, agent or occupants of lots along all improved streets in a common usage, for a depth of ten rods or the depths of the lots, whichever is the lesser, has failed, after ten days notice as provided in this section, to destroy such weeds or cause the weeds to be destroyed the commissioner of noxious weeds or any other agent authorized by the township board may enter upon such subdivided lands or lots and destroy, by cutting any such weeds. 
(b)  All expenses incurred in the destruction of such weeds shall be paid by the owner or owners of such subdivided lands. The township shall have a lien upon such subdivided lands or lots for such expense, with such lien to be enforced in the manner provided by the general laws of the state providing for the enforcement of tax liens. 
(Code 1986, § 8-09.07) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, MCL 247.64(2).  
Secs. 82-39—82-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DUTCH ELM DISEASE 
 
Sec. 82-61. - Public nuisances. 
(a)  Fungus. Any elm tree, whether located on public or private property within the township, which is infected with the Dutch Elm Disease fungus (Ceratostomella ulmi), is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(b)  Bark beetles. Any elm tree or part thereof, whether located on public or private property within the township, which harbors either of the bark beetles (Scolytus multistriatus and Hylurgopinus rufipes), which carry and transmit Dutch Elm Disease, is declared to be a public nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 8-01.02)  
Sec. 82-62. - Abatement of public nuisance. 
(a)  Service of notice. Any public nuisance under this article shall be abated by the owner of the premises upon which such nuisance is located or which adjoins that portion of a street or alley where such nuisance is located within five days after service of notice thereof on such owner by the township supervisor. 
(b)  Carried out by supervisor. If, at the expiration of the time limit in such notice, the owner has not complied with the requirements thereof, the township supervisor shall cause the requirements of such notice to be carried out. The cost of such abatement shall be charged against the premises and the owner thereof in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Compliance with state regulations. Any person abating any nuisance under this article shall comply with the provisions of the applicable laws of the state and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
(d)  Financial relief for farms. The township supervisor after proper inspection of any elm trees infected with the Dutch Elm Disease, where located in a farmer's wood lot and the cost of abating the nuisance is financially burdensome on the owner may make arrangements with the owner to abate such nuisance at the sole expense of the township or by use of welfare labor, but this subsection shall not apply generally to the suburban properties used for dwelling purposes and not for general farming. 
(Code 1986, § 8-01.03)  
APPENDIX A - ZONING[1] 
SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP ZONING ORDINANCE [NO. 423] 
AN ORDINANCE TO PROVIDE FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS; TO ENCOURAGE AND REGULATE THE PROPER LOCATION AND USE OF LAND, BUILDING[S], AND STRUCTURES FOR RESIDENCE, TRADE OR OTHER PURPOSES; TO REGULATE THE HEIGHT AND BULK OF BUILDINGS, THE DENSITY OF POPULATION, AND THE MINIMUM DIMENSIONS OF YARDS, COURTS, AND OTHER OPEN SPACES; TO PROVIDE FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION, AND AMENDMENT OF SAID ORDINANCE. 
SAGINAW CHARTER TOWNSHIP, SAGINAW, MICHIGAN, PURSUANT TO THE TOWNSHIP ZONING ACT, PUBLIC ACT NO. 184 OF 1943, MCL 125.271 ET SEQ., HEREBY ENACTS AND ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is the township's zoning ordinance, being Ord. No. 423, adopted January 23, 1989, and effective on March 2, 1989. The township furnished a copy for printing that was updated through October 2001. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the copy furnished by the township. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and the same system of capitalization, citations to state statutes, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Cross reference— Any ordinance or portion of any ordinance, pertaining to zoning, including, but not limited to, to basic zoning ordinance, ordinances rezoning property or amending the zoning map and ordinances promulgating zoning text amendments saved from repeal, § 1-11(14); buildings and building regulations, ch. 14; zoning for carnivals and outdoor amusements, § 18-75; environment, ch. 26; floods, ch. 34; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58; subdivisions and other divisions of land, ch. 62; land divisions, § 62-141 et seq.; telecommunications, ch. 70; vegetation, ch. 82. 
State Law reference— Zoning, MCL 125.271 et seq. 
 
PART I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS  
[Chapter 1. - General Provisions] 
 
Sec. 101. - Short title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance.  
Sec. 102. - Purpose. 
It is the general purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public safety, health, morals, convenience, and general welfare, and further to: 
1.  Guide the use and development of the community's lands and natural resources in accordance with their character, adaptability and suitability for particular uses as identified in a basic plan of land use and population density. 
2.  Protect the character of the community and enhance the social and economic stability of the township and individual zone districts as herein set forth. 
3.  Lessen congestion on the public streets and highways and facilitate safe and convenient access appropriate to various uses of land and buildings throughout the community. 
4.  Form a stable guide for public action to facilitate the adequate provision of sewerage and drainage, water supply distribution, and educational, recreational, and other public services. 
5.  Conserve life, property, and natural resources and the expenditure of funds for public facilities and services by establishing herein standards to guide physical development and to provide for enforcement of said standards. 
6.  Adopt provisions for each designated zoning district which shall control the use of land and property; and use, size, and location of buildings; the minimum yard, courts and other open spaces; and the maximum number of families to be housed in buildings or structures.  
Sec. 103. - Interpretation. 
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. It is not intended by this Ordinance to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any existing provisions of law or ordinance, or any rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law, relating to the uses of buildings or premises; nor is it intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other agreements between parties. However, where this Ordinance imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger yards, courts or other open spaces than are imposed or required by such existing provision of law or ordinance, or by such rules, regulations or permits, or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.  
Sec. 104. - Severability. 
It is the legislative intent that this Ordinance be liberally construed and should any provision or section of this Ordinance be held unconstitutional or invalid, such ruling shall not be construed as affecting the validity of remaining portions of the Ordinance, it being the intent that this Ordinance shall stand notwithstanding the invalidity of any provision or section therein.  
Sec. 105. - Repeal. 
The Saginaw Township Zoning Ordinance No. 168, including zone district classification, enacted on November 19, 1971, as amended, is hereby repealed and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent or in conflict herewith are also hereby repealed; provided, however, said repeal shall not abate any action now pending under or by virtue of the ordinance herein repealed, nor shall said repeal discontinue, abate, modify, or alter any penalty accrued or to occur or affect the rights of any person, firm or corporation, or waive any right of this township under any section or provision of the ordinance herein repealed existing at the time of the passage of this Ordinance.  
Sec. 106. - Effective date. 
This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days from date of publication.  
CHAPTER 2. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 201. - Rules applying to the text. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, certain rules of construction apply to the text, as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense, and the singular includes the plural, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 
2.  The word "person" includes a corporation or firm as well as an individual. 
3.  The word "structure" includes the word "building". 
4.  The word "lot" includes the word "plot", "tract", or "parcel". 
5.  The term "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word "may" is permissive. 
6.  The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or structure shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied". 
7.  Any word or term not herein defined shall be used with a meaning of common standard use.  
Sec. 202. - Definitions. 
1.  Accessory use, building or structure. A use, building or structure, except swimming pools, on the same lot and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use, building or structure. 
2.  Alley. Any dedicated public way other than a street which provides only a secondary means of access to abutting property and is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
3.  Alterations. Any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, or partitions, columns, beams, or girders; or any change which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed". 
4.  Automobile car wash. An establishment being housed in a building or portion thereof together with the necessary mechanical equipment used for washing automobiles and using production line methods. 
5.  Automobile repair shop. An establishment being housed in a building or portion thereof together with the necessary equipment used for the general repair of automobiles, engine rebuilding, rebuilding or reconditioning of motor vehicles, collision service and painting or undercoating of automobiles. 
6.  Automobile service station. An establishment being housed in a building or portion thereof together with the necessary equipment used for the direct retail sale of gasoline or any other engine fuel, kerosene, or motor oil and lubricants or grease, and including the sale of minor accessories, and the servicing of and minor repair of automobiles. 
7.  Basement. A story having part but not more than one-half of its height below finished grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or if it is used for business purposes. 
8.  Berm. A manmade, formed earthen mound of definite height and width used for obscuring purposes. 
9.  Block. The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets or between the nearest intersecting or intercepting street and a physical barrier such as a railroad, right-of-way, park, river channel or unsubdivided acreage. 
10.  Blood plasma donation centers . The collection of blood/plasma as a principal use on a property. Accessory blood/plasma collection associated with an emergency relief charity (such as the Red Cross), medical office, medical laboratory, medical clinic, hospital, government agency, nursing home or other medical facility shall not be considered a blood/plasma collection center. 
11.  Bufferyard and/or bufferzone. A strip of land, including any specific type and amount of planting or structures which may be required to minimize or eliminate conflicts between different types of land uses. 
12.  Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. 
13.  Building, front line of. The line that coincides with the face of the building nearest the front line of the lot. This face includes sun parlors and enclosed porches but does not include steps. Said line shall be parallel to the front lot line and measured as a straight line between the intersecting points. with the side yard. 
14.  Building, height of. The vertical distance measured from the mean elevation of the finished grade line of the ground about the front of the building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck line of mansard roofs, and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. 
15.  Building lines. A line defining the minimum front, side or rear yard requirements outside of which no building or structure may be located. 
16.  Building, principal. A building in which is conducted main or principal uses of the lot on which said building is located. 
17.  Bulk station. A place where crude petroleum, gasoline, naphtha, benzene, benzol, kerosene, or any other liquid except such as will stand a test of 150 degrees Fahrenheit closed cup tester are stored for wholesale purposes only, where the aggregate capacity of all storage tanks is more than 6,000 gallons. 
18.  Clinic. An establishment where human or animal patients who are primarily not lodged overnight and are admitted for medical and/or dental examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists, veterinarians or similar professionals primarily on an outpatient basis only. 
19.  Clubs. An organization catering exclusively to members and their guests, or premises and buildings for recreational, artistic, political, or social purposes, which are not conducted primarily for gain and which do not provide merchandise, vending, or commercial activities except as required incidentally for the membership and purpose of such club. 
20.  Commercial recreation establishment. A facility designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, amusement or leisuretime activities and other customary recreational activities either within an enclosed building (indoors) or outside of an enclosed building (outdoors) operated as a business and open for use by the public for a fee. 
21.  Commercial vehicle or trailer. Any wheeled vehicle that is either available for hire or used as part of or in connection with a nonagricultural business or industry. 
22.  Common land. A parcel or parcels of land together with the improvements thereon, the use, maintenance, and enjoyment of which are intended to be shared by the owners and occupants of the individual building units in a planned unit development. 
23.  Comprehensive development (master) plan. The statement of policy of the township planning commission relative to the agreed upon and officially adopted guidelines for a desirable physical pattern for future community development. The plan consists of a series of maps, charts, and written materials representing in summary form the soundest concept for community growth to occur in an orderly, attractive, economical, and efficient manner thereby creating the very best community living conditions. 
24.  Convalescent or nursing home. A residential placement home for the care of the aged or infirm wherein two or more persons are cared for. Said home shall conform and qualify for [a] license under state law. 
25.  Convention center. A facility primarily designed to showcase large national and international conferences, trade shows, business meetings, educational, cultural, social and community events which contains a minimum of 75,000 square feet of exhibit and meeting area. 
26.  Courts. Open, unoccupied spaces other than yards on the same lot with a building. 
a)  Court, inner. An open, unoccupied space not extending to the street or front, or rear yard. 
b)  Court, outer. An open, unoccupied space opening upon a street, alley, yard or setback. 
27.  Cul-de-sac. A street with only one outlet having sufficient space at the closed end to provide vehicular turning area. 
28.  District. Any section within the community for which the regulations contained within this Ordinance are the same. 
29.  Domestic unit. See subsection (1.d) under Family . 
30.  Drive-in. A business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is dependent upon providing a paved parking area from which patrons are served by an employee of the business without leaving their motor vehicles. This business requires employees to be outdoors as patrons cannot be served from any structure. 
31.  Drive-through. An accessory use to a service or restaurant business where a paved drive area is specifically designated to serve customers in motor vehicles from a permanent building. The customer does not leave the motor vehicle, is served from a window, and customarily leaves the premises shortly after being served. Such uses may include, but are not limited to, the following: financial institutions, fast food establishments, dry cleaners and convenience stores. It does not include car washes. 
32.  Dwelling. A building, or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by one family for residential purposes and having cooking facilities. 
33.  Dwelling types. For the purposes of this Ordinance, dwellings are separated into the following categories and herewith defined accordingly: 
a)  Single-family dwelling is a detached building containing one dwelling only. Townhouses included as defined in chapter 22, section 2207. 
b)  Two-family dwelling is a building containing two dwellings. 
c)  Multiple dwelling is a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units. Garden apartments are included as defined in chapter 22, section 2207. 
34.  Dwelling unit. One or more rooms including a single kitchen in a dwelling designed for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping purposes. 
35.  Electronic message board. A video terminal or electronic changeable copy sign in which the copy consists of an array of lights activated and deactivated simultaneously. Electronic message boards do not include animated signs. 
36.  Essential services. The phrase "essential services" means the erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or municipal departments or commissions of underground, surface or overhead gas, electrical, steam, or water transmission or distribution systems, collections, communication, including mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, wires, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, towers, poles, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection therewith reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by such public utilities or municipal departments or commissions, or for the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, but not including buildings other than such buildings as are primarily enclosures or shelters of the above essential service equipment. Personal wireless communication facilities are not considered an essential service. 
37.  Family. 
(1)  Family means: 
a.  One person, two unrelated persons; 
b.  Not more than six foster care adults living in a single dwelling unit. This provision is subject to Public Act 218 of 1979 as amended (MCL 400.701 to 400.737); or 
c.  Where there are more than two persons residing in a dwelling unit, persons classified constituting a family shall be limited to husband, wife, son, daughter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, aunt, uncle, stepchildren, and legally adopted children, or any combination of the above persons living together in a single dwelling unit. 
d.  Domestic unit: As herein defined, a domestic unit shall be given the same rights and privileges and shall have the same duties and responsibilities as a family, as defined herein for purposes of construing and interpreting this chapter. Domestic unit shall mean a collective number of individuals living together in one dwelling unit whose relationship is of a regular and permanent nature and having a distinct domestic character or a demonstrable and recognizable bond where each party is responsible for the basic material needs of the other and all are living and cooking as a single housekeeping unit. 
(2)  Anyone seeking the rights and privileges afforded a member of a family by this Code shall have the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence of their family relationship. 
(3)  Any person seeking the rights and privileges afforded a member of a domestic unit by this chapter shall have the burden of proof by clear and convincing evidence of each of the elements of a domestic unit. 
(4)  This definition shall not include any society, club, fraternity, sorority, association, lodge, combine, federation, group, coterie, or organization, nor include a group of individuals whose association is temporary or seasonal in character or nature or for the limited duration of their education, nor a group whose sharing of a house is not to function as a family, but merely for convenience and economics. 
38.  Family day care facilities. A private home in which one but less than seven minor children are received for care and supervision for periods of less than 24 hours a day unattended by a parent or legal guardian, except children related to an adult member of the resident family by blood, marriage or adoption. 
39.  Farm. A tract of land which is directly devoted to agricultural purposes; provided further, that farms may be considered as including establishments operated as greenhouses, nurseries, orchards, chicken hatcheries, furbearing animals, game, dog kennels, riding or boarding stables, livestock auctions, stone quarried, gravel pits, sand pits, or top soil mining shall not constitute a farm thereunder. 
40.  Fast food restaurant. An establishment predominantly offering food prepared for and/or packaged as carry out items whether consumed on the premises, in the building, parking lot or elsewhere. 
41.  Fence, decorative. A decorative fence is intended to enclose a portion of a parcel in a decorative manner and is not necessarily intended to preclude or inhibit entry or vision into the property. Examples of decorative fences include split rail, wrought iron and similar fences that are visually "transparent" and/or readily breached. 
42.  Fence, functional. A functional fence is intended to enclose a parcel or portion of a parcel in order to prevent or make difficult entry by animals, persons or vehicles. Such a fence may also be a visual screen. Chainlink, masonry, stacked, and similar types of fences are examples of functional fences. 
43.  Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land from the overflow of inland waters and/or unusual and rapid accumulation of surface water runoff from any source. 
44.  Garage, community. A community garage is a building used for the storage of three or more automobiles of two or more owners and containing no public repair or service facilities. 
45.  Home occupation. A home occupation is a lawful activity commonly carried on within a dwelling by a member or members of the family who occupy the dwelling where the occupation is secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and up to one other person, and the residential character of the dwelling is maintained. Auto and/or vehicle repair (painting, sales, and salvage), kennels and other similar uses are not permitted home occupations. 
46.  Hospital. An institution for the diagnosis, treatment or care of aged, sick or injured people. The term "hospital" shall include sanitarium, rest home, nursing home and convalescent home, but shall not include any institution for the care of mental disorders or the treatment of alcoholics or drug addicts. 
47.  Identity sign. A sign which carries only the name of the firm, the major enterprise, logo, or the principal product offered for sale on the premises, or a combination of these. 
48.  Institute for human care. A public or private facility for physical or mental care. A human care institution may include hospitals, convalescent, assisted care facilities and nursing homes. It does not include homes for the mentally disadvantaged, physically impaired or substance abuse rehabilitation facilities and the like. 
49.  Kennel, commercial. Any lot or premises used for the commercial sale or boarding of dogs, cats or other domestic pets. 
50.  Kennel, private. Any lot or premises used for the private maintenance of up to six dogs, cats or other domestic pets four months or older owned by the resident on the premises, not involving commercial activities. The keeping of more than six animals shall be considered a commercial kennel regardless of ownership or species of animals. 
51.  Legislative body. The Saginaw Charter Township Board of Trustees. 
52.  Loading space. An offstreet space at least ten feet wide, 25 feet long and 15 feet high, either within a building or outside on the same lot, provided, maintained, and available for the loading or unloading of goods or merchandise and having direct and unobstructed access to a street or alley. 
53.  Lot. A parcel of land occupied or intended for occupancy by a main building and accessory buildings thereto, together with such open spaces as are required under the provisions of this Ordinance. Every lot shall abut upon and have permanent access to a public street, except as provided in section 302(1). 
54.  Lot area. The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
55.  Lot; corner, interior and through. Corner lot is a lot which has at least two contiguous sides abutting upon a street for their full length, provided the two sides intersect at an angle of not more than 135 degrees. 
a)  Interior lot is a lot other than a corner lot. 
b)  Through lot is an interior lot having frontage on two streets which do not intersect at a point contiguous to such lot. 
56.  Lot coverage. The percentage of the lot area covered by the ground floor of principal and accessory buildings or structures. 
57.  Lot depth. The average distance from the front lot line of the lot to its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lot line. 
58.  Lot line, front. In the case of an interior lot, that line separating said lot from the street. In the case of a through lot, that line separating said lot from either street. In the case of a corner lot, the shorter street line shall be considered the front lot line. 
59.  Lot line, rear. A lot line which is opposite the front lot line. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line may be opposite either front lot line, but there shall only be one rear lot line. In the case of a lot with side lot lines converging at the rear, the, rear lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than 20 feet long, lying farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. 
60.  Lot line, side. Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line. 
61.  Lot lines. The lines bordering a lot as defined herein. 
62.  Lot of record. A parcel of land, the dimensions of which are shown on a document or map on file with the county register of deeds or in common use by county and community officials and which actually exists as shown, or any part of such parcel held in a record ownership separate from that of the remainder thereof. 
63.  Lot, width of. The width measured along the front lot line or street line. 
64.  Marquee. A canopy or covering structure projecting from and attached to a building. 
65.  Misconduct in office. Misconduct in office includes misfeasance, malfeasance and nonfeasance. 
66.  Mixed use. A two-story or multistory building which includes office, commercial, or otherwise nonresidential uses and also includes residential uses, above the first floor. 
67.  Mobile home park. A parcel of land 15 acres or more intended and designed to accommodate 60 or more mobile homes for residential use which is offered to the public for that use along with any structure, facility, area or equipment permitted and incidental to the residential use. Referred to also as "park." 
68.  Modular (premanufactured) housing unit. A dwelling unit constructed solely within a factory as a single unit or in various sized modules which are then transported to a site where they are assembled on a permanent foundation to form a single-family dwelling unit and meeting all codes and regulations applicable to conventional site-built construction. A mobile home is considered a type of modular housing unit with all of the following characteristics: 
a)  Designed for a longterm occupancy. 
b)  Containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems. 
c)  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels. 
d)  Arriving at site to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental location operations. 
69.  Motel. A building or group of buildings, whether detached or in connecting units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units designed primarily for transient automobile facilities. The term "motel" shall include buildings designed as "auto courts," "tourist courts," "motor courts," "motor hotels," and similar appellations which are designed as integrated units of individual rooms under common ownership. 
70.  Multiple dwelling. Any building housing more than two families, unless otherwise defined by this Zoning Ordinance. 
71.  Municipal land. Property owned and occupied by Saginaw Charter Township or a Saginaw County governmental agency. 
72.  Nonconforming use. A building, structure, or use of land lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this Ordinance and which does not conform to the regulations of the district or zone in which it is situated. 
73.  Open space. Any unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot with a building. See "Courts." 
74.  Parking space. An off-street space exclusive of necessary driveways, aisles or maneuvering areas suitable to accommodate one motor vehicle and having direct, unobstructed access to a street or alley. 
75.  Personal wireless communication facilities. Transmitters, antenna structures or towers and other types of equipment necessary for providing personal wireless services to the general public. Common examples are personal communications systems (PCS) such as cellular radio telephone service and paging. 
76.  Planning commission. The Saginaw Charter Township Planning Commission. Any reference to "zoning commission" or "commission" shall mean the planning commission. 
77.  Principal use. The main use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the premises exists. 
78.  Projection. The distance by which a sign or other structure extends over public property or beyond the building line. 
79.  Public utility. Any person, firm, corporation, municipal department or board fully authorized to furnish to the public electricity, gas, steam, telephone, telegraph, cable, transportation or water. 
80.  Quarry, sand pit, gravel pit, top soil stripping. A lot of land or part thereof used for the purpose of extracting stone, sand, gravel, or top soil for sale, excluding the process of grading a lot preparatory to the construction of a building [for which a] permit has been issued. 
81.  Recreational vehicles. All those small mobile units principally designed for recreational past time such as motor homes, camper trailers, pickup campers, pop-up tent trailers, snowmobiles, motorcycles, dune buggies, and similar camping type vehicles or trailers. 
82.  Right-of-way. A street, alley or other thoroughfare or easement permanently established for passage of persons or vehicles. 
83.  Roadside stand. A "roadside stand" is a structure for the seasonal display of agricultural produce with no space for customers within the structure itself. 
84.  Roofline. This shall mean either the high point of the roof or the top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette, and, where a building has several roof levels, this roof or parapet shall be the one belonging to that portion of the building on whose wall the sign is located. 
85.  Salvage yard. An open area where waste, used or secondhand materials are bought and sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled, or handled, including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A salvage yard includes automobile wrecking yards, and two or more inoperative, unlicensed vehicles located on a single lot shall be construed to be a salvage yard. 
86.  Sanitary landfill. A method of disposing of refuse on land without creating nuisances or hazards to public health or safety by utilizing principles of engineering to confine the refuse to the smallest practical area, to reduce it to the smallest practical volume, and to cover it with a suitable cover at the conclusion of each day's operation or at more frequent intervals as necessary. 
87.  Setback line. A line established herein from which required yards are measured. 
88.  Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. The following definitions shall apply to sexually oriented businesses: 
a)  Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein cash-operated, credit-operated, coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, internet or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
b)  Adult bookstore or adult video store. An establishment which offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration, as one of its principal business purposes, any one or more of the following: 
i)  Books, computer diskettes, tapes or hard drives, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video matter or photographs, cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representation and/or items which depict or describe "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or which are characterized by their emphasis upon exhibition or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or 
ii)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are characterized by their emphasis upon "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or designed for use in connection with "sexually explicit activities"; or 
iii)  Items, materials or paraphernalia depicting, displaying, advertising or packaged as "sexually explicit activities" or which depict or describe, or are characterized by their emphasis upon, the exhibition or description of "specified anatomical areas". 
iv)  For purposes of this Ordinance, "principal business purpose" means: 
a)  The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space, meaning 30 percent or more of the interior floor area as defined by the applicable building code; or 
b)  The receipt of 50 percent of more of its annual revenues from the sale of the items listed above. Revenue is a gross increase in assets or a gross decrease in liabilities recognized and measured in conformity with generally accepted accounting principles; or 
c)  The devotion of a significant or substantial portion of its advertising expenditures to the promotion of the sale, rental or viewing of books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, film, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other visual representations, items, materials, or paraphernalia which are characterized by the depiction, description, display, advertising or packaging of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
d)  An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas", and still be characterized as an adult book store, adult novelty or retail store or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, so long as the establishment falls within the definition of an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store as set forth above. 
c)  Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcohol is served, which regularly features: 
i)  Persons who appear in a state of restricted nudity, and/or other material while opaque does not completely cover the entire buttocks (e.g., g-strings) or all portions of the breast below the topmost portion of the areola; or 
ii)  Live performances of an erotic nature which are characterized by the partial exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or "sexually explicit activities" that occur away from the common area of the establishment, such as on a stage, on poles, in booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises wherein an entertainer or waitress provides adult entertainment to members of the public, a patron or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted, operated or maintained for a direct or indirect profit; or 
iii)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
d)  Adult massage parlor. Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other manipulation of the human body which occurs as part of or in connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical areas. The definition of sexually oriented business shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a licensed chiropractor or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team or school athletic program nor a therapeutic massage practitioner. An adult massage parlor is considered a sexually oriented business for purposes of this Ordinance. 
e)  Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar establishment which: 
i)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are regularly characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; and which advertises the availability of this adult type of material by means of a sign, visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising, including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio, internet or television; or 
ii)  Permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for electric transmission over the World Wide Web; or 
iii)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
iv)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
f)  Adult motion picture theater. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
g)  Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by the performance of "sexually explicit activities". This definition does not include a theater which features occasional live nude performances with serious literary, artistic or political value and which has no adverse secondary effects. 
h)  Adult use business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty or retail store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude modeling studio and/or a sexual encounter establishment or any business determined by the building official, township manager, and/or the chief of police, to be an adult use because of the similarities in the characteristics and activities of the business with regulated adult business uses, such as nudity, semi-nudity, exposure of "sexually explicit activities" and/or "specified anatomical areas". The definition of "adult use business" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
i)  Alcoholic commercial establishment. Any hotel, motel, tavern, restaurant, park, nightclub, cocktail lounge, burlesque house, bar, cabaret, taproom, club or other similar establishment licensed by the State of Michigan Liquor Control Commission, or where alcoholic beverages, including beer, are dispensed and/or consumed. This definition shall exclude a theater or auditorium. 
j)  Entertainer. A person who performs some type of activity or pose with the intent of allowing others to witness that activity or pose. 
k)  Escort. A person who, for consideration in any form, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately perform as an entertainer, including, but not limited to, the modeling of lingerie, the removal of clothing and the performance of a dance or skit. Under this definition, "privately" shall mean a performance for an individual or that individual's guests. 
l)  Escort agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for a fee, tip or other consideration. 
m)  Establishment. Any of the following: 
i)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; or 
ii)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
iii)  The location or relocation of any sexually oriented business. 
n)  Licensee. The individual listed as an applicant on the application of a sexually oriented business license, or a person whose name appears on a license to operate an adult use business. 
o)  Licensing officer. The Clerk of Saginaw Township or his/her designee. 
p)  Manager. An operator, other than a licensee, who is employed by a sexually oriented business to act as a manager or supervisor of employees, or is otherwise responsible for the operation of the sexually oriented business. 
q)  Massage. The treating of external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, or stimulating with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, with or without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powder, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is provided shall pay any consideration whatsoever therefore. For purposes of this Ordinance, the term "bodywork" shall mean massage. 
r)  Nude model studio. Any place where a person appears in a state of nudity or displays "specific anatomical areas", and is provided money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons. This includes modeling studios that provide for nude modeling on an occasional basis, but it does not include a modeling studio whose primary function is to provide art classes as part of a college, university or educational institution and which is certified by the State of Michigan. 
s)  Nudity or a state of nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breasts. 
t)  Operator. The owner, licensee, manager or person in charge of any premises. 
u)  Peep booth. An adult motion picture theater with a viewing room or cubicle of less than 150 square feet of floor space. 
v)  Premises or licensed premises. Any premises that requires a sexually oriented business license and that is classified as a sexually oriented business. 
w)  Principal owner. Any person owning, directly or beneficially: 
i)  Ten percent or more of a corporation's equity securities; or 
ii)  Ten percent or more of the membership interests in a limited liability company; or 
iii)  In the case of any other legal entity, ten percent or more of the ownership interests in the entity. 
x)  Private room. A room in a hotel/motel that is not a peep booth, has a bed and a bath in the room or adjacent room, and is used primarily for lodging. 
y)  Regular or regularly shall mean recurring, attending or functioning at fixed or uniform intervals. 
z)  Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. 
aa)  Sexual encounter center. A business or enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate or consort for the purpose of "sexually explicit activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" for any form of consideration, including, but not limited to: 
i)  Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the same or opposite sex; or 
ii)  Activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; or 
iii)  Permits patrons to display or be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for recording or transmission over the World Wide Web or any other media. 
bb)  Sexually explicit activities. Any of the following: 
i)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; or 
ii)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including, but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; or 
iii)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; or 
iv)  Any activity intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify a person's lust, passions or sexual desires; or 
v)  The display of human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
vi)  The display of excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activity set forth in a) through e) above. 
cc)  Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult novelty or retail store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center or similar establishment or any place that permits patrons to be filmed or photographed performing "sexually explicit activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas" for electronic transmission over the World Wide Web. "Sexually oriented" when used to describe film, motion picture, videocassette, slides, or other photographic reproductions shall mean film, movies, motion picture videocassette, slides or other photographic reproductions that regularly depict material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" offered for observation by the patron(s) on the premises of a sexually oriented business. The definition of "sexually oriented business" shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the State engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
dd)  Specified anatomical areas. Any of the following: 
i)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock, or female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any combination of the foregoing; or 
ii)  Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal, even if opaquely and completely covered. 
ee)  Specified criminal acts. Sexual crimes against children, sexual abuse, criminal sexual conduct, rape, crimes classified as sexual crimes by the State of Michigan or any other state, or crimes connected with another adult use business, including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity, prostitution and/or pandering. 
ff)  Significant or substantial portion. Thirty percent or more of the term modified by such phrase. If a business has twenty-nine percent or less of its stock-in-trade or interior floor space devoted to sexually oriented material, the use does not qualify as a regulated use. However, based upon the potential negative secondary impacts which relate to the sale, display and/or exhibition of sexually oriented materials, additional regulations of these materials is required as follows: 
i)  Floor space/display restrictions: The sale, display or exhibition of sexually oriented materials shall be limited to no more than 29 percent of the total stock in trade or interior floor space. The sexually oriented materials shall be located in the rear portion of a building away from its main entrance area. The sexually oriented materials shall be separated by racks, walls or other means that would restrict visibility into the area displaying the sexually oriented materials. No sexually explicit materials shall be permitted to be placed on the non-adult side of this separation. 
ii)  No sexually explicit materials shall be displayed in any of the business's windows at any time or visible from the exterior of the business or building. Additionally, no portion of the ceiling in a business or building will be permitted to be used to display sexually explicit materials. 
iii)  Magazines that contain "sexually explicit activities" or "specified anatomical areas" may be located outside an area specifically devoted to sexually explicit materials. However, the merchandise rack on which the materials are placed must be located immediately adjacent to the separate area that sells the sexually explicit materials, and contain opaque blinders that only allow viewing of the magazine title. 
iv)  Height restrictions: The height of the racks and display walls upon which sexually explicit material can be displayed shall be limited to six feet. 
89.  [Sign.] A "sign" is a name identification, description, display or illustration which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure or piece of land and which is intended to direct attention to an object, product, place, activity, person, institution, organization or business. However, a "sign" shall not include any display of official court or public office notices nor shall it include the flag, [a] political unit or school. A "sign" shall not include a sign located completely within an enclosed building. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following sign or sign-related terms are defined: 
a)  Sign, area or surface area of. That area per face enclosed by one outline, the sides of which make contact with the extreme points or edges of the sign, excluding the supporting structure which does not form part of the sign proper or of the display. 
The area of a sign composed of characters or words attached directly to a large, uniform building wall surface shall be the smallest outline which encloses the whole group. 
b)  Sign, electric. Any sign containing electric wiring. This does not include signs illuminated by an exterior floodlight source. 
c)  Sign, location. A lot, premises, building, wall or any place whatsoever upon which a sign is located. 
d)  Sign, projecting. A sign, other than a wall sign, which projects from and is supported by a wall of a building or structure. 
e)  Sign, roof. A sign located on or above the roof of any building. 
f)  Sign, temporary. A banner, pennant, poster or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, plastic sheet, cardboard, wallboard or other like materials and intended to be displayed for a limited period of time. 
g)  Sign, wall—flat. One affixed directly to or painted on or otherwise inscribed on an exterior wall and confined within the limits thereof of any building and which projects from that surface less than 12 inches at all points. 
90.  Site, area. The total area within the property lines excluding street rights-of-way. 
91.  Special use. The term applied to a use which may be permitted by the application for and issuance of a special use permit by the township planning commission upon approval of the township board. Specified procedures and requirements, as outlined in cited sections, must be complied with prior to final issuance of said permit. 
92.  Stable, commercial. A stable in which horses are kept for remuneration, hire, or sale. 
93.  Stable, private. An accessory building in which horses are kept for private use and not for hire, remuneration, or sale, and further that no more than three horses are boarded. 
94.  Story. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the next floor above it; or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
95.  Story, first. The lowest story of a building, the ceiling of which is more than seven feet above the average grade of the ground or sidewalk adjacent to its exterior walls. On a berm house seven feet shall be measured from the lowest floor level. 
96.  Story, half. A space under a sloping roof which has the line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more than three feet above the top floor level and in which space not more than two-thirds of the floor area is finished off for the use. A half-story containing independent apartments of living quarters shall be counted as a full story. 
97.  Story, height of. The vertical distance from the top surface of one floor to the top surface of the next above. The height of the top-most story is the distance from the top surface of the floor to the top surface of the ceiling joints [joists]. 
98.  Street. A public thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
99.  Street, functional classification. Functional classification is the process by which streets and highways are grouped into classes, or systems, according to the character of service they are intended to provide. Three basic groups include: (1) arterials primarily for mobility, (2) collectors for both mobility and land access, and (3) locals for primarily land access. 
a)  Collectors. Collector systems provide for both land access service and local traffic movements within residential neighborhoods, commercial areas and industrial areas. 
b)  Locals. Locals serve as direct land access and access to higher systems. 
c)  Major arterials. Major arterials serve the major centers of activity of the region, the highest traffic volume corridors, and the longest trip desires. 
d)  Minor arterials. Minor arterials interconnect with and augment the principal arterial system and provide service to trips of moderate length at a somewhat lower level of travel mobility than principal arterials. 
100.  Street line. The legal line or demarcation between a street or land for service, benefit or enjoyment. 
101.  Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a more or less permanent location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent location on the ground, excepting utility poles, utility manholes or similar items. 
102.  Substance abuse rehabilitation center. A public or private facility designed to provide medical treatment and psychological therapy to those individuals who suffer from drug or alcoholic addiction. 
103.  Supermarket. A full line comparison grocery, meat and produce retail sales establishment with a gross building area greater than 10,000 square feet. 
104.  Township board. The Saginaw Charter Township Board of Trustees. 
105.  Use. The employment or occupation of a building, structure or land for service, benefit or enjoyment. 
106.  Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of this Ordinance granted when strict enforcement thereof would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the specific property on which the modification is granted by the board of appeals on zoning. 
107.  Yard. An open space on the same lot with a building, unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided herein. The measurement of a yard shall be construed as the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the building line. 
108.  Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines and measured between the front line of the lot and the nearest point of the main building or land use. 
109.  Yard required, how measured. Required yard depth or width shall be measured in a horizontal plane and at right angles from the lot line in question or an extension thereof. 
110.  Yard, rear. An open space on the same lot with a main building unoccupied except as herein permitted, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. The depth of the rear yard shall be measured between the rear line of the lot, or the centerline of the alley, if there be an alley, and the rear line of the building. 
111.  Yard, side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with the building situated between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a front line or a rear line shall be deemed a side line. 
112.  Zero lot line. Division of ownership in which no side yard setbacks are imposed upon buildings. 
113.  Zoning administrator. An individual appointed by the township board delegated to administer the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 693, 11-27-2006; Ord. No. 718, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 744 , 1-11-2016) 
Editor's note— At the township's request, the definitions in this section have been alphabetized and renumbered accordingly. 
 
Lot Area/Lot Coverage 
 
Basic Structural Terms and Building Heights 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 544, 10-23-1995; Ord. No. 553, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 633, 10-14-2002; Ord. No. 673, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 715, 5-10-2010)  
CHAPTER 3. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 301. - Nonconforming uses. 
1.  Purpose. It is the intent of this Ordinance to permit the continuance of a lawful use of any building or land existing at the effective date of this Ordinance; however, except as herein provided, no building, structure or use or part thereof shall be used, altered, constructed or reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance; and further it is hereby declared that the existence of nonconforming uses are contrary to the best interests of the township; and further it is hereby declared to be the policy of the township board as expressed in this Ordinance to discontinue nonconforming uses in the course of time as circumstances permit, having full regard for the rights of all parties concerned. 
2.  Nonconforming uses of land. Where, at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance, a lawful use of land exists that is no longer permissible under the terms of this Ordinance as enacted or amended, such use may be continued, so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a)  No such nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
b)  No such nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any other portion of the lot or parcel occupied by such use at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance. 
c)  Nonconforming uses shall not be changed to another nonconforming use, except after approval of the board of zoning appeals. Before granting such approval, the board shall determine that such change in use will have a less deleterious effect on neighboring properties than the existing nonconforming use. 
d)  If such nonconforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than six consecutive months, or for 18 months during any three-year period, such discontinuance shall be considered conclusive evidence of an intention to abandon the nonconforming use. The time limit of discontinuance may be extended beyond the six months for a period of time not to exceed 1½ years upon application to and approval by the board of zoning appeals within the six-month period and upon demonstration that there exists a legitimate intent to continue the nonconforming use within such time extension. At the end of this period of abandonment, the nonconforming use shall be brought into conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance. The zoning administrator shall notify the property owner of such nonconforming use, in writing, by regular mail, 30 days prior to the end of the six-month period to inform the owner of the intent of the zoning administrator to find the use abandoned and the implications of such a finding. Seasonal nonconforming uses, which by their nature operate habitually or customarily during a given period of the year not exceeding 12 consecutive months, shall be exempted from this requirement. 
e)  No nonconforming use shall be extended to displace a conforming use. 
3.  Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this Ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yard, or other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
a)  Nonconforming structures shall not be altered or expanded without the prior approval of the board of zoning appeals, except that the following structural alterations may be permitted without such prior approval: 
i)  Structural alterations or extensions adding to the bulk of a structure which is nonconforming only by reason of lot size, lot width or building setback shall be permitted without prior approval of the board of zoning appeals, provided that such structural alteration or extension shall not increase the extent of nonconformity and shall satisfy all other site development regulations which are applicable. 
ii)  Structural alterations which do not add to the bulk of the structure or increase the intensity of use of the structure shall not require prior approval of the board of zoning appeals. 
b)  Nonconforming buildings or structures may be repaired and maintained so as to prolong the life of the structure. 
c)  Nonconforming structures may be reestablished in their nonconforming conditions in any zoning district after damage or destruction of the nonconforming structure, if such structure is nonconforming due only to its having an insufficient side or rear setback or due to its being located on a site having an area, width or both less than prescribed in the applicable sections of this Ordinance. 
4.  Nonconforming signs. Where a lawful sign exists at the effective date of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance that could not be installed under the terms of this Ordinance, the use of such sign may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful subject to the following provisions: 
a)  The faces, supports, or other parts of any nonconforming sign shall not be structurally changed, altered, substituted or enlarged unless the resultant changed, altered, substituted or enlarged sign conforms to the following provisions: 
i)  If dimensional changes or alterations to the message area or sign faces are made, the resultant sign area shall conform with the maximum sign area restriction for the parcel of land upon which the sign is located. 
ii)  If structural changes or alterations are made to support members, the resultant sign shall conform to the height and setback restrictions for the zoning district in which it is located. 
iii)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the periodic change of message[s] on a nonconforming sign, provided such change[s] do not necessitate structural change, alteration, substitution or enlargement of such sign. 
iv)  No nonconforming sign shall be changed, altered, substituted or enlarged if the cost of resultant change, alteration, substitution or enlargement exceeds 30 percent of the appraised replacement cost of the sign as determined by the township assessor unless prior approval for such change is granted by the board of zoning appeals after a public hearing and finding that such change is in the best interest of Saginaw Charter Township. 
b)  Nothing shall prohibit the repair, reinforcement or modernization of a lawful nonconforming sign, provided such repair does not exceed an aggregate cost of 30 percent of the appraised replacement cost as determined by the township assessor, unless the subject sign is changed by repair, reinforcement or modernization to a conforming structure. 
c)  Any lawful nonconforming sign damaged by fire, explosion, an act of God, or by other accidental causes may be restored, rebuilt or repaired to its original condition. 
d)  The township board may acquire any nonconforming sign, with or without acquiring the property on which such sign is located, by condemnation or other means and may remove such sign. 
5.  Repairs and maintenance. Repairs and maintenance may be performed on any building devoted in whole or in part to a lawful nonconforming use, including ordinary repairs or repair or replacement of nonbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent not to exceed 50 percent of the assessed value (25 percent of true cash value) of the building during any period of 24 consecutive months. However, the cubic content of the building as it existed at the time of enactment or amendment of this Ordinance shall not be increased except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared unsafe by an official charged with protecting the public safety upon order of such official. 
6.  Prior construction approval. Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the completion of construction and use of a nonconforming building for which a building permit has been legally issued prior to the effective date of enactment or amendment of this Ordinance; provided, that construction is commenced within 30 days after the date of issuance of the permit and that the entire building shall have been completed according to plans filed with the permit application within one year of the issuance of the building permit. 
7.  Change of tenancy or ownership. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or arrangement of any existing nonconforming uses of land, structures and premises, provided there is no change in the nature and character of such nonconforming uses. 
8.  Elimination of nonconforming uses or structures. The township board may acquire by purchase, condemnation or other means private property or an interest in private property for the removal or elimination of any nonconforming use or structure. 
State Law reference— Nonconforming uses, MCL 125.286.  
Sec. 302. - Supplementary use regulations. 
1.  Access to a street. Any lot of record created after the effective date of this Ordinance shall have frontage on a public street, except as may be approved as a planned unit development in accordance with the provisions of section 2207. 
2.  Rear dwelling prohibited. No building in the rear of and on the same lot with a principal building shall be used for residential purposes except for watchmen, caretakers, and domestic employees whose employment functions are related to the function of the principal building; provided that all other requirements of this Ordinance are satisfied. 
3.  Use of structure for temporary dwelling. No structure shall be used for dwelling purposes that does not meet the minimum standards as defined in this Ordinance and the township building code. No temporary structure, whether of a fixed or portable construction, shall be erected or moved onto a lot and used for dwelling purpose for any length of time unless authorized by the issuance by the zoning board of appeals of a temporary permit as provided for by this Ordinance. 
4.  Required water supply and sanitary sewerage facilities. After the effective date of this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered or moved upon a lot or premises and used in whole or in part for a dwelling, business, industrial or recreational purpose unless it shall be provided with a safe, sanitary, and potable water supply and with a safe and effective means of collection, treatment, and disposal of human excreta and domestic, commercial and industrial waste. All such installations and facilities shall conform with the minimum requirements of the Saginaw County Health Department and applicable state regulations. 
5.  One dwelling per lot. Only one single-family detached dwelling will be allowed to be erected on a lot in a R-1 district. 
6.  Fences, walls and screens. This section is intended to provide for the regulation of the height and location of fences, walls, screens and other similar obstructions for the purpose of providing for light, air, and privacy and safeguarding the public welfare by preventing visual obstructions at street and highway intersections. 
a)  Height. For the purposes of this section, "height" shall mean the vertical distance from existing grade to the top of the fence, hedge, or wall. 
b)  Location. 
i)  Front yard. No fence, wall or hedge planting shall exceed a height of three feet within any front yard in any zoning district. Plant materials located within 30 feet of the edge of the pavement of a public street shall not obstruct visibility at a level between three feet and eight feet. 
Exceptions: 
a.  Decorative fencing. In commercial, manufacturing and institutional districts, fences located within the front yard area may be five feet tall, provided they are of a decorative design approved by the planning commission. Certain design elements of the fence, such as posts, masonry pilasters or other detailing, may be permitted up to six feet in height. (Decorative fencing shall not include fences constructed with material such as chainlink, wood, barbed wire, chicken wire). 
ii)  Side and rear yard. No fence, hedge or wall greater than six feet in height shall be permitted within any side or rear yard setback. 
Exceptions: 
a.  A fence located on a residential parcel which abuts a commercial, manufacturing or institutional use may be eight feet tall, provided the adjoining residential property owners give their consent. Consent shall be in the form of an affidavit signed by the adjoining residential property owners and submitted to the community development department. 
b.  Fencing around tennis courts and recreational amenities shall be exempt from the six-foot height limitation. 
iii)  Corner lots. On a corner lot, a fence, wall or hedge planting cannot exceed a height of three feet in the street side yard setback unless all of the following conditions can be satisfied: 
a.  Must begin at the back of the house or primary structure. 
b.  Does not create any safety or traffic hazard. 
c.  Houses or buildings on property adjacent to the rear of the subject parcel shall not face the same street as the street side yard in which the fence will be located. 
d.  Will not exceed a maximum height of six feet. 
e.  Will not encroach upon any existing or proposed right-of-ways. 
c)  Maintenance of fences. All fences shall be maintained in their upright condition. Missing boards, pickets or posts shall be replaced in a timely manner with material of the same type and quality. 
d)  [Supporting posts and cross-members.] All supporting posts and cross-members of all fences shall face toward the interior of the lot of the person erecting the fence. 
e)  [Barbed wire, electrified components or similar fencing types.] Under no circumstances shall barbed wire, electrified components or similar fencing type that is likely to cause injury to persons be used in any residential district. 
f)  Permit and fee required. Prior to construction, reconstruction or establishment of a fence, wall or screen regulated by this section, a permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator. 
i)  Applications for permits shall be on forms prescribed by the zoning administrator and shall be accompanied by such plans or drawings required by the zoning administrator and by a permit fee of $10.00. 
ii)  The issuance of a fence permit is not intended, nor should it be construed to abrogate or modify the applicant's duties as contained in covenants and restrictions arising from a deed or other document. 
iii)  Permits shall continue until revoked or for such period of time as designated therein at the time of issuance. The issuance or granting of a permit shall not be construed to be a permit for or an approval of any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance. No permit presuming to give authority to violate the provisions of this Ordinance shall be valid. 
iv)  The zoning administrator may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this section whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
7.  Reserved. 
8.  Space used once. Any yard or other open space provided about any building or structure for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this Ordinance shall not again be used as a yard or other required open space for another building or structure existing or intended to exist at the same time as such building or structure. 
9.  Use exceptions. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to prohibit the following accessory or incidental uses: 
a)  The renting of rooms to not more than two nontransient persons in a dwelling unit which is otherwise occupied in a manner permitted in the district in which it is located. 
b)  Customary refreshment and service uses and buildings in any public park or recreational area incidental to the recreational use of such area. 
c)  Gardens, garden ornaments and usual landscape features within required yard space. 
d)  Retaining walls and public playgrounds. 
e)  Off-street parking for motor vehicles as specified in chapter 4. 
f)  Home occupations as specified in "R" district regulations and chapter 2, section 202. 
g)  Use of a premises as a voting place in connection with local, state, or national elections. 
h)  Administrative site plan approval may be conveyed to any personal wireless communication provider wishing to collocate on an existing structure or install an antenna on an existing structure. Examples include communication towers, water towers, utility poles, building and similar structures. 
10.  Parking of recreational vehicles and equipment. The parking of recreational vehicles and equipment, including travel trailers, campers, boats and similar recreational equipment, is prohibited within the required yard areas of any "R" district, except recreational, vehicles and equipment are permitted for periods not to exceed five consecutive days, whereupon said vehicle shall be completely removed from the property for a minimum of eight hours. The vehicle and/or equipment shall be parked on a dust-free, weed-free surface. 
11.  Parking and storage of commercial vehicles. No person shall park or store any vehicle, apparatus, trailer, or machine designed for a specific commercial operation or purpose such as: 
a)  Well drilling; 
b)  Moving dirt, stone, or other materials; 
c)  Removing lumber or stumps; 
d)  Trenching; 
e)  Planting trees or other vegetation; 
f)  Installing poles; 
g)  Lifting people or equipment; 
h)  Transporting water or other substances; 
i)  Vehicles intended to pull trailers; 
j)  Storage of construction equipment inside or outside the vehicle or trailer; 
k)  Generation of electrical power; 
l)  Pumping of water or other substances; 
m)  Demolition of materials or buildings and vehicles; 
n)  Wreckers; 
o)  Vehicles, apparatus, trailers, or machines similar to any of those listed in this regulation, shall be prohibited within any R-1, R-2, or R-3 district. 
Exception: The following vehicles, apparatus, trailers, or machines may be parked or stored in a residential district meeting the following guidelines: If a commercial vehicle is used for and in direct connection with a construction project taking place on the parcel where it is parked and the project is currently ongoing; or if the commercial vehicle is owned by a governmental body or utility and is used in the installation and/or maintenance of utilities such as water, sewer, streets, highways, cable television wire, telephone, or electrical wires. 
a.  Commercial vehicles on public property. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle or equipment identified in subsection (a) of this section on public property located in any zoning district, including, but not limited to, public streets, stub streets, rights-of-way, bike paths or pedestrian paths, sidewalks, greenbelts, and planting areas between bike paths and streets unless such parking or storage is limited to vehicles or equipment engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. 
b.  Commercial vehicles in residential and agricultural districts. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle as defined in [subsection] 302.11 in any residential or agricultural district unless the vehicles or equipment is engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service. 
Commercial vehicles such as pickup trucks, passenger/cargo-style vans with seating of up to 15 persons, sport utility vehicles, passenger cars, and similar type vehicles, may be parked or stored in a residential district so long as it is not modified from the original manufacturer's specifications in such a way as it extends its height or length with the exception that a plow on the front and a spreader on the rear of a vehicle may be attached even if the length of the vehicle is extended beyond the manufacturer's specifications. 
c.  Commercial vehicles in nonresidential districts. No person shall park or store any commercial vehicle identified as defined in subsection 302.11 or commercial equipment on private property in any nonresidential district except as where such parking or storage is limited to vehicles or equipment engaged in the performance of a service on the adjacent or underlying property, for the period of time reasonably necessary to complete the service or unless such vehicle or equipment is parked or stored in relation to a permitted principal or accessory use of the property. In such event, parking or storage must comply with all other codes and ordinances. 
12.  Use of trailers. The use of trailers, trucks, vehicles, modular buildings or similar vehicles or enclosures for sales or storage of materials in connection with a commercial or industrial land use is hereby prohibited. Modular buildings may be used for sales and storage, upon approval by the planning commission, provided said building is attached to a permanent foundation, has all wheels, undercarriage and towing mechanisms removed and is determined to be visually and aesthetically compatible with other structures in the vicinity and the character of the area in general. Trailers used by contractors for office and storage purposes are permitted for a reasonable length of time on a job site, provided there is an active building permit for construction on the site and the trailer's use is directly related to construction on the property upon which it is located. 
13.  Lots of record. Any residential lot created or recorded prior to the effective date of this Ordinance may be used for residential purposes even though the lot area and/or dimensions are less than those required for the district in which the lot is located, provided that yard dimensions and other requirements of the district, not involving lot area, width or depth, are met. 
14.  Building grades. [Repealed.] 
15.  Access to public street. No lot shall hereafter be created or altered unless such lot has direct access and frontage on a public street. The street frontage width of any lot shall not be less than the minimum lot width for the zoning district in which it is located. On a corner lot, this requirement shall apply to one street frontage only as the combined width of two or more street frontages does not satisfy this requirement. 
Lots created on curves or cul-de-sacs are exempt from this requirement, provided such lots have a width equal to the minimum lot width for the zoning district in which the lot is located when measured at the building line, and further that such lots have a minimum frontage of 40 lineal feet on a public street. Any other exception to this requirement may only be granted by the township board upon recommendation of the planning commission and if it can be shown that the subject parcel lacks any practical use without an exception. 
16.  Temporary dwelling. The intent of this section is to recognize the hardship often resulting from emergencies and acts of God and to provide a reasonable alternative for people displaced by such conditions and in need of temporary housing while permanent housing is arranged. When any single-family detached dwelling unit has been made uninhabitable by fire, flood or similar act of God, the zoning administrator may permit the use of a temporary structure for a period of up to 90 days, provided said structure complies with the requirements of the building code for human occupancy, and further provided said structure is connected to a proper potable water supply and sewage disposal system, and further provided said structure is located on the same property as the original dwelling. 
17.  Excavation. The excavation of sand, gravel, topsoil or other earthwork is hereby regulated as follows: 
a)  No permit or regulation shall be required if such earthwork or excavation is incidental to the construction of a subdivision, condominium project, or a principal building or structure that is permitted within that district. 
b)  No permit shall be required for earthwork, excavation or land reclamation if the total area of the earthwork is less than three acres in size. However, such earthwork is regulated to the extent that the area being excavated or reclaimed shall not exceed 30 percent of the total lot or parcel. 
c)  Any excavation project, regardless of size, in which the primary intent is to sell or dispose of the earth, sand, gravel or other feature for commercial gain shall be considered a mining operation and only permitted within the A-2 agriculture zoning district. 
d)  Upon receiving an application for a regulated excavation project, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the planning commission for the purpose of approving or denying the permit. Notices shall be sent by first class mail to all property owners within 300 feet of the boundary of the property in question. The notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the hearing and shall: 
1)  Describe the nature of the request. 
2)  Indicate the property which is the subject of the request. 
3)  State when and where the site plan. 
4)  Indicate when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. 
e)  Excavation projects regulated by this section shall comply with the provisions set forth in section 2213(e) of this Ordinance. 
f)  The planning commission may refuse to issue a permit if it determines that the operation would be hazardous or disturbing to existing or intended uses in the area or, by reason of noise, dust or fumes, would be detrimental to any persons or property. 
18.  Pennants, ribbons, streamers and other displays or items not meeting the definition of a "sign" in Chapter 86 "Sign Regulations" of Saginaw Township's Code of Ordinances are permitted in all Commercial and Science and Industry zoning districts for a period not to exceed 45 days in any calendar year, so long as said uses comply with the other requirements of this Code and subject to the following conditions: 
a.  A zoning permit must be obtained from the Community Development Department. The application for the permit shall set forth a diagram or a detailed drawing showing the exact location, setbacks, height, and characteristics of the devices to be used. 
b.  No device(s) shall be more than 24 feet in height or less than ten feet in height except in fire lanes or in areas of vehicular traffic where the height shall be a minimum of 14 feet. 
c.  No device(s) shall be located closer than an approved parking lot or building setback from any road right-of-way. 
d.  The device(s) shall be securely attached to their supporting structures. 
Exception: Pennants, ribbons streamers and other displays may be permanently displayed in any Commercial or Science & Industry district as shown on the zoning district map and are displayed on a single parcel or contiguous parcels of land under single ownership provided the following criteria are met: 
i.  The parcel consists of more than four acres; 
ii.  The parcel has at least 400 feet of road frontage; 
iii.  The parcel has not more than two curb cuts or points of ingress and egress to a public road. 
19.  Garage sales. Yard, rummage, garage and similar type sales are permitted providing: 
a)  The sale is temporary in nature and shall not continue for a period exceeding four days from the date of commencement with no more than three such sales per year. No items available during sales may be openly displayed when sales are not in progress. 
b)  The sale shall not be intended for more than incidental income and shall not be intended to operate as a commercial venture providing regular income. 
20.  Medical marijuana related uses. Uses related to the processing and growing or medical marijuana are prohibited. This includes all classes of growers, processors, provisioning centers, secure transporters, safety compliance facilities and other such uses as may specifically be granted or licensed through the State of Michigan, excluding registered patients and caregivers within a dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 517, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 578, 1-20-1998; Ord. No. 627, 10-22-2001; Ord. No. 645, 9-8-2003; Ord. No. 659, 2-23-2004; Ord. No. 672, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 715, 5-10-2010; Ord. No. 749, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 303. - Supplementary yard regulations. 
1.  Permitted yard encroachments. 
a)  Paved terraces, patios, and uncovered porches shall not be subject to yard requirements, provided: 
The paved area is unroofed and without walls or other forms of solid, continuous enclosure that links the paved area to the principal building. 
The highest finished elevation of the paved area is not over 12 inches above the average surrounding finished grade area. 
No portion of any paved area is closer than five feet from any lot line nor projects into any front yard setback area. Such paved areas may have noncontinuous wind breaks or walls not over six feet high and not enclosing more than one-half the perimeter of the paved area. 
b)  Unenclosed porches, roofed or unroofed may project into a required side or rear yard area a distance not to exceed eight feet, provided: 
The porch is unenclosed and no higher than one story and is erected on supporting piers. 
The porch shall not be closer than eight feet to any side or rear lot line. 
c)  Enclosed porches shall be considered an integral part of the building and shall be subject to all yard and area dimensional requirements established for principal buildings. 
d)  Special structural elements, such as cornices, sills, chimneys, gutters, and similar structural features, may project into any yard up to a maximum of 2½ feet. 
e)  Fire escapes, outside stairways, and balconies, if of open construction, may project into yard areas up to a maximum of five feet. 
f)  Structures below and covered by the ground. 
g)  Lighting devices. 
h)  Planters, retaining walls and other similar landscaping structures. 
i)  Gatehouse or security stations. 
j)  Sculptures, fountains, or other such items proposed as public art or public features. 
k)  Passive recreation features, such as walkways, paths, and other such items typically found in open space areas. 
l)  Temporary structures designed to protect property during the winter months, including snow fence and temporary structures for mailboxes. Structures shall be temporary and only during winter and shall be removed by April 1. Said structure(s) shall only be as large as necessary to function properly and installed in such a way as to not obstruct view or create a traffic hazard. 
2.  [Building setback lines.] Building setback lines shall be measured from a point 33 feet from the center of the adjacent road or from the property line, whichever is greater, except in cases involving the following major arterial and collector streets. The building setback line on any properties abutting the following streets shall be measured from a point the number of feet from the center of the road indicated below: 
Proposed Road Rights-of-Way 
Barnard ..... 43' 
Bay ..... 60' 
Brockway ..... 48' 
Center ..... 60' 
Fashion Square Boulevard ..... 48' 
Fortune Boulevard ..... 43' 
Gratiot ..... 75' 
Hackett ..... 48' 
Hemmeter ..... 48' 
Hermansau ..... 43' 
Hospital ..... 60' 
Lawndale ..... 60' 
Mackinaw ..... 60' 
Mannion ..... 43' 
McCarty ..... 48' 
Michigan, West (city limits to Center) ..... 60' 
Michigan, West and St. Andrews (Center to Gratiot) ..... 43' 
Midland (south of State) ..... 50' 
Midland (north of State) ..... 60' 
Schust ..... 43' 
Seidel ..... 43' 
Shattuck ..... 60' 
St.Andrews ..... 43' 
State ..... 60' 
Tittabawassee ..... 60' 
Towne Centre ..... 43' 
Weiss ..... 48' 
Wieneke ..... 60' 
3.  Conformance to established setbacks. 
a)  Required front yard setbacks shall conform to existing setbacks as established by existing uses in any district. 
4.  Bufferyards. 
a)  Purpose. The bufferyard is a designated unit of yard or open area, together with any plant materials, barriers or fences required thereon, designed to provide distance and screening in order to minimize negative impacts of adjacent land uses. Both the amount of land and the type and amount of landscaping specified are intended to minimize potential nuisances such as noise, glare, dirt, activity, unsightly parking areas and similar impacts. 
The bufferyard requirements are designed to be flexible. A single standard applied to all circumstances may not function as well and might impose unnecessary hardship (cost) on a developer to say nothing of promoting monotony. It is the intent of the following provisions to provide flexibility to the developer or property owner through the manipulation of four basic elements: distance, plant material type, plant material density and structural or land forms. 
i)  Location of bufferyard. Bufferyards shall be located on the side and rear lot line of a parcel extending to the lot or parcel boundary line. Bufferyards shall not extend into or be located within any portion of an existing street right-of-way or yard exceptions as provided in section 303(2). 
ii)  Bufferyards required. The type of bufferyard required shall be determined based on the proposed land use and existing adjacent land use, as such uses are defined in the comprehensive development plan, as follows: 
a)  Commercial land use. When any commercial land use is proposed adjacent to any recreation and open space, residential, agricultural or institutional land use, a type B bufferyard, as defined herein, shall be required. In addition, when the property abuts existing residential development, the developer must, upon request of the residential landowners and/or the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department, provide an eight-foot-tall privacy fence or wall along the abutting property line(s). The fence or wall finish and construction materials must be approved by the assistant director of community development and be consistent in design with the project and the adjoining residential area. In instances when a fence is requested, the developer shall follow the guidelines for buffer type B, showing the fence, a ten-foot buffer and a combination of trees and shrubs. 
b)  Campus Business land use. When a Campus Business land use, other than a residential or institutional land use, is proposed adjacent to any institutional land use or residentially zoned district, a buffer consisting of an eight-foot tall masonry wall shall be required within ten feet of the property line along with a ten-foot wide bufferyard as depicted in buffer A. When a residential or institutional Campus Business land use is located adjacent to a residentially zoned district, a type B bufferyard is required. In addition, when the property abuts existing residential development, the developer must, upon request of the residential landowners and/or the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department, provide an eight-foot-tall privacy fence or wall along the abutting property lines. The fence or wall finish and construction materials must be approved by the department and be consistent in design with the project and the adjoining residential area. In instances when a fence is requested, the developer shall follow the guidelines for a buffer type B, showing the fence, a ten-foot buffer and a combination of trees and shrubs. 
c)  Industrial land use. When any industrial land use is proposed adjacent to any recreation and open space, residential, agricultural or institutional land use, a type C bufferyard, as defined herein, shall be required. When any industrial land use is proposed adjacent to any commercial land use a type A bufferyard, as defined herein, shall be required. In addition, when the property abuts existing residential development, the developer must, upon request of the residential landowners and/or the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department, provide an eight-foot-tall privacy fence or wall along the abutting property line(s). The fence or wall finish and construction materials must be approved by the assistant director of community development and be consistent in design with the project and the adjoining residential area. In instances when a fence is requested, the developer shall follow the guidelines for buffer type B, showing the fence, a ten-foot buffer and a combination of trees and shrubs. 
d)  High density residential land use. When any high density residential land use is proposed adjacent to any recreation and open space, low or medium density residential, agricultural or institutional land use, a type B bufferyard, as defined herein, shall be required. In addition, when the property abuts existing residential development, the developer must, upon request of the residential landowners and/or the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department, provide an eight-foot-tall privacy fence or wall along the abutting property line(s). The fence or wall finish and construction materials must be approved by the assistant director of community development and be consistent in design with the project and the adjoining residential area. In instances when a fence is requested, the developer shall follow the guidelines for buffer type B, showing the fence, a ten-foot buffer and a combination of trees and shrubs. 
e)  Institutional land use. When any institutional land use is proposed adjacent to any residential land use a type A bufferyard, as defined herein, shall be required. In addition, when the property abuts existing residential development, the developer must, upon request of the residential landowners and/or the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department, provide an eight-foot-tall privacy fence or wall along the abutting property line(s). The fence or wall finish and construction materials must be approved by the assistant director of community development and be consistent in design with the project and the adjoining residential area. In instances when a fence is requested, the developer shall follow the guidelines for buffer type B, showing the fence, a ten-foot buffer and a combination of trees and shrubs. 
f)  [When inverse bufferyard requirements apply.] When a less intensive land use is proposed to be located adjacent to a more intensive land use, the inverse of the bufferyard requirements herein shall apply; that is, for example, if a residential land use is proposed adjacent to an existing commercial land use, a type B bufferyard shall be required to be installed on the residential parcel. 
g)  [Determination of requirements by zoning administrator.] When the parcel to be developed is located adjacent to a vacant parcel of land, the bufferyard requirement shall be determined by the zoning administrator based upon the zoning classification of said vacant parcel; that is, for example, if an industrial land use is proposed adjacent to a residentially zoned vacant parcel of land a type C bufferyard shall be required. 
h)  [Existing plant material or fences.] Existing plant material or fences may be counted as contributing to the total bufferyard requirement. 
i)  [Determination for additional bufferyard.] Should a developed use increase in intensity, the planning commission shall, during the site plan review process, determine if additional bufferyard is needed, and, if so, to what extent and type. 
iii)  Bufferyard types and development standards. Bufferyard requirements are stated in terms of the width of the bufferyard and the number of plant units required per 100 linear feet of bufferyard. The requirements may be satisfied by any of the options indicated for any given bufferyard type. 
a)  The following illustrations graphically depict the acceptable bufferyard widths, plant material types, plant material densities and structural or land forms for each bufferyard type. 
b)  All plant materials required within a specified bufferyard shall be planted to completion within six months from the date of receipt of a building permit and shall be thereafter properly maintained in a healthy, viable condition. Plant materials which are not in a healthy, viable condition shall be replaced. 
c)  Landscaping/plant material used for fulfilling the bufferyard requirements or site plan requirements shall be of the following minimum plant sizes: 
i.  Evergreen trees, a minimum of six feet in height; 
ii.  Deciduous trees, a mature canopy height of at least 24 feet and a two and one-half inches caliper at time of planting; 
iii.  Deciduous shrubs and decorative trees, at least six feet in height; shrubs and perennials, a minimum height of 12 inches in the first season. 
d)  Further, when a landscape plan is required, the following materials are specifically prohibited: 
i.  Boxelder 
ii.  Soft maple (red silver) 
iii.  Elm 
iv.  Poplar 
v.  Willow 
vi.  Horse chestnut (nut bearing) 
vii.  Tree of heaven 
viii.  Catalpa 
ix.  Fruit-bearing trees 
x.  All thorned trees and shrubs 
xi.  Ribes (gooseberry) 
xii.  Cottonwood 
e)  Where fencing is required in a bufferyard, it may be eliminated on approval of the planning commission when such fencing is considered by the planning commission to be incompatible with the character of an adjacent residential use. The fence shall be replaced with an evergreen hedge, minimum six feet in height, with plant material dense enough to provide opacity. When fencing is requested as outlined in [subsection] 4.a.ii.a, it may not be replaced with landscaping, except if agreed upon in writing by the owner of the residential properties. 
 
 
 
Varieties 	Minimum Allowable Size 
Deciduous Trees: Maple, Oak, Birch, Beech, Linden, Ash, Ginkgo 	Minimum eight feet in height and not less than 1½ inches in caliper. 
Deciduous Shrubs (shrub-like trees): Russian Olive, Dogwood, Redwood, Flowering Crab, Hawthorn, Magnolia 	Minimum six feet in height and not less than one inch in caliper 
Shrubs: Honeysuckle, Lilac, Cotoneaster, Forsythia, Euonymus, Hydrangea, Privet 	Minimum three feet in height 
Evergreens: Pine, Fir, Spruce, Hemlock,Juniper, Yew, Arborvitae 	Minimum four feet in height 
 
[5.  Reserved] 
6.  Swimming pools. 
a)  A building permit is required. The application shall include the name of the owner, plot plan and location of adjacent buildings, fencing and gates. 
b)  Swimming pools, in-ground or aboveground, are allowed in rear yards only and shall not be located in any street side yard. 
c)  No pool shall be located closer to any side lot line than eight feet or closer to any rear lot line than five feet. 
d)  No pool shall be closer to any primary structure than ten feet. 
e)  Pool houses or structures necessary to the pool shall meet the setback and size requirements for accessory structures as determined in each of the permitted districts. 
f)  Concrete slabs or wood decks constructed on grade and located adjacent to any pool may encroach up to two feet from the property line. 
(Ord. No. 577, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 715, 5-10-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 577 added a subsection 2 to section 303. It has been redesignated as subsection 6.  
Sec. 304. - Supplementary height regulations. 
1.  Permitted exceptions for structural appurtenances. The following kinds of structural appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations for authorized uses: 
a)  Ornamental in purpose, such as church steeples, belfries, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers, and flag poles; provided, that such structural elements do not exceed 20 percent of the gross roof area. 
b)  Appurtenances to mechanical or structural functions, such as chimneys and smoke stacks, water tanks, elevator and stairwell penthouses, ventilators, radio or television towers, aerials and fire and base towers, provided the total height of the structure or the building and appurtenance is 150 feet or less from grade and provided that said structures are constructed to be self-supporting. 
The foregoing permitted exceptions shall not be for human occupancy or dwelling. 
2.  Permitted exceptions, agricultural districts. 
a)  No exceptions are permitted for residential structures. 
b)  Structures for agricultural operations are permitted up to 75 feet. 
c)  Other nonresidential permitted structures may be erected to a height in excess of that specified provided each front, side and rear yard minimum is increased one foot for each one foot of additional height above the district requirement. 
3.  Permitted exceptions, residential districts. 
a)  No exceptions are permitted for residential structures. 
b)  Principal hospital and church structures may be permitted to exceed height limitations with a maximum height limit of 75 feet, provided each front, side and rear yard requirement is increased by one foot for each one foot of height above the district requirement. 
c)  Personal wireless communication towers may not exceed a height of 150 feet. 
4.  Permitted exceptions, business and industrial districts. 
a)  In any business or industrial district, any principal building may be erected to a height in excess of that specified for the district, provided each front, side and rear yard minimum is increased one foot for each one foot of additional height above the district maximum with the exception that hotels shall be permitted to a height of four stories or 50 feet prior to this section applying. 
b)  Personal wireless communication towers shall not exceed a height of 150 feet. 
5.  Height restrictions. Height limitations shall under no circumstances be less restrictive than those specified by the Tri-City Area Joint Airport Zoning Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 712, 1-11-2010)  
Sec. 305. - Accessory structures and uses. 
Accessory structures and uses shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  General requirements. 
a.  Timing of construction. No accessory structure or use shall be constructed or established on a parcel unless there is a principal building or use being constructed or already established on the same parcel of land. No existing accessory structures shall be occupied or utilized unless the main structure to which it is accessory to is occupied or utilized. 
b.  Site plan approval. A site plan is required and shall indicate the location of proposed accessory structures and uses. 
c.  Conformance with lot coverage standards. Accessory buildings and structures shall be included in computations to determine compliance with maximum lot coverage standards, where required. 
2.  General requirements for detached accessory structures and uses. 
a.  Setbacks. Accessory structures or uses (including garages) which are not structurally attached, shall meet the same setback and coverage requirements as set forth for the principal structure, except as otherwise specified for accessory structures in residential and agricultural districts. 
b.  Double frontage lots. On double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall comply with the applicable front yard setback regulations on both street frontages. 
c.  Height. Detached accessory, buildings and structures shall conform to the height requirement for the principal structure in the district in which it is located, except as may otherwise be specified for accessory buildings and structures in residential and agricultural districts. 
3.  Attached accessory structures or uses. Unless otherwise specified in this section, accessory structures or uses (including garages) which are attached to the principal building or structure shall be considered a part of the principal building for the purposes of determining conformance with area, setback and bulk requirements. For the purposes of this section, buildings or structures that are within ten feet of the principal building or structure shall be considered "attached." 
4.  Specific requirements for accessory structures and uses in residential and agricultural districts. 
a.  Size and number. Two detached accessory structures are permitted per parcel. 
i.  Lots containing less than 10,400 square feet may have one detached accessory structure not exceeding 720 square feet. The other may not exceed 144 square feet. 
ii.  Lots containing 10,400 square feet but less than 43,560 square feet may have one detached accessory structure not exceeding 720 square feet. The other may not exceed 144 square feet. An additional 20 square feet may be added to the larger accessory structure for every 1,000 square feet of lot area exceeding 10,400 square feet with a maximum of 1,200 square feet. 
iii.  In addition to the above requirements, lots exceeding 43,560 square feet may have one detached accessory structure not exceeding the ground area coverage of the principle dwelling on the lot, excluding unenclosed porches or patios. The other may not exceed 144 square feet. 
iv.  Parcels on which exists a dwelling without an attached garage, two detached accessory structures may be constructed, each totaling 720 square feet or seven percent of the lot size, whichever is less; provided that the required rear yard coverage of 30 percent and total lot coverage of 25 percent is not exceeded. 
b.  Building and wall height. Detached accessory buildings may have a building height of 17 feet as measured from the average grade to the highest roof elevation. 
Building height may be increased as follows: 
Detached accessory structures may match the roof pitch of the primary dwelling. 
c.  Setbacks. Detached accessory structures and uses containing 720 square feet or less shall maintain a minimum side yard setback of eight feet and rear yard setback of five feet when located more than ten feet to the rear of the principle structure. 
Detached accessory structures or uses exceeding 720 square feet must comply with the side and rear yard setbacks for principle structures or uses in the district in which they are located. 
i.  On a corner lot, an accessory structure or use shall comply with the street side yard setbacks of the principle structure on the lot. Where a rear line coincides with the sideline of an adjoining lot, an accessory structure shall not be closer than eight feet to the common lot line. 
ii.  All detached accessory structures shall be located behind the front building line of the principal structure on the lot or parcel of land. 
iii.  A storage building of no more than 144 square feet may be permitted within two feet of the side or rear property lines. 
iv.  On double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall comply with the rear yard setback of 15 feet. 
d.  Use of accessory structures. Attached and detached accessory structures shall not be used as a dwelling unit or for any business, profession, trade, or occupation. 
5.  Accessory buildings in other than residential one- and two-family districts. Accessory buildings, such as buildings for parking attendants, guard shelters, gate houses and transformer buildings, may be located in the front or side yard in nonresidential districts, upon planning commission approval. All such buildings or structures shall be architecturally and aesthetically compatible with the principal building and be located and landscaped to reduce the visual impact from surrounding properties and from public streets. 
6.  Wind-driven generating devices. Since the operations of wind-driven generating devices or windmills cause an amount of noise above that normally produced in a residential district and this noise may be produced at any time of the day and for long periods of time, these devices are hereby considered to be a nuisance in residential districts. In other zoning districts, such devices shall not be permitted within 250 feet of a residential unit or any R zoned property. 
7.  Radio and television reception devices. 
a)  Defined. Radio and television reception devices (RTRD) are herein defined as devices or structures designed to improve the reception of radio or television transmission, including antennas, antenna masts or towers, satellite television reception dishes and other similar devices. 
b)  [Additional standards.] Such devices are considered residential accessory structures and shall be regulated under the same requirements with the addition of the following standards: 
i)  RTRD's are prohibited in front yards, street side yards on corner lots, or any front or side yard between the principal structure and a public street. 
ii)  RTRD's shall not be counted in the determination of maximum allowable lot coverage. 
iii)  RTRD's shall be prohibited on that portion of the roof of all residential structures which face toward the street upon which the structure faces. 
iv)  No RTRD may contain any written or visual text, pictures, words or design other than on a small metal plate attached to the antenna that identifies the manufacturer, model and serial number of the RTRD, and other specific information as may be required by law or to insure proper identification. If any written or visual text, pictures, words, or designs other than this basic information is included on a RTRD, the antenna will be considered a sign and fall under the requirements of signs in chapter 5 of this Ordinance. 
v)  In addition to the yard requirements for accessory structures, no RTRD shall be located closer to any property line than the total height of such a device. 
c)  [Building permit required before installation.] A building permit shall be obtained before the installation of the RTRD on any lot, and said RTRD shall be installed in a permanent location on the property. 
8.  Firewood. The storage or stockpiling of logs, firewood or similar material is hereby considered to be a residential accessory use and such piles or storage areas shall not be permitted between the principal structure and a public or private street and shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion so as to prevent such uses from becoming a blighting influence. 
9.  Home occupations. It is the intent of this section to permit residents of the township a broad choice in the use of their residences as places of livelihood and the production or supplementation of personal and family income, while establishing criteria for the conduct of home occupations in dwelling units in residential districts to protect neighboring residential land uses from adverse impacts of activities associated with home occupations, to maintain and protect the character of residential neighborhoods, and to ensure the compatibility of home occupations with other uses permitted in residential districts. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove that the standards of this section are being met, especially regarding possible nuisances and traffic. 
a)  Home occupations, where permitted, shall conform to the following standards: 
i)  Any home occupation shall employ not more than one person other than those persons residing on the premises where the home occupation is to be operated. 
ii)  Any home occupation shall be operated entirely within the principal dwelling and shall have no separate entrance from outside the building. No home occupation or storage of goods, materials, equipment or products associated with a home occupation shall be permitted in any detached building, structure, detached garage or open area other than within the principal dwelling. 
iii)  Shall exclude retail and/or wholesale sales (other than over the phone, electronic means and/or through the mail) nor any industrial use (other than custom crafts and sewing). 
iv)  The operation of a home occupation shall not involve alteration or construction not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall a home occupation use more than 25 percent of the total actual first floor area of the dwelling, exclusive of porches, garages and similar areas. 
v)  Home occupations shall generate no noise, odor, vibration or electrical interference beyond that level normally associated with residential land use, nor shall a home occupation require, involve or utilize any mechanical or electrical equipment except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. 
vi)  Home occupations shall not generate traffic in volumes greater than that level normally associated with residential land uses. 
vii)  The type and volume of traffic generated by a home occupation shall be consistent with the traffic generation characteristics of other dwellings in the area. In addition, the lot or property on which the home occupation is conducted shall not have any parking spaces added to it during the time the home occupation is being conducted, nor shall any parking space be used that was not customarily or regularly used prior to that time. Not more than two patrons or business related vehicles shall be present at any one time, and the proprietor shall provide adequate off-street parking for such vehicles that is paved or otherwise surfaced as approved by the zoning administrator. Parking of vehicles in the public right-of-way (swale/road edge) is prohibited. Further, utilization of the residence as a place where employees or customers of the home occupation meet regularly or daily for travel to some other destination, and any parking of vehicles associated with this activity is prohibited. 
viii)  No home occupation may have deliveries to or from the dwelling, more than once in any one month and such deliveries shall not restrict traffic circulation. This delivery restriction does not apply to step van vehicles such as United Parcel Service or Federal Express vehicles. 
ix)  A Saginaw Township Business License shall be required of all home occupations. 
x)  There shall be no outdoor operations or outdoor storage of materials, products or equipment including commercial equipment and trailers as defined in subsection 302.11. 
xi)  Advertising. The address of the home occupation shall not be advertised in such a way that would encourage customers or salespersons to come to the property without an appointment. 
xii)  Commercial vehicles are allowed subject to compliance with subsection 302.11. 
10.  Family day care facilities. Where permitted, family day care facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
a)  Family day care facilities shall comply with all development requirements of a home occupation. 
b)  A family day care facility shall have in attendance no more than six children. 
c)  Any family day care facility shall not operate without first obtaining a Saginaw Township Business License and proper license from the State of Michigan Department of Social Services. 
d)  Family day care facilities shall only be permitted in owner-occupied, single-family, detached dwellings. 
e)  All structures and parcels of land used in connection with any family day care facility operation shall conform to all state laws and local ordinances. A family day care facility shall not be operated in a building or on a parcel of land which does not conform to the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance and adopted construction codes. 
11.  Group day care home. Where permitted, group day care homes shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Is located not closer than 1,500 feet to any of the following: 
i.  Another licensed group day care home. 
ii.  Another adult foster care small group home or large group home licensed under the adult foster care facility license act. 
iii.  A facility offering substance abuse treatment and rehabilitation service to seven or more people licensed under article 6 of the public health code, 1978 PA 218, MCL 400.701 to 400.737. 
iv.  A community correction center, resident home, halfway house, or other similar facility, which houses an inmate population under the jurisdiction of the department of corrections. 
b.  Has installed a fence a minimum of five feet in height around the perimeter designated and approved by the state for outdoor play area(s). 
c.  The property is maintained in a manner that is consistent with the visible characteristics of the neighborhood. 
d.  Does not exceed 16 hours of operation during a 24-hour period. 
e.  Shall comply with the provisions of the Township's home occupation provisions. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. 677, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008; Ord. No. 715, 5-10-2010)  
Sec. 306. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 674, adopted Oct. 25, 2004, deleted section 306 in its entirety. Former section 306, pertained to district boundary exceptions. For complete list of derivations, see Code Comparative Table.  
Sec. 307. - Approval of plats. 
No proposed plat of a new or redesigned subdivision shall hereafter be approved by either the local governing body or its agents unless the lots within the plat equal or exceed the minimum size and width requirements of this Ordinance and all other applicable codes or ordinances.  
Sec. 308. - Zoning of plats. 
All plats shall be subject to the provisions of the district within which they are located pertinent to allowed uses and further required zoning district change which may be necessary to accommodate proposed use or uses shall be made according to amendment procedures prescribed by this Ordinance.  
Sec. 309. - Public sanitary sewer connection. 
When public sewer is available or becomes available in the street, connection to the public sewer system shall be made within 90 days.  
Sec. 310. - Density computation. 
Should density computation be required for a land development project, except as specified for planned unit developments and mobile home parks, the following criteria shall be applied: 
1.  Site acreage computation. In arriving at a gross acreage figure, the following lands shall not be considered as part of the gross acreage in computing the maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units that may be created: 
a)  Land utilized by public utilities as easements, for major facilities, such as electric transmission lines, sewer lines, water mains, road easements, or other similar lands which are not available to the owner because of such easements. 
b)  Lands within floodplains. 
2.  Maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units. After the total gross area available for development has been determined by the above procedure, the maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units that may be approved shall be computed by subtracting from the total gross area available a fixed percentage of said total for street right-of-way purposes and dividing the remaining net area available by the minimum lot area requirement of the zoning district in which the planned development is located. 
The fixed percentages for street right-of-way purposes to be subtracted from the total gross area available for development shall be determined according to the following schedule: 
DISTRICT USE 
AREA 	PERCENT OF 
PROJECT 
R-1, R-1A (Single-family detached, two-family) 	25 
R-2, R-3, R-4 (Single-family detached, townhouses, two-family, multifamily) 	20 
 
These percentages shall apply regardless of the amount of land actually required for street right-of-way.  
Sec. 311. - Site plan review. 
The purpose of site plan review is to determine compliance with the provisions and intent set forth in this section and to promote the orderly development of the township and to prevent the development of or alteration of land without proper attention to setting and appearance. 
1.  Site plan review and approval required. Prior to the erection of any building or structure or additions hereto, change in use in any zoning district, any land use requiring special use approval or any planned unit development, a site plan shall be submitted for review and approval. This review and approval shall be performed by the zoning administrator or by the planning commission. 
A "building permit" or "certificate of occupancy" shall not be issued prior to final approval of the site plan. 
At no time shall a site plan be reviewed when considering a request for rezoning. A decision to rezone property should be based on the long-term goals and the future land use map as determined by the master plan of the township. Also, it is important to consider the timeliness of the development and the long-term use of land. 
In authorizing any site plan approval, the township planning commission may require that a bond of ample sum be furnished to insure compliance with requirements and/or specifications imposed by the approved site plan. 
2.  Administrative site plan review by the zoning administrator. The zoning administrator may perform a site plan review for: 
a.  A residential structure having two or fewer dwelling units therein and accessory structures and uses; 
b.  Uses permitted by right or under special conditions in any "A", "R-1A", "R- 1", or "R-2" zoning district. 
c.  A change in the use of a structure or land that does not require additional parking and does not involve structural alterations. 
d.  A commercial accessory building containing 1,000 square feet or less; 
e.  An addition to an existing structure or parking lot if the addition totals 20 percent or less of the existing structure or parking lot, and only if the addition will be surfaced with material or materials which do not differ from materials on the existing structure. 
f.  The planning commission reserves the right to delegate responsibility for review to the zoning administrator for other site plans deemed appropriate by size or function. 
g.  In order to perform this review, the zoning administrator may require the submission of information set forth in this section. 
h.  The zoning administrator will transmit copies of the site plan to the departments as appropriate for review. Upon receiving recommendations from the departments, the zoning administrator shall transmit the recommendations to the applicant. If the applicant concurs with the staff recommendations, the site plan will be approved along with all the recommendations as agreed to by the applicant. 
i.  In instances where the applicant does not concur with recommendations or where the zoning administrator deems planning commission review necessary during the administrative site plan review process, the applicant or the zoning administrator may request the site plan be transmitted to the township planning commission. The applicant will be required to pay the appropriate associated fee for site plan review. 
3.  Site plan review by the township planning commission. All other structures and uses of land or buildings not covered in section 311.1(a) shall be reviewed by the township planning commission, and the following site plan review procedures shall be followed: 
a.  Application deadlines. Application for site plan review shall be made at least 14 days prior to the scheduled planning commission meeting. 
b.  Application. The application requesting site plan review must be accompanied by a fee, as established by the township board. The application will not be reviewed until all submission requirements, including the fee, has been paid. 
c.  Submission of site plan. A minimum of five copies of the initial site plan map (24" x 36") along with one reduced copy or such additional copies as may be specified by the zoning administrator, and other attachments shall be submitted and shall contain the items listed below: 
(1)  Scale. The site plan must be drawn to a consistent scale of not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') if the proposed site is less than three acres and not less than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50') if the proposed site is three acres or more. 
(2)  Identification. The applicant's name, address and telephone number and the name and address of the firm(s) responsible for preparation of the site plan must be included. If the applicant does not own the property, the owner must be identified and must sign a statement certifying that the applicant is acting in the owner's behalf. 
(3)  Property information. The site plan must accurately depict the subject property and land adjacent to and across any thoroughfare from, including all existing and proposed easements or right-of-ways. Zoning of the site and the adjacent properties, and the current use of the site and of adjacent properties, must be identified. A legal description, location map and computation of the area of the property must accompany the site plan. 
(4)  Site features. The site plan should depict existing environmental conditions, including the location of wooded areas, isolated trees over six inches in diameter, topography, wetlands, any existing structures, including any site contamination, including those proposed for removal, and other significant conditions. The approximate location and use of structures and the location of the nearest driveways on adjacent or opposing parcels should be shown. 
(5)  Transportation features. The site plan must show the location and surface type of all existing and proposed public roads, access drives, internal vehicle circulation areas, all turning radii, parking lots (including number and location of handicapped parking spaces), sidewalks, loading areas or docks, truck bays, and refuse pick-up stations. 
(6)  Utilities. The site plan must show the location and size of all existing and proposed public utilities. Waterline information shall include location of existing and proposed fire hydrants and valves. Sanitary sewer information shall include location of any pumping station and approximate location of manholes. Storm water drainage information shall include any enclosed drains, flow restrictors and on-site retention/detention. The site plan must also include any existing or proposed private utilities, such as natural gas, electricity, telephone and cable television. 
(7)  Site drainage and grading. The site plan must show the location of storm drains, invert elevations, proposed finished grades, drainage ditches, catch basins, manholes, flow restrictors and on-site retention/detention. Allowable discharge and on site storage calculations must also be included. 
(8)  Structures. The site plan must show the location and dimensions, including height, of all proposed buildings, accessory structures and related features. Schematic plans and elevations of all structures must be included. The site plan should also show the location, arrangement, dimensions, and type of proposed signs, lighting, landscaping, screening, fences, and decorative walls. For multi-family housing developments, the number of units in each building must be identified. 
(9)  Additional information/supplementary materials. The site plan shall be supplemented by any additional information that, in the zoning administrator's discretion, is important for the site plan review process. Applicants shall be responsible for all costs of required supplementary materials. This could include, but not limited to, an assessment of the proposed project's impact on environmental, historical, social or economic conditions; traffic studies; or proposed measures to control or mitigate such impacts as noise, smoke, particulates, vibration, odors, or fire hazards. 
4.  Site plan review procedure. The review procedure begins with a pre-design meeting between the applicant's design professional and a representative of the community development department. A preliminary site plan is submitted to the planning commission for consideration. If approved with conditions, a final site plan complying with those conditions must be resubmitted to the community development department for administrative review and approval. 
a.  Pre-design meeting. In order for an applicant to have a site plan considered by the planning commission, the applicant and his/her design professional shall be responsible for coordinating a pre-design meeting with a representative of the community development department. The purpose of the meeting is to address various site plan layout alternatives and identify any major obstacles that may need further attention. Once a conceptual design is agreed upon by both parties, or differences of opinion with respect to the site plan have been identified, a preliminary site plan may be submitted for consideration by the planning commission. 
b.  Preliminary site plan review by the planning commission. The preliminary site plan shall be reviewed by the township planning commission and shall be approved, disapproved, approved with specific conditions, or tabled as may be deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this section and other codes and regulations of the township. If, during review, the planning commission finds a site plan not in conformance with the provisions set forth in this section it may, at its discretion, return the site plan to the applicant with a written statement of the modifications necessary to secure approval. 
c.  Final site plan approval by the planning commission. If the planning commission or other department imposes conditions on a site plan approval, the applicant is required to resubmit two copies of a final site plan that reflects said conditions. Staff will then review the final site plan for compliance with those conditions. If the site plan complies with the approval conveyed by the planning commission, staff will stamp both copies "approved" and return one to the applicant. One copy will be kept on file with the community development department. If the site plan does not comply with the conditions imposed by the planning commission, staff will stamp both copies "resubmit—not approved." One copy will be returned to the applicant the other will be put into the site plan file. 
d.  Approval. Following approval of the site plan, it shall become part of the record, and subsequent actions relating to the activity authorized shall be consistent with the approved site plan unless a change or addition conforming to this section received the mutual agreement of the land owner and the township planning commission or zoning administrator, as appropriate. Incidental and minor variations of the approved site plan with written approval of the zoning administrator, shall not invalidate prior site plan approval. 
e.  Denial for specific requirements. In instances where specific dimensional or area requirements mentioned in the zoning ordinance are not satisfied on the site plan, requests for variance(s) may be initiated by the applicant to the township zoning board of appeals. Requirements not met are grounds for denial. 
5.  Interdepartmental procedures for site plan review. 
a.  Interdepartmental review. Each affected department, including the community development department, department of public services, fire department and planning department reviews the project independently. If any department finds a need to suggest or require revisions, the developer may be called in for further consultation in an effort to accommodate the condition. Each department shall write up its review comments upon completion by using criteria approved by the planning commission. Said review comments will be included in staff's report to the planning commission 
b.  Utility capacity analysis. If the general character of the site plan is acceptable to the departments, it is referred to the township engineer, who shall be a practicing, registered civil engineer appointed by the board of trustees. The township engineer shall conduct a utility capacity and design analysis at the request of the director of the department of public service. The utility capacity analysis examines the adequacy of the public sanitary sewer, municipal water, and storm drainage for the project according to design standards established by the board of trustees. It is also to ensure that specific site plans conform to the needs or plans for the total utility system of the township. If problems are encountered at this point, the site plan is referred back to the department of public service for consultation with the developer. 
(1)  If, after favorable review by the departments and the utility capacity analysis, there are no significant revisions in the site plan, then it shall be approved by the zoning administrator and the project may be issued a building permit. 
(2)  If the site plan is revised during administrative review, utility capacity analysis, or if there are differing administrative perspectives, then the site plan shall be referred again to the Saginaw Township Planning Commission. The planning commission's responsibilities then include: 
i.  Reviewing the impact and desirability of any revisions made to the site plan in terms of review criteria. 
ii.  Resolving differing viewpoints or interpretations among the administrative officials. 
iii.  Review additional data that may be provided in order to make judgments about landscaping, construction materials or appearance. 
iv.  Make a determination as to whether the site plan is acceptable as submitted, acceptable with certain revisions, or unacceptable for specific reasons or deficiencies based on the criteria required for approval. 
If the planning commission rejects the final site plan, a new site plan shall be required. If it is approved subject to certain revisions required by the planning commission, then final approval is subject to revisions required by the planning commission and upon the submittal of a revised plan to the administrative site plan review committee. If the revised plan meets the conditions specified by the planning commission, then it shall be approved by the administrative site plan review committee. If approved as submitted and the utility capacity is satisfactory, the review process is completed and the zoning administrator may issue a building permit and or certificate of occupancy. 
6.  Site plan standards and requirements. In order that buildings, open space and landscaping will be in harmony with other structures and improvements in the area, and to assure that no undesirable health, safety, noise and traffic conditions will result from the development, the township planning commission shall determine whether the site plan meets the following criteria, unless the township planning commission determines that one or more of the criteria are inapplicable: 
a.  The proposed site plan shall meet all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance in terms of intent, use, dimensional, design guidelines and other requirements; 
b.  Safe, efficient, and convenient transportation shall be afforded the site including road rights-of-way, vehicular access and circulation, adequate parking, pedestrian and non-motorized facilities (if appropriate), and emergency vehicle access; 
c.  Appropriate consideration shall be made as to the impact on adjacent land uses including conformance to the Township Land Use Plan; relationship to the architectural scale, mass, and building materials used in it's surrounding environment; landscaping to provide buffers including fences, walks, or vegetative screens, and site lighting; and limitations and opportunities afforded by major land uses and zoning on adjacent or nearby parcels. 
d.  Adequate provisions shall be made for public utilities to, through and on the site including: sanitary sewers or on-site sewage disposal treatment, water supply and fire hydrants, storm drainage including a grading plan, restrictions and detention/retention if necessary, and disposal of solid refuse. 
e.  Protection of unique site or environmental conditions shall be ensured including, when appropriate, utilization of natural topography, vegetation, drainage, and other resources; maintenance of established conditions or continuance of established patterns of landscaping; appropriate design and orientation of structures on the site; and control of noise, smoke, vibration, odor, glare, heat, or other environmental intrusions. 
f.  Provisions for open space, recreation, storage space, and community facilities shall be required in all multiple-family developments and may be required for other large scale, intensive site uses. 
g.  Any site plan approved shall further be consistent with the purpose of the zoning ordinance as identified in Section 102 of the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance as amended. 
h.  Pedestrian walkways and/or pathways shall be provided as deemed necessary by the township planning commission for separating pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
7.  Appeals. The applicant shall have the right to appeal from the decision of the township planning commission or administrative site plan review to the township board, whose decision will be final. 
8.  Expiration. Planning commission approval of a site plan shall expire after one year if earnest construction of an approved structure has not commenced. The zoning administrator, in his discretion, may approve an extension of up to one year. 
(Ord. No. 652, 10-27-2003)  
Sec. 312. - Supplementary dwelling regulations. 
For the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of Saginaw Township and to insure that all new dwellings compare favorably with other housing in the township, all dwellings shall comply with the following provisions in addition to any requirements of the applicable construction codes: 
1.  The dwelling shall be placed upon and secured to a permanent foundation in accordance with the building code adopted by the township. The vertical area between the grade elevation of the lot and the structure shall have a wall of similar perimeter dimensions of the dwelling and constructed of such materials and type as required in the applicable building code for all dwellings. Such wall shall be of similar construction and appearance as other dwellings in the vicinity. In the event that the dwelling is of a type manufactured off the site (such as a modular housing unit as defined herein) such dwelling shall, in addition thereto, be installed pursuant to the manufacturer's setup instructions and shall be secured to the premises by an anchoring system or device complying with the rules and regulations of the Michigan Mobile Home Commission. 
2.  If the dwelling has wheels, towing mechanisms or undercarriages, they shall be removed. 
3.  The dwelling shall be connected to an approved potable water supply and sanitary sewerage disposal system as provided for in section 302(4) of this Ordinance and Saginaw Township Ordinance [No.] 72, as amended. 
4.  Unless otherwise stated herein, the minimum width-to-depth ratio for any single-story dwelling shall be two feet of width for every one foot of depth. 
5.  The dwelling shall comply in all respects with the adopted fire, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and building codes of Saginaw Township. In the case of a dwelling unit manufactured off the site (such as a mobile home), all construction and all plumbing, electrical apparatus, and insulation within and connected to said dwelling shall be of a type and quality conforming to the "Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards" as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, being 24 CFR 3280, and as, from time to time, such standards may be amended. Additionally, all dwellings shall meet or exceed all applicable roof snow load requirements. 
6.  Any additions shall be constructed with similar quality workmanship as the original structure, including permanent attachment to the principal structure and construction of a foundation as required herein. 
7.  The dwelling shall be aesthetically compatible in design and appearance with other residences in the vicinity. The compatibility of design shall be determined in the first instance by the township zoning administrator upon review of the plans submitted for a particular dwelling subject to appeals by an aggrieved party 15 days from the receipt of notice of said zoning administrator's decision. Any determination of compatibility shall be based upon the standards set forth in this section as well as the character, design, and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located within 2,000 feet of the subject dwelling where such an area is developed with dwellings to the extent of not less than 20 percent of the lots situated within said area, or, where said area is not so developed, by the character, design and appearance of one or more residential dwellings located throughout the township. The foregoing shall not be construed to prohibit innovative design concepts involving such matters as solar energy, view, unique land contour, or relief from the common or standard designed home. 
8.  The foregoing standards shall not apply to a mobile home located in a licensed mobile home park except to the extent required by state or federal law or otherwise specifically required in any ordinance of Saginaw Township regulating such parks.  
Sec. 313. - Condominium projects. 
1.  [Subject to pertinent regulations.] All condominium projects shall be subject to any pertinent regulations of the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable local ordinances. 
2.  Initial information. Concurrently with notice required to be given the Township of Saginaw pursuant to section 71 of Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.171) a person, firm or corporation intending to develop a condominium project shall provide the following information with respect to the project: 
a)  The name, address and telephone number of: 
All persons, firms, or corporations with an ownership interest in the land on which the condominium project will be located together with a description of the nature of each entity's interest (for example, fee owner, option, or land contract vendee). 
All engineers, attorneys, architects, or registered land surveyors associated with the project. 
The developer or proprietor of the condominium project. 
b)  The legal description of the land on which the condominium project will be developed together with appropriate tax identification numbers. 
c)  The acreage content of the land on which the condominium project will be developed. 
d)  The purpose of the project (for example, residential, commercial, industrial, etc.) 
e)  Approximate number of condominium units to be developed on the subject parcel. 
3.  Information to be kept current. The information shall be furnished to the zoning administrator and shall be kept updated until such time as a certificate of occupancy has been issued pursuant to section 2301 hereof. 
4.  Site plans—New projects master deed and engineering and inspections. Prior to recording of the master deed required by section 72 of Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.172), the condominium project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to section 311 of this Ordinance. In addition, the township shall require appropriate engineering plans and inspection prior to the issuance of any certificates of occupancy. 
5.  Site plans—Expandable or convertible projects. Prior to expansion or conversation of a condominium project to additional land, the new phase of the project shall undergo site plan review and approval pursuant to section 311 of this Ordinance. 
6.  Master deed, restrictive covenants, and "as built" survey to be furnished. The condominium project developer or proprietor shall furnish the zoning administrator with the following: one copy of the recorded master deed; one copy of all restrictive covenants; and two copies of an "as built survey". The "as built survey" shall be reviewed by the township engineer for compliance with township ordinances. Fees for this review shall be established by resolution of the township board. 
7.  Monuments required—Site condominium projects. All condominium projects shall be surveyed by a registered land surveyor with property lines physically delineated by survey monuments on the site per township engineering standards. 
8.  Compliance with federal, state and local law. All condominium projects shall comply with federal and state statutes and local ordinances. 
9.  State and county approval. The developer or proprietor of the condominium project shall establish that appropriate state and county approvals have been received with regard to the freshwater system for the proposed project and with regard to the wastewater disposal system for the proposed project. 
10.  Temporary occupancy. The zoning administrator may allow occupancy of the condominium project before all improvements required by this Ordinance are installed; provided, that a bond is submitted sufficient in amount and type to provide for the installation of improvements before the expiration of the temporary occupancy permit without expense to the township. 
11.  Single-family detached condominiums. Single-family detached condominiums shall be subject to all requirements and standards of the applicable R-1, R-1A, R-2, R-3, and R-4 districts including minimum floor area. The permitted density shall be computed in accordance with section 310. 
There shall be maintained a minimum spacing distance of 80 feet with sanitary sewer or 85 feet without sanitary sewer from the center of one residential dwelling unit to the center of any adjacent residential dwelling unit. This spacing requirement shall be computed along the front building line. In addition, building envelopes shall be depicted on the site plan to assure that the minimum 30-foot front yard, 30-foot rear yard and 20-foot distance between adjacent dwelling units can be satisfied. 
Rear lot drainage shall be shown on the site plan and installed per Saginaw Charter Township standards. 
12.  Streets and roads. All streets and roads in a single-family detached condominium project shall, at a minimum, conform to the standards and specifications promulgated by the Saginaw County Road Commission. Such streets or roads shall be dedicated to the Saginaw County Road Commission and must comply with the township comprehensive plan and major street plan. 
13.  [Copy of site plan to be furnished.] After submittal of the condominium plan and bylaws as part of the master deed, the proprietor shall furnish to the township a copy of the site plan on a photographic hard copy, laminated photostatic copy, or mylar sheet of at least 13? × 16? with an image not to exceed 10½? × 14?. 
(Ord. No. 437, 10-29-1989) 
State Law reference— Condominiums, MCL 559.1d et seq.  
Sec. 314. - General design guidelines. 
These guidelines are intended to serve as recommendations for all development and redevelopment projects completed by the private sector that require site plan approval. They are designed to enhance and protect Saginaw Charter Township's quality of life and community image as well as protect and promote the township's long-term economic vitality through quality design and architecture. 
1.  Architectural design guidelines. 
a.  While no specific or particular architectural style is required for any structure, high quality, innovative and imaginative architecture is encouraged. The use of standardized, "corporate" architectural styles associated with franchises is discouraged. Site specific design solutions are encouraged. 
b.  All buildings should be compatible in scale, mass, and form with adjacent structures and the pattern of the surrounding area. 
c.  Efforts to coordinate the actual and apparent height of adjacent structures are encouraged. This is especially applicable where buildings are located very close to each other. In terms of design, differing heights can often be made more compatible through placement of windows, belt courses and other horizontal elements that reflect similar elements on neighboring properties, including roof lines and roof pitches. 
d.  Rear and side facades, if visible from public streets or neighboring properties, should be carefully designed with similar detailing, and should be compatible with the principal facades of the building. All elevations of the building will be evaluated during review. 
e.  The incorporation of defined outdoor spaces into the buildings and site designs of all new development in the township is encouraged. Outdoor spaces, which are encouraged, include courtyards, patios, plazas, covered walkways passages, gardens, trellised areas, etc. 
f.  Building surfaces more than two stories or 35 feet high or 50 feet in length, should attempt to include a wall plane that provides strong shadow or visual interest. 
g.  New building forms and elevations should be detailed and articulated to create interesting roof lines, and strong patterns of shade and shadow. 
h.  Building frontages should be active with large non-reflective minimally tinted window openings at ground level. 
i.  Large structures should be designed to reduce their perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller-scale components. 
j.  The rear of existing buildings shall be enhanced, where appropriate, to improve public access from parking lots. 
k.  Variations in rooflines should be encouraged to reduce the massive scale of the structure and add visual interest. Roofs should attempt to include two of the following features: parapets concealing flat roofs and roof top equipment, overhanging eaves, sloped roofs, and three or more roof surfaces. 
2.  Building equipment and service. 
a.  Access for service vehicles should be provided on the street with the least traffic volume. 
b.  Building equipment shall be located, designed, and/or screened to minimize visual impact on public streets, large surface parking fields and neighboring properties. 
c.  Trash containers and outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public streets, pedestrian areas, and neighboring properties. The screen for both the trash containers and any outdoor storage should be designed to be compatible with the architectural character of the development. It shall be constructed of durable materials similar to those of the building and should have solid (opaque) walls and doors. 
d.  When feasible and/or upon recommendation by the planning commission, service and loading areas should be separated from main circulation and parking areas and away from public streets. Loading and unloading activities shall not require circulation onto public streets. 
e.  All exterior on-site utilities, including but not limited to, sewers, gas lines, water lines, and electrical, telephone and communications wires and equipment, shall be installed and maintained underground. Drainage systems, when pertaining to retention or detention, may be installed above ground but should be well planned, attractive and integrated into the site. 
f.  Developers should work with utility companies to plan the most appropriate and unobtrusive location for utility boxes and other necessary utility installations. All utility installations should be screened by an architectural screen similar to the building. If this is not possible the utility installation shall be mitigated through landscaping, loading docks and outdoor storage areas shall be incorporated into the overall design of the building and the landscaping so that the visual and acoustic impacts of these functions are fully contained and out of view from adjacent properties and public streets. Screening walls consistent with the main structures material is encouraged. 
3.  Site design. 
a.  The sequence of continuous pedestrian activity shall not be interrupted. Blank walls and other "dead" or dull space at the street level shall be avoided. Visually interesting activities at the sidewalk edge shall be maintained and/or established to engage pedestrian interest. 
b.  Frontage design and signage locations shall be coordinated with streetscape landscaping and street trees. 
c.  Pedestrian open spaces such as covered walkways; courtyards and plazas are encouraged, as well as the development of open and attractive passageways between buildings and uses. 
d.  Outdoor seating and dining areas that face onto the street are encouraged. 
e.  The existing scale and rhythm of storefronts shall be preserved. When a parcel is redeveloped, there should be an attempt to design a structure that will positively impact, and not detract, the already built environment. Buildings over two stories high may seek to "scale down" their facades to reduce apparent height. The building wall at the street should be no more than 35 feet tall. The upper story above 35 feet should be stepped back a distance equal to the height of the building story immediately below. 
f.  All roof top mechanical equipment; antennas, etc. shall be screened from view. Roof top lighting is strongly discouraged. 
g.  Shopping cart storage areas shall be incorporated into the building design as an integral part of the development and shall be harmonious with other aspects of the development. 
h.  Stormwater detention and/or retention should be integrated into the site and addressed as a site feature and amenity as opposed to merely an infrastructure necessity. Developers should work to master plan drainage and retention facilities to improve efficiency and create larger usable areas of open space. 
i.  Lighting should operate for only the minimum number of hours required and should then be reduced in level or turned off. The design of lighting systems should anticipate lighting levels that will vary depending on building use, hours of operation, occupancy and seasonal changes. The hours of operation of site lighting should be included in the site plan submittal. 
j.  Landscape feature lighting and lighting at the pedestrian level is encouraged. 
k.  Architectural lighting should be used to highlight special features only and to embellish the lighting levels of ground level pedestrian areas. 
l.  Mailboxes and mail delivery. All mailboxes shall be centrally located and internal to the site. Mailbox location shall be off the public roadway and coordinated with the United States Post Office. 
4.  Landscaping. 
a.  Landscaping should be provided along and against buildings to anchor it to the surrounding environment and soften the structure. 
b.  Trees should be used throughout paved areas and along pedestrian pathways. Trees should be so selected and planted to provide a mix of canopy and ornamental trees. 
c.  Dense landscaping and/or architectural treatments should be provided to screen unattractive view and features, such as storage areas, trash enclosures, utility cabinets, etc. 
d.  Developers are encouraged to retain existing mature and desirable trees on site and to incorporate them into the new development. 
5.  Guidelines for the public streetscape. The streetscape environment includes all the elements that can make a pedestrian comfortable such as the sidewalk, street trees, street furniture, and the facade of the building. 
a.  All projects must incorporate pedestrian access from the street and parking areas and may be required to install pedestrian amenities as identified below: 
i.  All development and redevelopment projects must include sidewalk and sidewalk connections as deemed appropriate by the planning commission. At a minimum, these connections should provide access to, from and in between existing pedestrian hubs, such as to adjacent businesses, public areas and transit stops. 
ii.  In order to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access, all crosswalks on streets whether public or private and driveways shall be denoted by a change in surface consistent with the intent of the design guidelines and as approved by the planning commission. 
iii.  Benches and waste receptacles in a type and color specified by the Township consistent with the existing or planned streetscape in the area may be required when any of the following conditions are present: 
a.  Commercial uses, 
b.  Institutional uses, 
c.  Commercial recreation, including theaters, 
d.  Any mixed use development, or planned unit development, 
e.  Residential development at a density greater than 4 dwelling units per acre, and 
f.  Developments directly adjacent to a multi-use path, as identified as above, regardless of size. 
iv.  A minimum of two bike spaces may be required, in a type and color specified by the township, dependent on the use of the site, the intensity of the development and/or the proximity of pedestrian pathway(s). 
v.  A development located along Tittabawassee Road shall install a ten-foot wide path in lieu of installation of a public sidewalk constructed to the design and specification requirements of the Township. 
b.  Terminal street views (the point where a street connects perpendicular to a second street) should focus on a significant built or natural feature (a building, landscaping, public space - not a parking lot). 
c.  Street trees and landscaping should be designed and maintained to enhance pedestrian access and levels of comfort. 
d.  Buildings, not parking lots, should be the primary feature at the entrance to a development. 
e.  Facades facing streets or public walkways shall incorporate windows and doors so as to encourage pedestrian activity. Mirrored or smoked glass is discouraged as it acts as a wall and prevents pedestrian interaction. 
f.  Street furniture. Street furniture, including benches and trash receptacles, shall be provided at key locations at the discretion of the township, and shall be of a type and standard approved by the township. 
g.  Decorative street lights. 
i.  Any proposed street lighting that is intended to serve to light a circulation drive, a dedicated private street or intended to be a street dedicated to the county shall be of a type and standard approved by the township. If there is a corridor or streetscape plan for the area, the fixtures shall be consistent with the adopted plan. This is inclusive of residential development for corridor streetscape. 
ii.  Any freestanding light fixture (lamp post) at the entry to the building shall be of the same head fixture and color as the township specification for the area. 
6.  Cardinal Square. Cardinal Square is a specified geographic area within Saginaw Charter Township, located generally between McCarty Road north to Tittabawassee Road, west to Mackinaw Road and east to I-675. 
a.  All developments within Cardinal Square shall install, at key locations, brick pilasters and wrought iron or simulated wrought iron fencing, with the following standards: 
i.  Brick columns, two feet by two feet wide, composed of standard brick units. The brick shall be as specified by the township. A four-inch soldier course of brick or two courses of quioining is required at the top of each column. A beveled limestone cap with a two-inch overhang is required to be placed on top of each column. 
ii.  Commercial grade ornamental metal fence with finish rail top shall be installed between the columns. The fence shall be wrought iron, aluminum, steel or other similar material. No vinyl fencing is permitted and no exposed sharp points shall project. The fencing shall be between 30 and 36 inches in height. There shall be a minimum of 16 feet and a maximum of 32 feet between each column unless otherwise specifically approved by the planning commission. 
iii.  The fencing shall be mounted to a separate post and not the column. There should be a one-inch control joint between the fence and brick column. 
iv.  Line posts shall be provided and spaced every eight feet. 
v.  Total height of the brick columns including limestone cap shall be a minimum of 41 inches to a maximum of 57 inches tall. 
vi.  All fencing and columns shall be located a minimum or four feet but no more than eight feet, behind the existing sidewalk or pathway but not within any road right-of-way or the location of the proposed sidewalk or pathway, as determined by the zoning administrator. 
vii.  Low growing landscaping, preferably a mix of ornamental grasses, perennials and low growing shrubs is strongly encouraged between the sidewalk and fence and shall be designed, installed and maintained so as not to obstruct site distance. 
viii.  When adjacent to a multi-use path, the developer shall, at the request of the planning commission, construct that portion of the pathway proposed for their property and/or provide a connection to the multi-use path. 
7.  The Campus Business district is a zoning district limited to a specific geographic area within Saginaw Charter Township. 
a.  The general design guidelines described in Section 314 shall be incorporated in all developments within the Campus Business district. 
i.  Furthermore, a minimum of 15 percent of a development's building facade that is visible from the street or adjacent properties shall be windows. 
ii.  Buildings shall be constructed to be long-lasting and use natural materials including brick, stone (including cast stone), or other such specifically approved materials as the primary building materials. 
b.  When a parking lot of more than five vehicles is located between the building and the road, at least 75 percent of the frontage of the parking area shall be screened through landscaping, bermed areas or a combination of the two. Screening shall be located adjacent to the parking area and have a minimum height of three feet measured from the highest finished grade of the parking area. The screening shall consist of a combination of shrubs, decorative fencing, berm(s) with a minimum of a one to three rise to run, perennial plantings and other such items, with a minimum of one shrub or perennial plant provided for each four lineal feet. The plants shall meet the height and species requirements contained in Section 304.b. 
c.  Every building except single-family dwellings, shall be provided with landscaped materials along its perimeter meeting the following criteria: 
i.  At least 75 percent of all sides of a building visible from the road or an adjacent property shall be landscaped and such landscaping shall be located within 20 feet of the building. 
ii.  The planting area devoted to the building landscaping shall be a minimum of eight feet in width. 
iii.  Landscaping materials shall include a combination of deciduous trees, evergreens, hedges, shrubs, annual and perennial flowers and ground cover plantings. 
iv.  Deciduous trees shall be planted at a rate of three trees for every 100 lineal feet of the building. 
v.  All portions of the planting area not otherwise devoted to trees and shrubs shall be planted with grass, ground cover or other live landscape treatment, excluding paving or gravel except that this planting area may be interrupted by walkways. Decorative stone and/or mulch is permitted. 
d.  Deliveries, loading and unloading, dumpster unloading, parking lot cleaning, and similar building or site maintenance when located within 100 feet of a residential (R) district, shall not take place before 7:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. 
e.  Compatibility with adjacent residential districts or uses: The proposed location of accessory uses or structures that are of a significantly different scale or character than the adjacent residential districts or uses, such as access drives, parking areas, solid waste pickup points, loading, unloading, and facilities of a similar nature, shall not be located near the boundary of the development. 
i.  In no case shall unloading, loading or storage of equipment or materials take place within 100 feet of a residential district. 
ii.  If the project abuts a residential district or use or where there is a compatibility issue, a transition area shall be provided. This transition area includes the 100-foot minimum setback required by Section 2004.3.c and 2004.4.c. Altering the grade within the transition area shall be minimal unless needed to provide effective buffering or to accommodate drainage. 
iii.  If the grade change abutting a residential district or use is to be varied by more than three feet, the site plan shall include cross sections illustrating existing and proposed grades in relation to existing and proposed building heights. Cross-sections and/or photographs of existing conditions shall be provided to document the effectiveness of the proposed buffer. 
f.  Preservation of on-site natural areas: Efforts shall be made to preserve natural features and the integrity of the land. Developments that preserve on-site natural areas shall be permitted to adopt one of the following bonus provisions: 
i.  Rear and side yards may be reduced to a minimum of one-half the required distance, except for lots that abut a residential district or use, or 
ii.  When a development preserves a wooded area at least two acres in size, the total landscaping required (quantity of plants) shall be reduced by 60 percent, or 
iii.  Developments that preserve at least two acres of natural area adjacent to a residential area may forgo installation of the required buffer yard in that area based on the approval of the planning commission. 
8.  State Street Corridor. The State Street Corridor is a specified geographic area within Saginaw Charter Township stretching along and around the State Street Corridor and extending north and south on collector roads. The specific geographic area is the same as the State Street Corridor Improvement Authority. 
a.  The State Street Corridor Overlay District is recommended in order to meet the following: 
i.  Preserve the unique character of the State Street Corridor. 
ii.  Complement the existing pattern of buildings. Development should rely on found character, not imported character. Structures should be designed and developed or redeveloped to complement architecture, mass and bulk of the area surrounding it. 
iii.  Enhance the pedestrian orientation of the State Street area and the Saginaw Township community and encourage streetscape design that is inviting and on a human scale as well as ensuring consistent pedestrian connections throughout the area. 
iv.  Communicate the community's vision for the State Street area. 
b.  Scope. The standards outlined apply to all developments excluding single-family and two-family developments including: 
i.  All newly constructed buildings. 
ii.  All exterior building and improvements which require a building permit (only standards applicable to the changed element apply). 
iii.  Renovation of a structure that requires site plan review or administrative site plan review. 
c.  Landscaping Standards. 
i.  Shredded, hardwood mulch, a minimum of three inches in depth, should be placed in defined beds. 
ii.  All beds shall be defined with plastic or metal edging. 
iii.  Ground cover used in lieu of turf grasses in whole or in part shall be planted in such a manner as to present a finished appearance and reasonable complete coverage after one complete growing season. A growing season is defined as May—November. 
iv.  Annual, plastic, or other non-living plant material shall not be considered acceptable to meet the landscaping requirements of the ordinance. 
d.  East State Street (Hemmeter Road to City of Saginaw). The standards for development in this area are designed to preserve and protect the strong residential neighborhoods in Saginaw Charter Township. This business district is intended to provide a visual and physical buffer from more intense commercial activity further west on State Street and to provide complimentary and needed services, office uses and development that is in appearance, cohesive and complimentary to the surrounding residential character. Stone shall be incorporated into the building or incorporated within a site as detailed in the state street corridor design guide. 
i.  Building placement. 
a.  Front yard setback: The front yard setback shall be 15 feet from the proposed right of way as determined by Section 303.2. Parking shall not be the dominant feature of the site. 
b.  Side yards shall be a minimum of ten feet inclusive of parking. 
c.  Rear yard setback inclusive of parking shall be a minimum of ten feet unless adjacent to a residential district. When adjacent to a residential district, the side and rear yard of a nonresidential use which abuts a residential district shall be landscaped to provide a visual screen between districts. The extent of the screening shall be based on the distance between the parking area and/or the building to the property line, with the exception that the planning commission may require additional screening from parking areas and headlights if trespass by lighting or vehicle headlights is a concern: 
i.  Fifty feet or more from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer of maintained and seeded lawn is required along with one tree or two shrubs for each 30 lineal feet. 
ii.  Thirty feet but less than 50 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer of maintained and seeded lawn or ground cover with three-foot tall berm with a slope no greater than 3:1 with two trees or four shrubs installed within said buffer for each 30 lineal feet. 
iii.  Fifteen feet but less than 30 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, an opaque fence six feet in height with one tree or two shrubs shall be planted every 30 lineal feet. 
iv.  A minimum of ten feet but less than 15 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer screen no less than five feet in width and six feet in height shall be established, consisting of tree plantings, hedges, and an opaque fence or wall that is consistent with the materials and colors used on site. 
ii.  Building design guidelines. For all new buildings or redevelopments: 
a.  Building facades are considered the public faces of buildings. All four sides of the building must be addressed with consistent architecture. 
b.  All buildings should have a "porch" or other such entrance that functions as a porch. It shall be a minimum of five feet wide. 
c.  Building owners are encouraged to place planters and window boxes with flowers or climbing vines within 12 inches of the building façade and plantings along the private walk leading to their "front door." 
d.  All mechanical equipment, including roof top equipment, shall be screened from view. 
e.  Accessory structures are permitted however; they must be consistent in architecture and size and mass with the principal building. 
iii.  Articulation and fenestration. 
a.  Each entry shall be the primary focus of the building. 
b.  Windows should be used in such a way as to provide visual interest to the building as a whole as well as to pedestrians. Banding of windows on second floors is encouraged. 
iv.  Windows and transparency. 
a.  Windows shall be clear, not tinted, mirrored or frosted, except that specialty windows (stained, etched, or other such similar treatments) are permitted at a maximum of one per façade face. 
b.  Privacy can be achieved through the use of curtains or screening in appropriate locations, however, each business shall have a minimum of 50 percent of the store front windows "active" with displays, painted signage (limited to 80 percent of the window) or other such similar effect. 
v.  Roof type. A minimum 6/12 pitched roof is preferred and structures that provide for two roof elevations (structure and porch) are encouraged. 
vi.  Materials. Natural materials, such as natural brick and stone, are encouraged. 
vii.  Entry. 
a.  Entry ways shall be the primary focus of all buildings. 
b.  Functional doorways should be included in the rear of the building so that necessary loading and unloading can take place. 
viii.  Height. 
a.  All new buildings shall have a minimum height of 18 feet. 
b.  No building shall be greater than two stories or 27 feet, except that structural appurtenances shall be permitted to exceed the height limitations when they are ornamental in purpose, such as steeples, belfries, cupolas, ornamental towers provide that such structural elements do not exceed 20 percent of the roof area. 
e.  Streetscape design guidelines. All new developments and redevelopments shall require installation of streetscape design elements; either two elements from Option A or one element from Option B. All elements must be maintained in perpetuity and of a type and style specifically approved by the planning commission. 
Option A (choose two): 
•  Low (12 inches to three feet in height) fence and landscaping 
•  Bench 
•  Potted plants 
Option B (choose one): 
•  Stone knee wall (minimum 12 feet in length) 
•  Stone columns with minimum ten feet of fencing 
•  Stone columns with associated landscaping 
f.  West State Street. The standards for this section of State Street are meant to permit a wide variety of more intense commercial and multiple-family housing developments. The township acknowledges that this level of intense development typically requires more parking, flexibility in parking standards and creative ways to screen parking and encourage pedestrians. Stone shall be incorporated into the building or incorporated within a site through the placement of large stones and outcroppings or as otherwise approved by the planning commission. 
i.  Building placement. 
a.  Front yard setback: The front yard setback shall be 30 feet from the proposed right of way as determined by Section 303.2. unless the applicant seeks one of the alternatives detailed below: 
i.  For a setback a minimum of 30 feet but more than 20 feet; the applicant may choose one of the following elements: 
a.  Stone columns and fencing. 
b.  Fencing (no less than 20 lineal feet) and a coordinated approved landscaping plan. 
c.  Stone columns at key entrances with coordinated and approved landscaping. 
ii.  For a setback less than 20 feet but more than ten feet; the applicant may choose one from each of the following groups: 
a.  Group 1: 
i.  Stone columns and fencing. 
ii.  Fencing (no less than 20 lineal feet) and a coordinated approved landscaping plan. 
iii.  Stone columns at key entrances with coordinated and approved landscaping. 
b.  Group 2: 
i.  Bench as approved by the planning commission. 
ii.  Two planters maintained with plantings, as approved by the planning commission. 
iii.  Trash can as approved by the planning commission. 
iii.  For a setback less than ten feet but at least five feet; the applicant may choose any four elements from the list below: 
a.  Stone columns at key locations with an approved associated landscaping plan. 
b.  Fencing with associated landscaping as approved by the planning commission. 
c.  Street trees planted in grates with an expanded sidewalk. 
d.  A knee wall of decorative stone, at key locations, at least 12 feet in length. 
e.  A bench and trash can as approved by the planning commission. 
f.  Planters (maintained with plantings) at key locations as approved by the planning commission. 
g.  Public art, as specifically approved by the planning commission, to be maintained in perpetuity. 
h.  A quasi, outdoor/public space, at least 400 square feet in size, as approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Parking shall not be the dominant feature of the site. 
c.  Side yards are not required unless adjacent to residential development. Parking lots shall provide a minimum five-foot separation unless there is an executed mutual access easement agreement. 
d.  Rear yard setback is 30 feet, excluding parking which shall be a minimum of five feet unless adjacent to a residential district. When adjacent to a residential district, the side and rear yard of a nonresidential use which abuts a residential district shall be landscaped to provide a visual screen between districts. The extent of the screening shall be based on the distance between the parking area and/or the building to the property line, with the exception that the planning commission may require additional screening from parking areas and headlights if trespass by lighting or vehicle headlights is a concern: 
i.  Fifty feet or more from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer of maintained and seeded lawn is required along with one tree or two shrubs for each 30 lineal feet. 
ii.  Thirty feet but less than 50 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer of maintained and seeded lawn or ground cover with three-foot tall berm with a slope no greater than 3:1 with two trees or four shrubs installed within said buffer for each 30 lineal feet. 
iii.  Fifteen feet but less than 30 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, an opaque fence six feet in height with one tree or two shrubs shall be planted every 30 lineal feet. 
iv.  A minimum of ten feet but less than 15 feet from building and/or parking area to the nearest residential property line, a buffer screen no less than five feet in width and six feet in height shall be established, consisting of tree plantings, hedges, and an opaque fence or wall that is consistent with the materials and colors used on site. 
ii.  Building design guidelines. For all new buildings or redevelopments: 
a.  Building facades are considered the public faces of buildings. All four sides of the building must be addressed with consistent architecture. 
b.  Walls greater than 50 feet in length shall be effectively broken down through a change in surface, a change in materials or additional landscaping so as to reduce the perceived scale and mass of the wall. 
c.  All mechanical equipment, including roof top equipment, shall be screened from view. 
d.  Planters with landscaping are encouraged at key locations at and around the primary entrance to the building. 
iii.  Articulation. 
a.  Each entry shall be the primary focus of the building. 
b.  Windows should be used in such a way as to provide visual interest to the building as a whole as well as to pedestrians. 
c.  Large scale developments, such as strip malls and shopping centers are required to provide a façade and design that allows distinctions between individual storefronts. 
iv.  Windows and transparency: 
a.  The front façade of a structure shall be a minimum of 40 percent transparent, meaning a combination of doors and windows. Windows shall be clear, not tinted, mirrored or frosted, except that specialty windows (stained, etched, or other such similar treatments) are permitted at a maximum of one per façade face. 
b.  Care should be taken to place windows around the perimeter of the building unless not feasible due to interior layout or use. If the installation of windows is deemed not feasible by both the developer and the zoning administrator, additional architectural and/or landscaping detail is required along said façade. 
v.  Roof type. There is no specific type of required roof type or pitch, except that creativity and quality design is encouraged. Large scale developments, such as strip malls and shopping centers are required to provide a façade and overall design that allows distinction between and among individual storefronts. 
vi.  Materials. Natural materials, such as natural brick and stone, are encouraged. Manmade materials are discouraged, especially on the first floors. Color schemes should be selected that enhance and compliment the materials selected. 
vii.  Entry: 
a.  Entry ways shall be the primary focus of all buildings. 
b.  Functional doorways shall be included along storefronts and other developments whenever possible. 
viii.  Height. Buildings shall have a minimum height of 18 feet. 
g.  Performance standards. In order to permit a wide range of uses and provide for creativity and flexibility for developers and the township, while still preserving the character and identity of Saginaw Charter Township, the following performance standards shall apply to all uses within the state street corridor: 
i.  All outdoor lighting shall be limited to 15 feet in height when located 300 feet from a residentially zoned district. Fixtures should be of a "cut off" type and there should be zero foot candles measured at the property lines. 
ii.  Dumpster unloading, parking lot cleaning, and similar building or site maintenance shall not take place before 7:00 a.m. nor after 10:00 p.m., excepting that snow plowing is permitted during all hours. 
iii.  No use is permitted which creates a noise level greater than which is allowed in by the noise ordinance when measured from the nearest residential property line. The planning commission may require details of operation and a map showing the areas affected by potential noise. 
iv.  No use is permitted which emits smoke, soot or noxious fumes or odors excepting smoke or odors which are typically associated with restaurants and food service establishments. 
v.  Emergency road and utility repairs, road cleaning, snow plowing and other such similar work conducted by the township, county and/or its agents operated within the road or road right-of-way shall be exempt from these standards. Additionally, sirens used by public safety agencies are exempt as well. 
vi.  Any use that evolves into a nuisance, resulting in police, fire or other such calls that exceeds by 50 percent similar uses in the township, the property owner/operator shall be issued a civil infraction as permitted in the township's general ordinance. 
9.  Administration of the design guidelines. The design guidelines in this section are to be used as guides for the township planning commission when reviewing site plans and special land use for multiple family, institutional, commercial and manufacturing uses. 
a.  Flexibility of the guidelines. Because not every development may be able to meet each specific design guideline, the guidelines were written to be flexible, to expand and contract, to fit the development and achieve the intent of the master plan. 
b.  Applicable to all developments. Although not all developments will meet all of the guidelines, each new or redevelopment project in the area should meet most of the design guidelines. Minor changes to existing developments need not comply with the design guidelines. Minor changes are defined as those changes which do not structurally alter the building or site layout. The township encourages all changes in structures, uses and site design, regardless of how minor, to attempt to meet the intent of this Ordinance. All changes in use shall comply with the intent and purpose of these design guidelines. Any addition to a structure, parking area, or other significant site features is required to meet these design guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 675, 10-25-2004; Ord. No. 691, 7-10-2006; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008; Ord. No. 735, 12-16-2013 )  
Sec. 315. - Prohibition of (recreational) marihuana establishments. 
A.  Marihuana establishments, as authorized by and defined in the Michigan Regulation and Taxation of Marihuana Act (the "Act"), are prohibited in all zoning districts. 
B.  No use that constitutes or purports to be a marihuana grower, marihuana safety compliance facility, marihuana processor, marihuana microbusiness, marihuana retailer, marihuana secure transporter or any other type of marihuana related business authorized by the Act, that was engaged in prior to the enactment of the ordinance codified in this section, shall be deemed to have been a legally established use under the provisions of the Saginaw Charter Township Code of Ordinances; that use shall not be entitled to claim legal nonconforming status. 
C.  Violations of this section are subject to the violations and penalties pursuant to Section 2301 of Chapter 23 and may be abated as nuisances. 
D.  This section does not supersede rights and obligations with respect to the transportation of marihuana by marihuana secure transporters through Saginaw Charter Township to the extent provided by the Act, and does not supersede rights and the regulations with respect to medical marihuana facilities established pursuant to the Michigan Medical Marihuana Act. 
( Ord. No. 758, § 1, 2-11-2019 )  
CHAPTER 4. - GENERAL OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 750, adopted Nov. 28, 2016 , deleted Ch. 4 and added provisions to be a revised Ch. 4. Former Ch. 4 pertained to the same subject matter, consisted of §§ 401—407, and derived from Ord. No. 630, adopted Mar. 25, 2002; Ord. No. 703, adopted Sept. 8, 2008; and Ord. No. 744, adopted Jan. 11, 2016 . 
Cross reference— Traffic and vehicles, ch. 74. 
 
Sec. 401. - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Ordinance that off-street parking and loading areas be provided and adequately maintained by each property owner in every zoning district for the purposes of promoting safe and efficient off-street storage of motor vehicles; and to provide for sound and stable environmental conditions and the prevention of future blighted areas. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 402. - Off-street parking and loading general requirements. 
1.  Parking and loading requirements. In all zoning districts, off-street parking and loading requirements shall be provided in amounts not less than specified for the various land uses listed in section 404. 
2.  Requirements for a use not mentioned. Requirements for a use not mentioned shall be determined by the zoning administrator based upon those uses which are most similar to the use not listed. The zoning administrator may consider, but is not limited to, the following in establishing parking requirements for a use not mentioned: 
A.  Documentation supplied by the applicant regarding actual parking demand for the proposed use; or 
B.  Evidence available in planning and technical studies relating to the proposed use; or 
C.  Required parking for the proposed uses determined by other comparable jurisdictions. 
3.  Increase in floor area, building use capacity, intensity of use or change in use. Additional parking shall be provided and maintained in proper ratio to any increase in floor area, building use capacity or intensity of use. 
4.  More than one use on property. In the event a building or parcel of land is occupied by more than one land use, the total requirements for off-street parking and loading shall not be less than the sum of the requirements for the individual buildings or uses computed separately. 
Exception: reductions made in conjunction with [sub]section 402.10. of this section. 
5.  Use of off-street parking. It shall be unlawful to use any off-street parking and loading area for purposes other than short-term parking of licensed vehicles or the loading or unloading of necessary service trucks. Commercial repair work, servicing, sales, display or storage of merchandise or equipment in any parking area is prohibited except where specifically permitted in this Ordinance. If permitted, such activity may not reduce the number of off-street parking spaces available below the number required by section 404. 
6.  No parking on front lawn. No portion of a front yard lawn area shall be used for parking. 
7.  Maintenance of off-street parking areas. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be maintained as follows: 
A.  Parking and loading areas shall be adequately maintained and kept free of litter, debris and trash. 
B.  Parking and loading areas shall be kept entirely clear of snow. Snow may be stored in a parking area provided adequate on-site parking is provided in an amount equal to that required for the use or uses of the parcel. A clear sight area must be maintained from the edge of the adjacent street as defined in section 405.5 herein. Snow may not be piled higher than three feet within the clear sight area. 
C.  Parking stalls shall be distinctly marked with painted striping or similar indicators. 
D.  The surface of all parking and loading areas shall be maintained in good condition so no holes, depressions or cracks exist greater than three inches in depth and/or six inches in width or length and cracks of a width of one inch shall not interrupt more than ten percent of the surface area of any parking or loading area. 
8.  Pedestrian walkways. Where deemed necessary by the planning commission, walkways leading from parking areas, adjacent properties, and public sidewalks shall be installed to the principal building for the purpose of assuring pedestrians safe access to the site. All internal walkways shall conform to the following: 
A.  Must be paved with hard-surfaced material such as concrete, asphalt, stone, brick, tile, etc. Only nonskid paving may be used in walkway construction. 
B.  Must be curbed and raised at least six inches above the parking lot grade except where they cross driveways or aisles or where necessary to meet barrier free requirements. 
C.  Must be a minimum of five feet wide, exclusive of parked car overhangs. Where necessary to ensure five feet of unobstructed walkway, wheel stops are required. 
D.  Where pedestrian walks cross parking areas or automobile circulation lanes, the pedestrian walk must be defined by use of a contrasting material or marking, including, but not limited to, white concrete in an asphalt area, visually obvious paint stripes or other clearly defined pattern. 
9.  Shared use of drives and/or parking. The planning commission may require an access easement, development of a service drive or shared driveway to adjacent parking areas or parcels of land, to minimize the need for driveways and curb cuts to each use and thereby decreasing hazards to persons and vehicular traffic. 
A.  Shared parking. The planning commission may approve shared use of parking facilities located on separate properties if all of the following conditions are met: 
i)  A convenient pedestrian connection between the properties exists; and 
ii)  The properties are within 500 feet of each other; and 
iii)  The availability of parking for all affected properties is indicated by directional signs as permitted by the sign ordinance in chapter 5. 
iv)  The property owners shall provide parking spaces equal to the combined individual parking requirements stated in section 404, unless otherwise provided in [sub]section 402.10 [of this section] (reductions in parking requirements). 
v)  Prior to establishing shared use of parking, the property owner or owners shall file with the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department a written agreement providing for the shared parking use. The agreement shall be recorded on the title records of each affected property and shall be binding to future owners. Said agreement shall set forth terms for future maintenance and liability. 
B.  Shared or joint driveway. The planning commission may require adjacent property owners to share a driveway when it is determined it is in the best interest of the general public. Each property has a right to reasonable access. Reasonable access may not always be direct access, or may not be the number of access points requested by the developer or owner. 
i)  The planning commission, as part of a site plan review, may require the applicant to provide an easement to the township, which allows future access to the adjoining properties. 
ii)  The planning commission, as part of a site plan review, may require the applicant to construct a service drive leading to an adjacent property for the purpose of providing reasonable access to said property. 
iii)  Prior to establishing a shared or joint drive, the property owner or owners, shall file with the Saginaw Charter Township Community Development Department a written agreement providing for the shared or joint drive. The agreement shall be recorded on the title records of each affected property and shall be binding to future owners. Said agreement shall set forth terms for future maintenance and liability. 
10.  Reductions in parking requirements. Parking requirements may be reduced in the following situations: 
A.  Establishment of a joint or shared driveway. Where two or more abutting parcels in any B or M zoning district share a driveway complying with [sub]section 402.9 [of this section], each parcel is entitled to a ten-percent reduction in the amount of parking spaces required. This decrease is in addition to reductions allowed by other provisions of this section. 
B.  Reductions for further public benefits. In any B or M zoning district, the parking requirement for a parcel fronting on a county primary or state highway, other than an expressway, may be reduced by ten percent, in addition to other reductions allowed by this section, if three of the below-listed conditions are met: 
i)  No driveways open onto the major road. 
ii)  Installation of a walkway connection between public sidewalks and the buildings main entrance. 
iii)  A service drive and sidewalk is constructed between parking areas, allowing travel between parcels without the use of a public street. 
iv)  Shared parking is established in conformance with [sub]section 402.9 [of this section]. 
v)  Acceleration and/or deceleration lanes are provided on the major road for the right turns in and out of any driveway into the parcel, and a separate left turn lane is also provided. 
C.  Exceptions. Maximum ten percent cumulative reduction for restaurants. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 403. - Site development and construction requirements. 
1.  Permit. A zoning permit shall be required for the construction or expansion of any parking or loading area regardless of whether such parking area is in conjunction with the construction of a structure. The applicant shall submit a written plan to the zoning administrator, along with an application for a zoning permit. Such plan shall conform to the following standards: 
A.  The plan shall be to scale (1" = 20' no larger than 1" = 40') and contain the following information: 
i)  Boundary lines of the property involved. 
ii)  Location and size of any existing or proposed structures. 
iii)  Number and dimensions of existing and proposed parking spaces, ingress, egress and circulation drives, berms, landscaping and screening structures, drainage features. 
iv)  Existing or proposed use of the property. 
B.  All parking lot plans shall be reviewed and approved by the township engineer for compliance with the township's storm water management ordinance. 
2.  Parking area and circulation design requirements for all uses except one- and two-family residential uses. All ingress, egress and circulation drives shall be paved with concrete, plant mixed asphalt or similar material; and shall be graded and provided with adequate drainage to dispose of all collected surface water within a reasonable period of time. 
A.  [Surfacing requirements.] Parking and loading area surfacing shall conform to the following with either: 
i)  Six inches of cement concrete; or 
ii)  Two inches of asphalt surface lay over a base of stone with a compacted thickness of six inches. 
B.  Size of spaces. 
i)  Parking stalls shall be a minimum of nine feet wide and 18 feet long. 
ii)  Parallel parking spaces must be a minimum of nine feet wide and 22 feet long. 
iii)  Barrier free parking stalls must be a minimum of eight feet wide and 18 feet long with an adjacent clear space provided that measures five feet wide and 18 feet long. 
iv)  Loading areas shall be a minimum of ten feet wide, 25 [feet] long and 15 feet in height to provide adequate clearance. They must be located either within a building or outside on the same lot and available for the loading or unloading of goods or merchandise and having direct and unobstructed access to a street or alley. 
C.  Perimeter edges. Concrete curb and gutter shall be required for parking lots containing more than 50 spaces that serve commercial, industrial or institutional uses. The purpose of the curb and gutter is to control storm water flow from the parking area and to protect landscaped areas such as landscaped islands and other plantings. 
i)  Parking areas containing 50 spaces or less shall have bumper guards or wheel stops installed along the perimeter of the parking lot to prevent yard encroachments. 
ii)  Concrete curb and gutter shall be a minimum of six inches in height from the grade of the parking area or drive. 
iii)  The perimeter of landscaped islands within parking areas shall also be developed with curbs as required above. 
iv)  All access driveway openings shall be defined with a six-inch raised curb around the entire radii to the front lot line or proposed right-of-way line as listed under section 303.2, whichever is the greater distance from the centerline of the roads. 
D.  Ingress, egress and circulation drives. To provide for the safe ingress, egress and circulation of vehicles and pedestrians within parking areas and on adjacent streets and properties, all ingress, egress and circulation drives shall be developed in conformance with the following: 
i)  The location of driveways, entrances and exits shall be subject to the approval of the zoning administrator, or planning commission when site plan review by that body is required, after consideration of the effects on surrounding property, pedestrian and vehicular traffic and the movement of emergency vehicles. 
ii)  Drives for ingress or egress shall not be less than 25 feet from any adjacent lot or parcel within a residential district and ten feet from any side or rear property line of other uses. 
iii)  Ingress and egress drives shall be limited and clearly marked. Each driveway opening to a public street must be approved by the agency having jurisdiction over the street. 
iv)  Drives for ingress, egress and circulation shall not be less than 20 feet in width, except that drives for one way traffic flow may be 15 feet in width with the approval of the fire department. 
v)  Every legal parcel of land is entitled to reasonable access to public streets. Where such access is not provided by way of an existing proposed service drive or access drive, cross or access easement or joint drive, one driveway may be permitted directly onto a public street. The planning commission may permit additional access drives consistent with the standards for site review. When necessary for safe ingress and egress of vehicles, the planning commission may require acceleration, deceleration, turn or passing lanes and any other similar improvement to be installed at the expense of the developer or property owner. The standards for driveway development shall be as stated in the rules for driveways promulgated by the Michigan Department of Transportation and the Saginaw County Road Commission. The planning commission may require dedication or reservation of land for future service or access drives, joint driveways or cross or access easements at the time of rezoning of a parcel, or site plan or plat approval. 
E.  Driveway spacing. Each parcel shall have no more than one driveway entrance and exit opening to any public street for each 300 feet of frontage, or fraction thereof. Where more than one driveway is allowed, they shall be located at least 150 feet apart. No driveway shall be located within 50 feet of a street intersection. Exceptions may be made by the planning commission if the applicant can demonstrate that one driveway is insufficient for the proposed use. 
F.  Service drives. In the interest of public safety, a frontage or service road may be required along major streets as shown on the township's road designation map. The following minimum standards shall be utilized in design and construction of frontage roads: 
i)  Minimum width: 24 feet. The planning commission may approve a 20-foot wide service drive if it can be demonstrated that a parcel has physical constraints that make it difficult to establish a 24-foot wide service drive. 
ii)  Service drives shall be setback a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way or proposed right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
Exception: Access management plans adopted by the planning commission may be implemented as approved. 
3.  Yard requirements. Parking and loading areas and interior circulation drives shall not be located within any road rights-of-way as described under section 303.2 and, further, parking, loading and drive areas shall conform to the front and street side yard requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located unless otherwise provided herein. Parking lots, loading areas and circulation drives shall be located a minimum of 30 feet or the required setback of the zoning district in which the property is located, whichever is greater, from any road right-of-way as described under section 303.2. However, the setback may be reduced to 20 feet by the planning commission through the site plan review process for commercial B and industrial M districts only if it does not create a safety issue, it does not encroach upon or obstruct the clear sight distance for corner lots as defined by section 405.3 and a three-foot tall landscaped berm is constructed within the front yard between the road right-of-way and the parking lot. The height of said berm shall be measured from the grade of the adjoining parking lot. Furthermore, the slope of the berm shall not exceed one vertical for every three horizontal. 
Exception: Access management plans adopted by the planning commission shall be implemented as approved. 
A.  Parking lot, loading areas and circulation drives. All parking lots, loading areas, and circulation drives shall comply with all applicable setback and buffer yard requirements stated herein. However, along interior side property lines and rear property lines where no other setback rule is specifically stated, such paved areas must be a minimum of five feet from the property line. An exception may be permitted by the planning commission if two or more parking lots are connected to essentially function as a single parking area. Also, a legally binding agreement must be recorded to ensure continued use of the parking as such (i.e., cross easement). The five-foot separation strip shall consist of natural plantings and grass with curb as a preferable border. 
B.  Building perimeter and landscaping. Parking and loading areas and circulation drives shall be no closer than five feet to any building or structure. Within said five feet a raised sidewalk shall be constructed where it is expected that pedestrians may travel. Otherwise, said five-foot requirement may consist of a raised landscaped area. A minimum of 50 percent of this landscaped area, at time of planting, shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubs, or other living vegetation. 
C.  [Buffer yards.] Where a parking area or circulation drive of three spaces or more is within 40 feet of an adjoining residentially zoned district or lot there shall be installed and maintained a buffer yard along the adjoining property and within said buffer yard shall be developed either of the following: 
i)  A planting strip containing approved plant materials as listed in section 405 of this Ordinance at a density of ten plants per 100 lineal feet of buffer yard and at a height of five feet at time of planting. The buffer yard shall be a minimum width of ten feet. 
ii)  A masonry wall or uniformly treated wood fence not less than five feet tall. The buffer yard shall be a minimum of five feet in width. Said buffer yard shall be of such length as the width or length of the parking area. 
4.  Single-family and two-family parking requirements. 
A.  A maximum of a 400 square-foot parking area per dwelling unit may be located in the required front yard of any single- or two-family residential use. Necessary driveways for single- or two-family uses providing access to the dwelling unit from a public street may be permitted within the setback areas and may be used for residential parking purposes. The 400 square-feet is in addition to the square footage occupied by the necessary driveway. 
B.  Off-street parking for one- and two-family residential uses shall have a durable, smooth and dustless surface consisting of asphalt, concrete, crushed stone or similar surface as approved by the zoning administrator. Any such area shall be graded so that surface water drains away from adjacent lots. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 404. - Off-street parking requirements. 
1.  For the purposes of this section, the following shall apply: 
A.  Floor area. Unless otherwise specified, where floor area is the unit for determining the required number of parking spaces, the [term] "unit" shall mean gross floor area. [The term] "useable floor area" shall mean the floor area used for service to the public and shall not include floor area used for storage or the processing and packaging of merchandise where it is undertaken in a room in which service to the public is not involved. 
B.  Beds. For hospitals, bassinets shall not be counted as beds. 
C.  Places of assembly. For churches, sports arenas and other places of assembly in which those in attendance occupy benches, pews or similar facilities, each 20 inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat. 
D.  Employees. For requirements stated in terms of employees, the calculation shall be based on the maximum number of employees on the premises during the largest shift. 
E.  Fractions. When units of measurement determining the number of required parking spaces result in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction shall be counted as one additional space. 
F.  Outdoor seating. Square footage occupied by outdoor seating areas shall be calculated at 50 percent the typical required amount for that use. Outdoor seating areas that can be enclosed or utilized off-season shall be calculated at the full amount of required parking for that use. 
_____
2.  The minimum number of off-street parking spaces shall be determined in accordance with the following schedule: 
Minimum Number of Standard Off-Street Parking Spaces per Use 
	UNIT OF MEASURE 
RESIDENTIAL 
A. 	One- and two-family 	Two for each dwelling unit 
B. 	Multiple-family 	Two for each dwelling unit 
C. 	Mobile home parks 	Two for each mobile home or mobile home site 
D. 	Bed and breakfast establishments 	Two, plus one for each rental room 
INSTITUTIONAL 
E. 	Churches, temples or similar uses 	One for each five seats or 8.5 linear feet of pews in the main room for worship 
F. 	Hospitals 	One for each patient bed, plus one space for each 200 square feet of outpatient service area 
G. 	Homes for the aged, nursing and convalescent homes 	One space per four patient beds, plus one space for each employee 
H. 	Senior citizen housing 	One space per two living units, plus one for each employee 
I. 	Preschool child care, nursery schools and day nurseries 	One space for every six children and one for each employee 
J. 	Elementary and junior high schools 	One for each teacher and administrator in addition to the requirements of the auditorium 
K. 	Senior high schools 	One for every one teacher and administrator and one for each ten students, in addition to the requirements 
L. 	Lodge halls, meeting halls and community centers or buildings of similar use without fixed seats 	One for each three persons of legal capacity as established by the township fire or building codes 
M. 	Libraries, museums, and post office buildings 	One for each 600 square feet of gross floor area, plus one space for each employee 
N. 	Theaters and auditoriums 	One for each three seats 
O. 	Stadium, sports arenas or similar places of outdoor assembly 	One for each three seats and one for each one employee 
BUSINESS/COMMERCIAL 
P. 	Auto wash 	One for each one employee, in addition, adequate waiting space for autos shall be provided on the premises to accommodate 50 percent of the hourly rate for each automatic wash line and four for each washing stall for a self-service wash 
Q. 	Establishments for sale and consumption on the premises of beverages, food or refreshments 	13 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
R. 	Drive-in restaurants or similar drive-in uses for the sale of beverages, food or refreshments 	One for each 15 square feet of floor area 
S. 	Carry-out restaurant (less than six tables and/or booths) 	Six spaces plus one space for each employee on peak shift 
T. 	Drive-through business such as banks and fast [food] restaurants 	Three stacking spaces for each drive-in window in addition to normal parking 
U. 	Furniture and appliances, household equipment sales, repair shops, showroom feet of decorator, electrician or similar trade, shoe repair and other similar uses 	1.5 for each 1,000 square [feet] of gross floor area 
V. 	Convenience grocery, self-service food or beverage 	Three for each 1,000 square feet [of gross floor area] 
W. 	Automobile service stations 	Two for each one service stall each, or pit, and one for each one gasoline pump 
X. 	Laundromats and coin-operated dry cleaners 	One for each two washing machines 
Y. 	Mortuary establishments 	One for each 50 square feet of gross floor area 
Z. 	Motel, hotel or other commercial lodging establishments 	One for each one occupancy unit, plus one for each one employee, plus extra spaces for dining rooms, bathrooms, or meeting rooms as otherwise provided in this section 
AA. 	Motor vehicle sales and service establishments 	Five for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area of sales area, plus one for each one auto service stall 
AB. 	Open air businesses 	Two for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AC. 	General retail 	One space per 250 square feet 
AD. 	Commercial retail centers, supermarkets, shopping malls 	For centers less than 50,000 square feet: 
One space for each 250 square feet of GFA 
For centers between 50,000 square feet and 450,000 square feet of GFA: 
One space for each 300 square feet of GFA 
For centers greater than 450,000 square feet of GFA: 
One space for each 350 square feet of GFA 
AE. 	Blood plasma donation center 	One space for each collection station, one space for each person permitted to occupy the waiting area, and one space for each employee in the largest working shift. The zoning administrator shall review the proposed floor plan for the plasma center and may require additional parking for processing rooms/booths, staging and testing areas, etc. 
OFFICES 
AF. 	Banks 	Four for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AG. 	Business or professional offices, except as otherwise provided 	Five for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AH. 	Professional offices of medical, dental or similar professions 	Six for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AI. 	Public office building not otherwise specified 	Four for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AJ. 	Beauty, barber or tanning 	Two spaces for each work station or tanning booth 
INDUSTRIAL 
AK. 	Manufacturing or research establishments 	Three for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AL. 	Warehousing or wholesale establishments 	One space per 10,000 square feet of gross floor area plus one space per every one employees on the largest shift 
AM. 	Mini-warehouse 	One unobstructed parking space for each ten storage units 
AN. 	Contractor's establishments 	One space per employee plus parking for accessory uses 
ENTERTAINMENT/RECREATION 
AO. 	Assembly buildings without fixed seats, for commercial recreation, including dancehalls, pool or billiard parlors, skating rinks, and exhibition or buildings for similar assembly use 	15 for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AP. 	Health clubs, swimming pool clubs, tennis clubs or similar uses 	Six for each 1,000 square feet of gross floor area 
AQ. 	Golf courses 	Four for each one golf hole and one for each one employee 
AR. 	Driving ranges 	One for each ten lineal feet of driving range width at the point which golf balls are driven 
AS. 	Bowling alleys 	Five for each one bowling lane 
AT. 	Miniature or par-3 golf courses 	Three for each one hole, plus one for each one employee 
AU. 	Shooting range 	One and one-half for each shooting position/alley, plus one for each employee on the largest typical shift 
 
3.  On-street parking. Requests for on-street parking shall be specifically approved by the Saginaw County Road Commission and the Saginaw Charter Township Planning Commission. Any approved on-street parking shall be designed to consider the requirements for snow removal, paid for and constructed by the developer and constructed to the specification of the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 ) 
_____ 
Sec. 405. - Parking area landscaping requirements. 
1.  Intent. Landscaping is intended to provide a visual separation of uses from streets, and visual separation of compatible uses so as to soften the appearance of streets, parking areas and building elevations. 
Recognizing that the preservation or installation of vegetative cover promotes the health, safety and general welfare by aiding in the stabilization of the environment's ecological balance by contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge and stormwater runoff retardation while at the same time aiding in noise, glare and heat abatement, the following requirements for the landscaping of parking and outdoor display areas are enacted. 
2.  Interior landscaping. Landscaping required or installed within a parking area shall be designed to control traffic, provide shade, screen views into and within vehicular use areas, and separate the parking circulation, and service areas, in accordance with the following provisions. 
A.  Required amount. 
i)  If the parking area contains no more than 50 parking spaces, at least 16 square feet of planting area must be provided as described in [sub]section 405(B) of this section for each parking stall proposed. 
ii)  If the parking area contains more than 50, but less than 100 parking spaces, at least 20 square feet of landscape development must be provided as described in [sub]section 405.B of this section for each parking stall proposed. 
iii)  If the parking area contains more than 99 parking spaces, at least 25 square feet of landscape development must be provided as described in [sub]section 405.B of this section for each parking stall proposed. 
B.  Design. The landscaping requirements listed in [sub]section 405.2[A.] [of this section] shall be incorporated into the site in the manner described below: 
i)  For parking calculations less than or equal to 128 parking spaces, a minimum of one tree and two shrubs or two treelike shrubs and two shrubs for each four parking spaces must be evenly dispersed throughout and around the perimeter of the parking, display or storage area and/or in the setback area as shown on a plan approved by the zoning administrator. When the parking calculation exceeds 128 parking spaces, any additional spaces will be calculated at a minimum of one tree and two shrubs or two treelike shrubs and two shrubs for each 16 parking spaces. All plant materials required by the sections [this subsection] shall conform to the standards of section 303(4)(b), (c), and (d). 
ii)  The remaining ground area must be landscaped with plant materials, decorative mulch or unit pavers. 
iii)  A landscaped area must be placed at the interior end of each parking row in a multiple lane parking area. This area must be at least four feet wide and must extend the length of the adjacent parking stall. 
iv)  For sites that have parking calculations greater than 300 parking spaces, the planning commission may grant approval to deviate from the required landscaping by up to 50 percent. 
3.  Clear sight distance. When an ingress or egress drive intersects a public right-of-way or when the subject property abuts the intersection of two or more public streets, all landscaping within the triangular areas described below shall provide unobstructed cross visibility at a level between three feet and eight feet. Landscaping, except grass or ground cover, shall not be located closer than three feet from the edge of any ingress or egress drive pavement. The triangular areas referred to above are: 
A.  The areas of property on both sides on an ingress or egress drive formed by the intersection of each side of the drive and the public street with two sides of each triangle being ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two ten-foot sides. 
B.  The area of property located at a corner formed by the intersection of two or more public road rights-of-way with two sides of the triangular area being 30 feet in length along the abutting public rights-of-way and the third side being a line connecting the ends of the two 30-foot sides. 
4.  Maintenance of landscaping. The owner, tenant and their agent, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping, which shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance and shall be kept free from refuse and debris. Dead, diseased, or missing vegetation shall be replaced within 30 days, or as soon as weather permits. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 406. - Street trees. 
Street trees shall be required for all commercial, institutional and high density residential uses. The following minimum standards shall be utilized for street tree plantings: 
1.  Location. Street trees shall be placed behind the right-of-way line or proposed right-of-way line, whichever is greater. In no case shall any street tree be placed closer than four feet to a sidewalk or bike path. 
A.  Street trees shall be spaced every 30 feet on center. 
B.  An approved corridor landscape plan adopted by the planning commission shall take precedence over the spacing requirement stated in [subsection] 406.1.A. [of this section]. 
2.  Tree size. Street trees shall be at least 2½ inches in diameter and six feet in height at time of planting. 
3.  Tree type. Street trees shall conform to the standards listed in section 303.4(b), (c) and (d) of the Zoning Ordinance. Further, street trees shall be selected so that they are hardy to the climate and their location. Street trees, and the trees throughout the site, shall be selected so that there is not an abundance of a certain species. 
A.  An approved corridor landscape plan adopted by the planning commission shall take precedence over the standards listed in section 303.4(b), (c) and (d). 
4.  Trees required under section 405.2 may be used to satisfy this requirement. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 407. - Loading area requirements. 
In order to prevent undue interference with public use of streets and alleys, property owners who customarily receive or distribute goods by motor vehicle shall provide on the premises for that number of vehicles that will be at the premises at the same time on an average day of full use. 
1.  Every building housing such a use and having over 500 square feet of gross floor area shall be provided with at least one truck standing, loading and unloading space on the premises, not less than ten feet in width, 25 feet in length and 15 feet in height. One additional truck space of these dimensions shall be provided for every additional 120,000 square feet or fraction thereof [of] gross floor area in the building. 
2.  Access to a truck standing, loading, and unloading space shall be provided directly from a public street or alley, or from any right-of-way that will not interfere with public convenience, and that will permit orderly and safe movement of truck vehicles. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 408. - Flexibility in application. 
1.  The township recognizes that, due to the specific requirements of any given development, inflexible application of the parking standards may result in development with inadequate parking or parking far in excess of that which is needed. The former situation may lead to traffic congestion or unauthorized parking on adjacent streets or neighboring sites. The latter situation may result in excessive paving and stormwater runoff and a waste of space which could be left as open space. 
2.  The township may grant deviations from off-street parking requirements. These deviations may require more or less parking based upon a finding that such deviations are more likely to provide a sufficient number of parking spaces to accommodate the specific characteristics of the use in question. In the event that a deviation is granted, the following shall apply: 
A.  An applicant may request a parking deviation as part of a development application or as a separate and distinct action with no other concurrent request. 
B.  The applicant shall provide a parking study with adequate detail and information to assist the township in determining the appropriateness of the request. 
C.  The township may attach conditions to the approval of a deviation from the off-street parking requirements that bind such approval to the specific use in question. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
Sec. 409. - Lighting. 
1.  Lighting of off-street parking areas. Off-street parking areas shall be lighted in accordance with a plan as approved by the township planning commission. 
A.  The maximum height of a base, a pole, and fixtures shall be 25 feet. Exterior lighting shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in a manner that minimizes off-site glare, light trespass on neighboring lots, and traffic hazards to motorists. 
B.  The maximum intensity of light within any site shall not exceed the following standards: 
Light intensity 	Maximum 
(foot-candles) 
At any point within the site 	12.0* 
Average for the overall site 	6.0* 
At any lot boundary or road right-of-way line 	1.0 
 
*Exception: Automobile service stations and similar uses as approved by the planning commission. 
C.  Parking area lighting and other exterior on-site lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet when located within 200 feet of a residential dwelling or district. All exterior and parking lot lighting fixtures shall be so arranged or installed with reflectors so that light is deflected away from adjacent residential land uses and adjacent streets. Further, said exterior lighting within 200 feet of a residential zone/use shall have cutoff light fixtures and shall include the submittal of an acceptable lighting plan that designates zero foot-candles at the property line. 
2.  Exceptions: 
A.  Single-family and two-family duplexes. 
( Ord. No. 750, 11-28-2016 )  
CHAPTER 5. - SIGN REGULATIONS BY DISTRICT 
 
Secs. 501—511. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 657, adopted Jan. 26, 2004, repealed §§ 501—511. For similar provisions, reader is directed to Ch. 48, §§ 48-1—48-14. See Code Comparative Table for history.  
Sec. 512. - Off-premises, outdoor advertising signs. 
Off-premises, free-standing signs (advertising an activity, business, product, or service not sold or conducted on the premise upon which the sign is located) may be erected adjoining State Street (M-58) West of Berberovich Street, Midland Road (M-47), Bay Road (M-84), and I-675 in areas zoned B-3 (Commercial - Community Wide), B-3A (Commercial - Highway Service), B-4 (Commercial - General Intensive Business), M-1 (Science and Industry), and M-2 (Manufacturing) but not in areas zoned B-2 (Commercial - Neighborhood), R (Residential), FC-1 (Floodplain Conservation), A (Agriculture), or B-1 (Commercial - Office-Business) subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Off-premises signs shall not be located any closer than 5,000 feet to another off-premises sign on either side of the street. 
2.  Off-site signs may be double-faced and each side shall be considered as facing traffic flowing in the opposite direction. 
3.  At the intersection of two streets, double-or single-faced signs at right angles to and, therefore, facing traffic on said street shall not be closer than 300 feet from the intersecting roads' nearest right-of-way. 
4.  In any permitted zones, off-premises signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of total area, per sign face. 
5.  Off-premises signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to meet the requirements of the state building code and state electrical code. 
6.  Off-premises signs and sign structures must be erected on structural or tubular steel supports. Where the back is visible, it shall be suitably painted or otherwise covered to present a neat and clean appearance. All signs shall be on one pole except when multiple poles are required due to adjacent structures. No guy wires are permitted. The area around the off-premises sign structures shall be kept clean, and all scrub brush, tall grass, etc. shall be cleared away to a distance of at least five feet to the rear and side of the structure, as well as to the front property line, and if on a corner site to both property lines. 
7.  Upon seven workdays' notice of violation of the above provision, the township may take such action as necessary to bring the premise into compliance with this Ordinance, and the owners of said off-premises sign shall pay the township the costs thus incurred upon receipt of a statement from the township of the cost. Owner of such off-premises signs shall secure a business license and, in connection therewith, shall supply a bond to secure work which the township may perform as provided for above in such amount as determined by the sole discretion of the chief building inspector as shall reasonably cover the cost to maintain such sign during the year covered by the permit. Only one license shall be required although a number of different locations are involved, the township shall not be required to inspect any signs or perform any work referred to above and shall not be liable to any person for violation by the sign owner of this Ordinance. 
8.  No part of any off-premises sign structure shall be closer to any proposed right-of-way line than 30 feet. 
9.  No off-premises sign shall be less than ten feet or more than 30 feet above the existing grade at the site of the sign. 
10.  All off-premises signs shall be located no closer to a street than is provided by the building setback line. 
11.  No off-premises, outdoor advertising structure may be erected within 300 feet of any public park, recreation ground, lake, stream, school, church, or residential lot or zone located on the same side of the street. 
12.  No off-premises sign shall be located on a parcel on which there exists a violation of a township Ordinance, or an existing non-conforming use or sign. Parcel is defined as that property [on] which the off-premises sign is located, which shall include contiguously owned parcels by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 660, 2-23-2004)  
PART II - LAND USE DISTRICTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Districts authorized, MCL 125.271. 
 
CHAPTER 6. - DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 601. - Division of the township. 
For the purposes of this Ordinance, the township, excepting streets and alleys, is divided into the following zone districts: 
FC-1 	Floodplain and Conservation 
A-2 	Agricultural 
R-1 	Residential (Low Density) 
R-1A 	Residential (Suburban Low Density) 
R-2 	Residential (Medium Density) 
R-3 	Residential (Intensive Low Rise) 
R-4 	Residential (Intensive High Rise) 
B-1 	Commercial (Office-Business) 
B-2 	Commercial (Neighborhood) 
B-3 	Commercial (Community-Wide) 
B-3A 	Commercial (Highway Service) 
B-4 	Commercial (General Intensive) 
CB-1 	Campus Business 
M-1 	Industrial (Science and Industry) 
M-2 	Industrial (Manufacturing) 
 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 602. - Official zoning map. 
The boundaries of these districts are hereby defined and established as shown on a map entitled "Township Zone District Map," which accompanies this Ordinance and which map with all explanatory matter thereon is hereby made a part of this Ordinance. The official zone map shall be kept and maintained by the township clerk.  
Sec. 603. - Interpretation of boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts indicated on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
a)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following the streets or highways or the centerline of said roadways shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
b)  Boundaries indicated as approximately following township boundary lines or following lot lines shall be construed as following said lines. 
c)  Boundaries indicated as approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets or highways shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated by given distance or scaled dimension.  
Sec. 604. - Scope of regulations. 
No building or structure, or part thereof, shall hereafter be erected, moved, constructed, or altered, and no new use or change in use shall be made unless in conformity with the provisions of this Ordinance and with the regulations specified for the district in which it is located. 
The regulations applying to such district include specific limitations on the use of land and structure, height and bulk of structures, density of population, lot area, yard dimensions, and area of lot that can be covered by each structure. 
The board of appeals shall have the power to classify a use which is not specifically mentioned along with a comparable permitted or prohibited use for the purpose of clarifying the use regulations in any district.  
CHAPTER 7. - FC-1 FLOODPLAIN AND CONSERVATION DISTRICTS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Floods, ch. 34. 
 
Sec. 701. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended to protect floodplain and/or conservation areas; to promote the public health, welfare, and safety by prohibiting use of land within floodways which may result in the loss of life or property; [and] to preserve natural features, wildlife areas and scenic landscape. The basic purposes as herewith recognized are to protect persons and property from the hazards of floods and from resulting cost to the community, as well as to preserve natural resources and assets.  
Sec. 702. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal uses by "right" within a FC-1 district: 
1.  Farm crop, forestry, or similar land resource operations which do not adversely affect the natural state for which this district is designed to protect. 
2.  Parks, playgrounds, and conservation areas therein owned and operated by a public agency.  
Sec. 703. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory use to any of the permitted uses listed in the FC-1 district as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Recreation, refreshment, amusement and service structures may be permitted in public recreation or conservation area under supervision of public authorities and provided no structures are erected in an area subject to flooding. 
3.  Boat landings and docks, but not including incidental refreshments or restaurant facilities, provided ample at-grade off-street parking and storage facilities are provided for vehicles. 
4.  Agricultural buildings, provided no structures are erected within an area subject to flooding; however, under no circumstance may a building be erected or altered for residential purposes. 
5.  Alteration of the existing grade of areas subject to flooding is prohibited except upon issuance of a permit by the State of Michigan, Water Resources Commission, as required by the state law, Act 245 of the Public Acts of 1929, as amended (section 5b). 
6.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
7.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed, provided that all parking be at existing grade.  
Sec. 704. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structure may be permitted in the FC-1 district by the application for an issuance of special use permit when all the procedural requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards as cited in this chapter or chapter 22, are met. 
1.  Golf courses and country clubs, other than miniature golf courses, subject to the conditions of chapter 22, section 2205, and further provided no structures are constructed in any area subject to flooding. 
2.  Golf driving ranges, subject to section 2213(3)(b) and the following conditions: 
a)  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4, in addition to those required for a golf course or country club. 
b)  The driving range shall be a minimum of 200 feet at all points from any adjacent residential property and/or district. 
c)  The driving range shall be designed so that balls are not hit in the general direction of any buildings, roads, pedestrian paths, or other areas where people or personal property may be hurt or damaged. 
d)  An off-street lighting plan shall be submitted to the planning commission for approval in compliance with section 407. 
e)  Minimum site area shall be ten acres with a minimum width of 300 feet and depth of 350 feet. 
f)  Provisions shall be made for preventing balls from landing on adjacent parcels or roadways. 
3.  Personal wireless communication facilities when located on municipally owned and occupied land containing 20 acres or more and meeting the requirements of section 2219. 
( Ord. No. 755, 4-9-2018 )  
Sec. 705. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  None required. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Same as for A-2 agricultural district. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Same as for A-2 agricultural district. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  None required. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4. (Refer to section 404.) 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required in FC-1 districts.  
CHAPTER 9. - A-2 AGRICULTURE DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 901. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended to control the development of nonfarm use within primarily open land farm areas. It is the purpose of the regulations for this district to promote the maintenance of farm areas, while at the same time provide for special uses of a nonfarm nature which will not deter the basic objectives of this Ordinance.  
Sec. 902. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an A-2 district: 
1.  Single-family dwelling. 
2.  General farming and forestry including field crop and fruit farming, truck gardening, horticulture, aviaries, hatcheries, apiaries, greenhouses, tree nurseries and similar agricultural enterprises. 
3.  Specialized farming including the raising and keeping of small animals and livestock, provided that such livestock are fenced in or otherwise prevented from roaming at large off premises. 
4.  Public and private conservation areas and structures for the conservation of water, soil, open space, forest or wildlife resources.  
Sec. 903. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the A-2 district as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Customary home occupations, as specified for R-1 districts. 
3.  Cemeteries, public or private, subject to the conditions specified for R-1 districts. 
4.  Roadside stands selling products grown by the owner of the property upon which the stand is located, provided that contiguous space for the parking of customers' vehicles is furnished off the public right-of-way at the ratio of one parking space for each 15 square feet of roadside stand floor area. 
5.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
6.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
7.  Private stables, as defined under section 202(78), with a minimum site of five acres.  
Sec. 904. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structures may be permitted in the A-2 district by the application for an issuance of a special use permit when all of the procedural requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards as cited in chapter 22, are met: 
1.  Farms for production of fur-bearing animals for profit which occupy a minimum site of five acres of land, provided such animals are at all times contained within a structure or fenced area; that the structure and area be maintained in a clean, healthful and inoffensive manner; and further that the structure and area be located so as to minimize the potentially adverse effects of noise or odors on adjacent properties so as to not create a nuisance. 
2.  Grain and seed elevators and sales, cold storage for cooperative and/or wholesale agricultural products, and similar enterprises which are directly related to agriculture, and provided adjacent areas and uses therein [sic]. 
3.  Golf courses and country clubs, other than miniature golf courses, are subject to the conditions of chapter 22, section 2205, and further provided no structures are constructed in any area subject to flooding. Golf driving ranges that are ancillary to permitted golf courses and/or country clubs subject to chapter 22, section 2205 and the conditions listed under section 704(2). 
4.  Greenhouses and nurseries not selling [at] retail on the premises. 
5.  Incinerators and sanitary fills, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
6.  Correctional institutions or camps, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
7.  Institutional uses including: religious institutions, institutions for human care, educational and social institutions, and public buildings and service installations, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2204. 
8.  Public parks and recreation areas. 
9.  Race tracks with the exception of motor vehicle events, miniature golf courses and golf driving ranges, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
10.  Commercial riding stables or academies with a minimum site area of five acres or one acre for each horse stabled on the parcel whichever is greater. 
11.  Sand, gravel or clay pits and quarries, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
12.  Seasonal labor housing complex associated with agricultural enterprise. 
13.  Sewage treatment and disposal installations, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
14.  Special open space uses, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2213. 
15.  Veterinary hospitals, clinics, and kennels, which occupy a minimum site of five acres of land. 
16.  Mobile home park development, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2206. 
17.  Private airports or landing fields. 
18.  Personal wireless communication facilities when located on municipally owned and occupied land containing 20 acres or more and meeting the requirements of section 2219. 
19.  Substance abuse rehabilitation centers subject to the standards cited in section 2213. 
20.  Open space preservation developments complying with the requirements of section 2220. 
(Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 633, 10-14-2002 ; Ord. No. 636, 2-24-2003)  
Sec. 905. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth nor have a ratio of depth to width greater than four feet of depth for each one foot of width. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 60 feet. 
b)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of at least 35 feet, with a minimum of 15 feet on one side. 
c)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 40 feet. 
d)  In the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall be 15 feet. 
e)  In any case, no permanent or temporary structure housing livestock, other animals or for storage of manure shall be located any closer than 150 feet to a lot line. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum floor area of 1,040 square feet per dwelling unit, with a minimum of 800 square feet on the ground floor for units of more than one story. 
4.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Two and one-half stories or 35 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 25 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required in A-2 districts. 
(Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 10. - R-1 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (LOW DENSITY) 
 
Sec. 1001. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended primarily for single-family residential uses, together with such compatible uses as schools, churches, and recreational uses. The regulations herein set forth are designed for the purposes of encouraging a residential environment of low-density single-family dwellings located in individual lots.  
Sec. 1002. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an R-1 district: 
1.  Single-family dwelling not to exceed one single-family dwelling per lot. 
2.  Public parks, public playgrounds, public recreational grounds, and grounds for games and sports, except those of which the chief activity is carried on, or is customarily carried on, as a business.  
Sec. 1003. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the R-1 district and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1) and section 305. 
2.  Customary home occupations as provided in chapter 3, section 305(9). 
3.  Cemeteries, public and private, subject to the following conditions: 
a)  The site shall be at least 20 acres and shall be so designed as to provide ingress and egress directly onto or from a major or minor thoroughfare. 
b)  No principal or accessory building shall be closer than 50 feet from any abutting residentially zoned property line. 
c)  All lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged and maintained to direct light away from residential lands adjoining the site. 
d)  A maximum of one sign is permitted at a point of entrance or exit which shall bear only the name of the cemetery and shall have a maximum area of 16 square feet. The sign shall be located no closer than the yard requirements for the residential zone. 
4.  Signs, as provided in chapter 5. 
5.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
6.  Family day care facilities as provided in chapter 3, section 305(10). 
7.  State-licensed residential facilities, provided the population of such a facility is no greater than six persons and no similar facility is located within 1,500 feet of the proposed facility and persons released from correctional facilities may not be housed in such a facility. 
8.  Group day care home, as provided in chapter 3, section 305(11). 
(Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008)  
Sec. 1004. - Uses permitted by special permit. 
The following uses of land and building may be permitted in the R-1 districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all of the procedural requirements specified in chapter 22, together with the applicable standards cited in chapter 22, are met. 
1.  Institutional uses including religious institutions, educational and social institutions, and public buildings and service installations, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2204. 
2.  Bed and breakfast establishments as provided in section 2217. 
3.  Personal wireless communication facilities when located on municipally owned and occupied land containing 20 acres or more and meeting the requirement of section 2219. 
4.  Planned neighborhood development, subject to the requirements of section 2221. 
(Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 753, 8-14-2017 )  
Sec. 1005. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 10,400 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 80 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
c)  Each lot not being serviced by public sanitary sewer shall be provided with a minimum of 85 feet in width at the front building line and shall contain a minimum of 12,000 square feet. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
b)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of at least 20 feet, with a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
c)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
d)  In case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than ten feet. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum finished living area of 1,040 square feet floor area per dwelling unit with a minimum of 800 square feet on the ground floor for units of more than one story. 
4.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Two and one-half stories of 35 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 25 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required in R-1 district. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 510, 10-11-1993; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 11. - R-1A RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (SUBURBAN LOW DENSITY) 
 
Sec. 1101. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended for yet open rural and agricultural area which are the prime potential for urban development. 
The regulations herein set forth are designed for the purpose of encouraging and allowing well-planned low-density residential and related uses together with planned unit developments (for low to medium density) within R-1A districts as they are ready for development.  
Sec. 1102. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an R-1A district: 
1.  All uses permitted by "right" within an R-1 district and subject to all the restrictions hereinafter cited.  
Sec. 1103. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the R-1A district and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Customary home occupations as specified for R-1 districts. 
3.  Cemeteries, public and private, subject to the conditions specified for R-1 districts. 
4.  Customary agricultural operations on a minimum site of five acres of land including general farming, truck farming, fruit orchards, nurseries, greenhouses, and usual farm buildings but subject to the following restrictions: 
a)  No storage of manure or other odorous or dust-producing materials or use shall be permitted within 150 feet of any adjoining lot line. 
b)  Stables and buildings housing farm animals shall not be closer to any adjoining lot line than 150 feet. 
c)  No farm buildings shall be located closer than 50 feet to any lot line. 
d)  Customary farm animals except swine, poultry, rabbits, etc., and dogs other than household pets may be kept on a noncommercial basis when adequately housed and fenced on a parcel of land not less than five acres. 
e)  No products shall be publicly offered for sale from the roadside. 
5.  Single-family dwelling not to exceed one single-family dwelling per lot with a minimum lot size of 12,750 square feet and a minimum width at the front building line of 85 feet, providing the lot is a lot of record of a legally recorded plat. All other dimensional requirements of section 1005 are applicable. 
6.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
7.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
8.  Family day care facilities as provided in chapter 3, section 305(9). 
9.  State-licensed residential facilities as specified for R-1 districts.  
Sec. 1104. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and buildings may be permitted in the R-1A districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all the provisional requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards cited in chapter 22 are met. 
1.  Institutional uses including religious institutions, educational and social institutions, and public buildings and service installations, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2204. 
2.  Golf courses and country clubs, other than miniature golf courses, are subject to the conditions of chapter 22, section 2205. Golf driving ranges that are ancillary to permitted golf courses and/or country clubs, subject to chapter 22, section 2205 and the conditions listed under section 704(2). 
3.  Planned unit development, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2207. 
4.  Bed and breakfast establishments as provided in section 2217. 
5.  Personal wireless communication facilities when located on municipally owned and occupied land containing 20 acres or more and meeting the requirements of section 2219. 
6.  Open space preservation developments complying with the requirements of section 2220. 
7.  Planned neighborhood development, subject to the requirements of section 2221. 
(Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 636, 2-24-2003; Ord. No. 753, 8-14-2017 ) 
Editor's note— The amendment made by Ord. No. 578 stated that it amended § 1103(5). It has been treated as an amendment to § 1104(5) in accordance with the intent of same.  
Sec. 1105. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 15,000 square feet per dwelling unit. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Minimum yard requirements are the same as those specified for R-1 districts. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum finished living area of 1,040 square feet floor area per dwelling unit with a minimum of 800 square feet on the ground floor for units of more than one story. 
4.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Maximum building heights are the same as specified for R-1 districts. 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  Maximum lot coverage is the same as specified for R-1 districts. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required for R-1A districts. 
(Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 12. - R-2 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (MEDIUM DENSITY) 
 
Sec. 1201. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended to provide a sound and stable environment for various types of residential buildings including single-family and two-family, as well as single-family townhouses up to a medium-density character. In addition, residentially compatible uses are allowed under specified conditions. There is no intent to promote, by these regulations, a residential district of lower quality or livability then the R-1 or R-1A districts. 
It is the express purpose of the regulation as herein set forth to promote variety in housing style, design and cost to meet the ranging demands for adequate housing by existing and potential residents.  
Sec. 1202. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an R-2 district. 
1.  All uses permitted by right in R-1 districts, subject to all regulations hereinafter cited. 
2.  Two-family dwellings.  
Sec. 1203. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the R-2 district and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Customary home occupations as specified for R-1 districts. 
3.  Cemeteries, public and private, subject to the conditions specified for R-1 districts. 
4.  Signs, as provided in chapter 5. 
5.  In the case of two-family dwellings, two off-street parking places shall be provided outside of the front yard, as defined herein per unit. 
6.  Family day care facilities as provided in chapter 3, section 305 9. 
7.  State-licensed residential facilities as specified for R-1 districts. 
8.  Group day care home, as provided in chapter 3, section 305 11. 
(Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008)  
Sec. 1204. - Uses permitted by special use permits. 
The following uses of land and buildings may be permitted in the R-2 districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all of the provisional requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards cited in chapter 22 are met: 
1.  All uses permitted by issuance of a special use permit in a R-1 district subject to the restrictions and regulations specified therefor. 
2.  Planned unit developments subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2207. 
3.  Day nurseries subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2209. 
4.  Townhouses not to exceed a density factor of eight units per acre. 
5.  Senior citizens developments subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2214. 
6.  Bed and breakfast establishments as provided in section 2217. 
7.  Personal wireless communication facilities when located on municipally owned and occupied land containing 20 acres or more and meeting the requirements of section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 1205. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  For single-family dwellings, such lot shall contain a minimum of 10,400 square feet. Single-family dwellings located on property not served and thereby not connected to public water and sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
b)  For two-family dwelling structures, each dwelling structure shall have a minimum lot area of 11,050 square feet. Two-family dwellings located on property not served and thereby not connected to public water and sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet and a minimum lot width of 100 feet. 
c)  For townhouse dwellings, there shall be a minimum lot of one acre required, provided the minimum lot area per unit equals 8,450 square feet for the first unit and 5,015 square feet for each additional unit, further provided a maximum density of eight units per acre is not exceeded. A minimum lot width of 150 feet shall be required and all units shall be connected to public water and all sanitary sewer facilities. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
d)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 80 feet in width at the front building line and in addition all lots to be occupied for two-family dwellings shall be 85 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
b)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 20 feet with a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
c)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
d)  In the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than ten feet. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Single-family dwelling units shall have a minimum finished living area of 1,040 square feet per unit with a minimum of 800 square feet on the ground floor for units of more than one story. 
b)  Two-family dwellings and townhouse structures shall have a minimum finished living area of 850 square feet per dwelling unit. 
4.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Two and one-half stories or 35 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 35 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required in R-2 districts. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 510, 10-11-1993; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 13. - R-3 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (INTENSIVE LOW RISE) 
 
Sec. 1301. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended primarily for multiply-family residential uses together with certain institutional and other compatible uses under specified conditions. There is no intent to promote, by these regulations, a residential district of lower quality or livability than the R-1, R-1A, or R-2 districts. This district is intended only for area served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
It is the express purpose of these regulations to provide sites for multiply-family dwelling structures of a low-rise, moderate-density character where adequate public and private services and facilities are available to accommodate higher population concentrations.  
Sec. 1302. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an R-3 district: 
1.  Single-family dwellings. 
2.  Two-family dwellings. 
3.  Multiply-family dwelling, excepting basement living units, and boardinghouses or roominghouses.  
Sec. 1303. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions thereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any permitted uses listed in the R-3 districts, and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Customary home occupations, as specified for R-1 districts. 
3.  Day nurseries, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, (refer to section 2209). 
4.  Institutional uses including religious institutions, educational and social institutions, and public buildings and service installations, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2204. 
5.  Basement living units within multiple-family dwelling subject to an engineering determination, supplied by the developer, as to the protection from flooding afforded to basement living units and as is approved by the planning commission. 
6.  Family day care facilities as provided in chapter 3, section 305(9). 
7.  State-licensed residential facilities as specified for R-1 districts. 
8.  Group day care home, as provided in chapter 3, section 305 11. 
(Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008)  
Sec. 1304. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and buildings may be permitted in the R-3 districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all of the provisional requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards cited in chapter 22, are met: 
1.  Planned unit development, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2207. 
2.  Multiple-family service uses, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2211. 
3.  Funeral homes and mortuaries, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2210. 
4.  Senior citizens' housing development, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2214. 
5.  Housing developments may contain zero bedroom with a minimum floor area of 500 square feet if they do not exceed more than 25 percent of the total units subject to the standards set forth in chapter 2207. 
6.  Bed and breakfast establishments as provided in section 2217. 
7.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 1305. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  For single-family dwellings, such lot shall contain a minimum of 9,750 square feet. 
b)  For two-family dwelling structures, such lot shall contain 11,050 square feet. 
c)  Townhouses are not to exceed a density factor of ten units per acre, provided there is a minimum site of one acre and provided minimum lot area per unit equals 7,800 square feet for the first unit and 3,970 square feet for each additional unit, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2207(4)(c). Minimum lot width of 150 feet is required. 
d)  For multiple-family dwelling structures, the first dwelling unit shall have 7,800 square feet, and each additional unit shall be provided with 2,750 square feet. For boardinghouses or roominghouses, the dwelling structure shall have 6,000 square feet for the first living unit with at least 1,200 square feet for each additional group of four occupant accommodations or major fraction thereof. 
e)  Each lot, unless otherwise cited, shall at the front building line be a minimum of 80 feet in width for single-family, 85 feet in width for two-family, and 150 feet for multiple-family. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  For single-family dwellings: 
i)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
ii)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 25 feet, with a minimum of 12 feet on one side. 
iii)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
iv)  In the case of a corner lot the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than 12 feet. 
b)  For two family dwellings: 
i)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
ii)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 20 feet with a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
iii)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
iv)  In the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than ten feet. 
c)  For multiple family dwellings: 
i)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
ii)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 25 feet, with a minimum of 12 feet on each side. 
iii)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
iv)  In the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than ten feet. 
v)  Within any site for an apartment complex, no structure shall be less than a distance of 25 feet apart. 
vi)  No garage or carport opening facing the street shall be located less than 20 feet from the exterior property lines. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Minimum floor area for single- and two-family, as well as townhouses, are the same as specified for R-2 districts. 
b)  Minimum floor areas for multiple-family shall be in accord with the following schedule: 
Number of Bedrooms 	Square Feet 
1 	850 
2 	1,000 
3 or more 	1,200 
 
4.  Maximum building heights. 
a)  Maximum building heights are the same as specified for R-2 districts; however, further provided that within 150 feet of any R-1 district no building shall exceed a height of two stories. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 40 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  None required in R-3 districts. 
8.  Recreation areas. 
a)  Recreation areas and facilities, such as parks, playgrounds, swimming pools, and community buildings, shall be provided to the extent necessary to meet anticipated needs of the residents of the developments. Provisions of separate adult and youth recreation areas is encouraged. Recreation facilities generally shall be provided in a centralized location and should be convenient to the community center. In larger developments recreation facilities may be decentralized as necessary to provide adequate recreation opportunities for all residents. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 685, 8-8-2005)  
CHAPTER 14. - R-4 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS (INTENSIVE HIGH RISE) 
 
Sec. 1401. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended primarily for multiple-family residential uses, together with certain institutional and other compatible uses under specified conditions. There is no intent to promote by these regulations a residential district of lower quality or livability than the R-1, R-1A, R-2, or R-3 districts. This district is intended only for areas served by public water and sanitary sewer. 
It is the express purpose of these regulations to provide sites for multiple-family dwelling structures of both a low use and high-rise, and higher density character where appropriate public and private services and facilities are available to accommodate greater population density.  
Sec. 1402. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an R-4 district: 
1.  All uses permitted by right in R-3 districts, subject to all regulations hereinafter cited. 
2.  High-rise apartment structures.  
Sec. 1403. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following are the permitted uses subject to the cited conditions thereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  All uses permitted under special conditions in R-3 districts, subject to all regulations thereinafter cited.  
Sec. 1404. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and buildings may be permitted in R-4 districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all the provisional requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards cited in chapter 22, are met: 
1.  Multiple-family service uses, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2211. 
2.  Planned unit developments, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2207. 
3.  Senior citizens' housing development subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2214. 
4.  Bed and breakfast establishments as provided in section 2217. 
5.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 1405. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  For single-family and two-family dwellings as well as townhouse structures, such lots shall conform to requirements for R-3 and R-4 districts. 
b)  For multiple-family structures, the first dwelling unit shall have 4,000 square feet of lot area and each additional unit shall be provided with an additional area as specified by the following structure type: 
Structure Type 	Additional Lot Area 
Garden apartments 	2,250 sq. ft. for each additional unit 
Multi-story apartments 	790 sq. ft. per additional unit 
 
For boardinghouses or roominghouses, the dwelling structure shall have 6,000 square feet for the first living unit, with at least 1,200 square feet for each additional group of four accommodations or major fraction thereof. 
c)  Each lot shall conform to minimum lot width as required for R-3 districts. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Minimum yard requirements shall conform to those cited for R-3 districts except as hereinafter modified. 
b)  Minimum yard requirements for high-rise apartment structures shall be as follows: 
Within any site for an apartment complex, no structures shall be less than a distance of 25 feet apart and shall be increased by two feet for every ten feet, or major fraction thereof the structure exceeds 2½ stories or 35 feet. 
3.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. 
a)  Minimum floor area requirements are the same as specified for R-3 districts. 
4.  Maximum building heights. 
a)  Maximum building heights are the same as specified for R-3 districts, except as hereinafter modified. 
b)  High-rise apartments may be constructed to a height of 100 feet. 
c)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
5.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  Maximum lot coverage is the same as specified for R-3 districts. 
6.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
7.  Loading requirements. 
a)  Each high-rise apartment building shall be provided with one standard loading space as a minimum and shall provide one additional loading space for each 50 dwelling units over 100 dwelling units. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 15. - B-1 COMMERCIAL (OFFICE-BUSINESS)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 1501. - Intent and purpose. 
The B-1 districts are designed to accommodate office uses, together with office sales uses, and certain personal services and restricted retail commercial uses. 
It is the purpose of this district to accommodate permitted uses typically in proximity to major shopping facilities and/or in compatible relationship with the major arterial street system and surrounding land uses. The nature of modern office use development provides greater compatibility for integration into a community structure; therefore, this district has been established for the purpose of encouraging office and related use development, but excluding general commercial activity.  
Sec. 1502. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within a B-1 district: 
1.  Office buildings for any of the following occupations: executive, administrative, professional, accounting, writing, clerical, stenographic, drafting, and office equipment and supplies sales. 
2.  Medical offices, including clinics. 
3.  Banks, credit unions, saving and loan institutions and similar uses. 
4.  Personal service establishments which perform personal services on the premises including barber or beauty shops and photographic studios or similar uses, but not including interior decorating shops. 
5.  Institutions for human care, including hospitals and public clinics. 
6.  Publicly owned buildings, exchanges and public utility offices, but not including storage yards, substations or regulator stations. 
7.  Commercial schools including art, business, music, dance, professional and trade.  
Sec. 1503. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the B-1 districts and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Funeral homes, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2210. 
3.  Day nurseries, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2209. 
4.  Signs, as provided in chapter 5. 
5.  Off-street parking and loading, as required and allowed. 
6.  Small animal veterinary clinics, provided all animals are boarded within a wholly enclosed structure. 
7.  Self storage facilities in climate controlled buildings; provided: 
a.  There shall be no direct access to storage units from outside the building. 
b.  The hours of operation shall be limited from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. 
c.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
d.  Buildings are designed to be compatible with adjacent uses. 
(Ord. No. 690, 7-10-2006)  
Sec. 1504. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and buildings may be permitted in the B-1 districts by the application for issuance of a special use permit when all of the provisional requirements specified in chapter 22, together with all applicable standards cited in chapter 22 are met: 
1.  Residential land uses in connection with permitted office or service uses provided the following standards are met: 
a)  Residential development shall not exceed a density of eight dwelling units per acre. 
b)  Unless otherwise mentioned herein, residential development shall conform to the requirements of the R-3 district in chapter 13. 
c)  The total floor area dedicated to or utilized by the residential use shall not exceed the total floor area dedicated to or utilized by the office or service use on the property. For the purpose of determining dedicated or utilized floor area, those areas used in common by both the residential and commercial uses shall be considered to be divided in half with one-half to each use. 
d)  Parking requirements for the property shall be the sum of parking required for each use individually. 
2.  Office business retail uses, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2211. 
3.  Restaurant or other establishments serving food and/or beverages including drive-through restaurants subject to chapter 22, sections 2216 and 2218, but not including drive-ins. 
4.  Tennis, racket sport, nonprofit fraternal organizations, private clubs, social and service institutions, swimming facilities (public or private); subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2205. 
5.  Drive-in businesses, including banks and drive-in facilities, related to uses permitted in B-1 districts, except that drive-in restaurants and automobile service stations are hereby not allowed. 
6.  Institutional uses including religious institutions, educational and social institutions and public buildings and service installations, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2204. 
7.  Senior citizens' housing development, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2214, as well as a maximum density of 12 dwelling units per acre. 
8.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
9.  Substance abuse rehabilitation centers subject to the standards cited in section 2213. 
(Ord. No. 535, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 633, 10-14-2002)  
Sec. 1505. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 18,000 square feet. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet. 
b)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 25 feet, with a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
c)  Each lot shall have a minimum rear yard of 30 feet. 
d)  In the case of a corner lot the side yard on the street side shall not be less than 30 feet and the remaining side yard shall not be less than ten feet. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Three stories or 40 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 35 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  Any use engaged in the sale of merchandise, including prepared foods and beverages, shall provide at least one standard loading space regardless of floor area and at least one standard loading space for each 6,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area involved in the use. Loading space for high-rise apartments shall be provided as required under section 1405(7), chapter 14. All office buildings of over two stories shall provide one loading space. 
b)  Supplementary regulations are contained in chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 16. - B-2 COMMERCIAL (NEIGHBORHOOD)[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 1601. - Intent and purpose. 
The B-2 districts are designed and intended to meet the day-to-day convenience shopping and service needs of persons residing in adjacent residential areas. 
It is the purpose of this district to accommodate commercial activities primarily offering goods or services which are required by a family at intervals of a week or less and at the same time protect adjacent residential areas from the adverse effects of uncontrolled or unlimited commercial activity which can result in blighting influences upon residential uses. Under appropriate conditions medium density apartment developments are also allowed.  
Sec. 1602. - Uses permitted by "right." 
All B-2 uses must be conducted wholly within a permanent, fully enclosed building (except required off-street parking and loading). In addition to those uses specified by "right" within a B-1 district only the following uses are permitted by "right" in the B-2 district. 
1.  Retail food establishments which market only convenience goods such as groceries, fruit, meats, dairy products, produce, baked goods, alcoholic beverages or similar commodities. Establishments such as bakeries and delicatessens which prepare food for retail, take out sales. Supermarkets are not permitted in B-2 districts. 
2.  General retail establishments, provided no more than 4,000 square feet of gross floor area is used per tenant space. 
3.  Offices for medical, dental and similar allied professions. 
4.  Banks, automatic teller machines, and other similar financial institutions excluding drive-in facilities. Drive-in facilities are allowed as a special use permit. 
5.  Personal service establishments which perform services on the premises, such as barber and beauty shops, tanning salons, dressmaker or tailor shops, self-service laundries, repair shops for shoes, watches, jewelry, radios, small households appliances and similar items, but excluding repair shops for lawnmowers, large appliances, furniture, motor vehicles and similar items. 
6.  Professional offices for architects, engineers, artists, and others employed in the graphic arts field. 
7.  Administrative offices in which the personnel will be employed in one or more of the following fields: executive, administrative, legal, writing, clerical, stenographic accounting, insurance and similar enterprises, including both public and private. 
8.  Commercial schools including art, business, music, dance, professional and trade. 
(Ord. No. 585, 8-17-1998)  
Sec. 1603. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the B-2 districts and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Temporary outdoor uses such as displays, Christmas tree sales, tent sales, amusements and the display or sale of any item permitted for sale by right in this district with the following conditions: 
a)  Such use shall be limited to 30 days in any one calendar year per parcel of land. 
b)  Such use or sales area shall not be located within any required yard or setback area. 
c)  Adequate off-street parking shall be maintained at all times and such use shall not displace required off-street parking nor cause parking or traffic congestion on adjacent streets or properties. 
d)  Such use shall be approved only when it can be adequately shown not to be injurious or detrimental to properties in the immediate vicinity. 
e)  Extension beyond the 30-day limit may be granted by the planning commission, after a public hearing and a finding that a practical difficulty will be created were the 30-day limit to be imposed. 
3.  Small animal veterinary clinics, provided all animals are boarded within a wholly enclosed building. 
4.  Day nurseries, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2204. 
5.  Signs, as provided in chapter 5. 
6.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
7.  Religious institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
8.  Social institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
(Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006)  
Sec. 1604. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structures may be permitted by the application for issuance of a special use permit when specified procedures of chapter 22 and the requirements as outlined in the chapter and sections cited are met: 
1.  Automobile service station, subject to the site development standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212. 
2.  Drive-in businesses, including banks and drive-in facilities related to uses permitted in B-2 districts. 
3.  Residential land uses in connection with permitted retail, office or service uses under the following conditions: 
a)  Residential development shall not exceed a density of eight dwelling units per acre. 
b)  Unless otherwise mentioned herein, residential development shall conform to the requirements of the R-3 district in chapter 13. 
c)  The total floor area dedicated to or utilized by the residential use shall not exceed the total floor area dedicated to or utilized by retail, office or service use on the property. For the purpose of determining dedicated or utilized floor area, those areas used in common by both the residential and commercial uses shall be considered to be divided in half with one-half to each use. 
d)  Parking requirements for the property shall be the sum of parking required for each use individually. 
4.  Restaurants, clubs and other eating or drinking establishments which provide food or drink for consumption on the premises, subject to chapter 22, section 2218; provided, that such establishments shall not be so-called "drive-in" facilities and that no dancing or entertainment shall be permitted. 
5.  Drive-through restaurants subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2216. 
6.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 1605. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 11,050 square feet. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 85 feet in width at the front building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet and said yard, except for necessary drives or walks, shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading or accessory structures, nor shall it be used for any outdoor display including any items sold on or off the premises. The only exception to this shall be in accordance with section 403(5)(a). 
b)  Side yards shall not be required except on that side of the lot abutting upon a residential district or agricultural district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than 20 feet; and further, in the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 30 feet; and further, except that if walls of structures facing an interior lot line contain windows or other openings, there shall be a ten-foot side yard. 
c)  Each lot shall have a rear yard of 30 feet. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  The maximum building height shall be three stories or 40 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 40 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings or structures. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  Any use engaged in the sale of merchandise, including prepared foods and beverages, shall provide at least one standard loading space regardless of floor area and at least one standard loading space for each 6,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area involved in the use. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 17. - B-3 COMMERCIAL (COMMUNITY-WIDE)[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 1701. - Intent and purpose. 
The B-3 community commercial district is established to serve the needs of a larger consumer population than is served by the B-2, neighborhood commercial district. 
It is the intent of this district to provide regulations governing use and development of community-wide service shopping areas. These regulations are designed to promote the economic viability of the community-wide service shopping areas by encouraging consolidation of permitted uses, improving safety and convenience for customers, lessening traffic congestion on adjacent thoroughfares and streets, and ensuing harmonious relationships with surrounding land uses.  
Sec. 1702. - Uses permitted by "right." 
In addition to those uses specified by "right" for B-2 districts, only the following uses are permitted by "right" in the B-3 districts: 
1.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in a permanent enclosed building. 
2.  Photographic studios. 
3.  Supermarkets. 
4.  Professional offices for architects, engineers, artists, and others employed in the graphic arts field. 
5.  Administrative offices in which the personnel will be employed in one or more of the following fields: executive, administrative, legal, writing, clerical, stenographic, accounting, insurance, real estate, and similar enterprises public and private. 
6.  Commercial schools including art, business, music, dance, professional and trade. 
7.  Bus, train and air passenger terminals. 
8.  Dry cleaning and laundry establishments. 
9.  Service establishments including printing, publishing, photographic reproduction, blueprinting, photostatic and related trades or arts. 
10.  Public buildings and service installation. 
11.  Radio and television stations. 
12.  Assembly buildings including auditoriums, theaters, private clubs and fraternal organizations.  
Sec. 1703. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the B-3 districts and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Automobile service stations, provided that the development requirements cited in chapter 22, section 2212 are met. 
3.  Temporary outdoor uses, including, but not limited to, tent sales and sidewalk sales, for a period not to exceed seven days per calendar year, except for those uses specified under chapter 16, section 1603(2) and the conditions stated therein. Tent sales shall be limited to those items customarily sold out-of-doors. Sidewalk sales must be directly adjacent to the primary structure and shall not be conducted in parking or drive areas. A permit is required from the zoning administrator for all such uses. The permit shall state the time period for such sales, which may be less than the maximum period provided for herein. All temporary uses shall be subject to the following requirements: 
a)  No part of such sales operation shall be located within any required yard or transition strip. 
b)  The sales operation shall not impede or adversely affect vehicular or pedestrian traffic flow or parking maneuvers. 
c)  Existing driveways only shall be used. 
d)  Signs as permitted under section 504(6). 
e)  The sign, merchandise, and all equipment used in such sales, and all debris and waste resulting therefrom, shall be removed from the premises within three days of the termination date of the permit. 
f)  A cash bond of $100.00 shall be provided to the township prior to issuance of the permit for tent sales only to guarantee cleanup of the site as required in the preceding paragraph 5. 
g)  A scaled drawing shall be provided with the permit application, showing thereon the location and extent of such sales. 
4.  Day nurseries, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2209. 
5.  Pet shops, provided that the animals and birds are kept entirely within the building at all times. 
6.  Commercial recreation facilities, such as indoor theaters, bowling alleys, indoor skating rinks or similar uses; provided, that all such uses will be conducted wholly within a fully enclosed building and that such building shall have yard setbacks of at least 100 feet from any abutting residential district boundaries. 
7.  Motel or motor-hotel, provided the following conditions are met: 
a)  Minimum floor area of 250 square feet per guest unit shall be provided. 
b)  Minimum lot area of three acres is required together with a minimum lot width of 250 feet, plus there shall be no less than 400 square feet of lot area for each guest unit. 
c)  Maximum lot coverage including all buildings, both principal and accessory, shall be 40 percent. 
d)  Setback. A landscaped setback not less than 20 feet shall be provided to the extent it abuts a public or private street or freeway. A landscaped setback not less than 30 feet between buildings and interior property lines shall be provided. 
8.  Signs, as provided in chapter 5. 
9.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
10.  Mini-warehouse on a minimum lot of one acre. An opaque fence or wall, a minimum of six feet in height shall enclose the entire periphery of the use. 
11.  Small animal veterinary clinics, provided all animals are boarded within a wholly enclosed building. 
12.  Restaurants, taverns and other eating or drinking establishments which provide food or drink and/or entertainment on premises excluding drive-in service, subject to the conditions as sited under section 2218. 
13.  Religious institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
14.  Social institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
15.  Blood plasma donation centers. 
a.  An indoor waiting area with a restroom shall be provided and open at least one hour prior to the opening of the center. 
b.  The storefront/façade shall be active. No mirrored, tinted or screened out/blacked out windows are permitted. 
c.  All loading and unloading shall be performed in the rear of the building. At least one designated loading area shall be provided. 
d.  Hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. if within 600 feet of a residential district and/or private and public schools. 
e.  Must provide a designated break area for employees, including outdoor space for smoking if permitted, as approved by staff. 
f.  Bike racks and benches may be required to be installed per the Planning Commission at specific locations as approved by staff. 
g.  Blood plasma centers shall not be located closer than 2,000 feet to another blood plasma center, as measured from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 712, 1-11-2010; Ord. No. 744 , 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 1704. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structures may be permitted by the applications for the issuance of a special use permit when specified procedures of chapter 22 and the requirements as outlined in the chapter and sections cited are met: 
1.  Servicing and repair of motor vehicles, trailers and boats when conducted within a wholly enclosed building. 
2.  Building supply and equipment establishments selling retail. 
3.  Open air business uses such as retail sales of plant material, sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment and garden supply. 
4.  Drive-in businesses, including banks and drive-in facilities related to uses permitted in B-3 districts. 
5.  Automobile car wash, subject to site development and car wash standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212. 
6.  Funeral homes and mortuaries, subject to chapter 22, section 2210. 
7.  Drive-through restaurants subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2216. 
8.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
9.  Substance abuse rehabilitation centers subject to the standards cited in section 2213. 
10.  Outdoor display lots exclusively for new or used recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, farm machinery and equipment, trailers or tractors which are for sale, rent or lease shall comply with the following: 
A.  The business shall be located on a lot or parcel which has its frontage on a State of Michigan Highway. 
B.  The lot shall have a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage and at least 40,000 square feet. 
C.  All areas subject to vehicular use shall be paved in accordance with section 403 of this Ordinance. 
D.  The perimeter of the parking area, along with circulation drives, shall be defined with concrete curbing as required in chapter 4 of this Ordinance. 
a.  Exception: Landscaped islands are not required on the end of each row of parking of the display lot. 
E.  No repair or refinishing work shall be done on the lot, unless such work is performed within a wholly enclosed building in accordance with an approved site plan. 
F.  Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voice or music shall be prohibited outside of any building. 
G.  No vehicle or product for sale, lease or rent shall be parked or displayed within 20 feet of a public right-of-way or proposed public right-of-way. 
H.  No temporary structures are allowed. 
I.  The applicant constructs and/or occupies a permanent building of at least 800 square feet on the site. 
J.  The placement of vehicles for display is of a professional nature, such as no upside-down cars. 
K.  Night lighting shall be shielded from all adjacent residential zoned districts in conformance with section 409 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
L.  Where adjoining a residential district, a decorative masonry wall six to eight feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. The planning commission may approve a landscaped berm as an alternative. 
M.  A type C bufferyard is required on any side or rear property line abutting a residential district. (Fence with a 15-foot setback including shrubs and evergreens). 
N.  Display areas, storage areas and all other vehicle parking contained on the site shall comply with the parking design and layout requirements of chapter 4 of this Ordinance. 
O.  New and used trucks may be sold as an accessory use in conjunction with an approved retail recreational vehicle sales display lot, provided not more than ten percent of the outdoor display area is used to display said vehicles. 
11.  Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2215, sexually oriented businesses and shall be subject to special approval review as required by chapter 22, special uses-special use permit requirements, but shall not be subject to section 2203, permit standards. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 633, 10-14-2002 ; Ord. No. 663, 5-24-2004; Ord. No. 724, 9-26-2011)  
Sec. 1705. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Requirements are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Requirements are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Requirements are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 50 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings or structures. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  The required number of standard berths for B-3 retail business uses and wholesale or processing uses shall be provided in amounts not less than shown in the following schedule: 
Square Feet 	Berths 
0—6,000 	1 
6,001—35,000 	2 
35,001—75,000 	3 
75,001—150,000 	5 
Each additional—100,000 	1 additional 
 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 18. - B-3A COMMERCIAL (HIGHWAY SERVICE)[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 1801. - Intent and purpose. 
The B-3A districts are designed and intended to provide essential servicing to the needs of the automobile traveler on the major arterial network. 
It is the purpose of this district to accommodate traveler needs and avoid undue congestion on the major transportation network. The promotion of safe and smooth traffic flow along arterials and at interchanges and the protection of adjacent properties in other zones from the adverse influences of traffic and highway service uses are prime considerations in the application of this district.  
Sec. 1802. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within a B-3A district: 
1.  Any retail business whose principal activity is to service the needs of the highway traveler or provide merchandise oriented to service from an automobile including drive-in businesses, restaurants, or similar uses. 
2.  Automobile service and repair establishments and parking garages. 
3.  Bus passenger terminals and stations. 
4.  Motels, hotels, and transient lodging facilities.  
Sec. 1803. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the B-3A districts and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
4.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 1804. - General use requirements. 
1.  Qualifying conditions. 
a)  Automobile and service repair establishments shall meet all the objectives, permitted use requirements and site development requirements set forth in chapter 22, section 2212. 
b)  Drive-in businesses shall conform with the site development standards of chapter 22, section 2212. 
c)  At all interchange areas (expressway) accessways shall be provided so that each separate use [or] as grouping of buildings or grouping of uses as a part of a single planned development shall not have more than two accessways from a feeder road. Such accessway shall not be located closer than 300 feet to the point of intersection of an entrance or exit ramp centerline and the feeder road. In those instances where properties fronting on a feeder road are of such width or are in multiple ownerships and accessways to property cannot be provided in accord with the minimum 300-foot distance from the intersection of the feeder road and entrance or exit ramps, a marginal access road shall be provided to service such properties. 
d)  Motels or motor hotels shall conform to the conditions specified in chapter 16, section 1603(8). 
e)  Automobile car washes shall conform to site development and car wash standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212.  
Sec. 1805. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 20,000 square feet. 
b)  Each lot shall be a minimum of 100 feet in width at the building line. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet and said yard, except for necessary drives or walks, shall remain clear and shall not be used for loading or accessory structures. 
Parking shall be permitted to encroach into the front yard after approval of a parking plan by the planning commission and provided a minimum setback of 25 feet is maintained. 
b)  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 25 feet with a minimum of ten feet on each side. 
c)  Each lot shall have a rear yard of 40 feet. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  The maximum building height shall be three stories or 40 feet. 
b)  Exceptions refer to chapter 3, section 304. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 40 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings or structures. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  Any use engaged in the sale of merchandise, including prepared foods and beverages, shall provide at least one standard loading space regardless of floor area and at least one standard loading space for each 6,000 square feet or major fraction thereof of gross floor area involved in the use.  
CHAPTER 19. - B-4 COMMERCIAL (GENERAL INTENSIVE)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 1901. - Intent and purpose. 
The B-4 business districts are designed and intended to meet the needs for sites by diversified and less intensive business types. It is the purpose of this district to accommodate uses characterized by the following: 
1.  Customers are often served in his vehicle or has the vehicle served. 
2.  They are large space users. 
3.  They combine retail, service, wholesale, assembly, and repair activities in various ways. 
4.  They serve entire community and regional markets. 
5.  Clientele is more often other businesses and are not household oriented. 
B-4 districts are generally located along major arterials and/or in proximity to rail service and/or B-3 districts and/or M districts.  
Sec. 1902. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within a B-4 district: 
1.  Use permitted by "right" within B-3A districts and as therein regulated. 
2.  Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise in a permanent, enclosed building. 
3.  Wholesale businesses. 
4.  Miniwarehouses on a minimum lot of one acre. 
A.  All doors, whether overhead, entry doors or otherwise, shall be coordinated to compliment the building's exterior. 
B.  Screening requirements: 
i)  When adjacent to agricultural, commercial or industrial zoned property, the development install screening around the periphery of the site as defined as buffer yard A (section 303(4),iii.). 
ii)  When adjacent to residentially zoned property, the development install screening around the periphery of the site as defined as buffer yard B (section 303(4)iii.). 
When the development retains mature trees at the edge of the property, which will effectively screen the development, the planning commission may permit the retention of the trees in lieu of requiring a buffer yard in that area. 
5.  Manufacturing and processing establishments selling their entire output at retail on the premises. 
6.  Building supply and equipment establishments. 
7.  Assembly buildings including auditoriums, private clubs, fraternal organizations and churches. 
8.  Public buildings and service installations. 
9.  Service establishments including printing, publishing, photographic reproduction, blueprinting and related trades or arts. 
10.  Automobile showrooms for new and used automobiles. 
11.  Veterinary hospitals, clinics or kennels. 
12.  Personal service establishments which perform personal services on the premises including barber shops, interior decorating shops, photographic studios and similar uses. 
13.  Interior decorating shops. 
(Ord. No. 684, 8-8-2005)  
Sec. 1903. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Customary accessory uses to any of the permitted uses listed in the B-4 districts and as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
2.  Commercial recreation facilities, such as indoor theater, bowling alley, billiard hall, indoor archery range, indoor skating rink or other similar uses; provided, that all uses will be conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building and that such building is located at least 100 feet from any front, side, or rear of any lot within an adjacent residential district. 
3.  Temporary outdoor uses, as specified in chapter 17, section 1703(3). 
4.  Drive-in theaters, golf and miniature golf courses, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212. 
5.  Servicing and repair of motor vehicles, trailers and boats, when conducted within a wholly enclosed building. 
6.  Pet shops, provided that the animals and birds are kept entirely within the building at all times. 
7.  Outdoor display lots exclusively for new or used automobiles, trucks, new or used recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, farm machinery and equipment, trailers or tractors which are for sale, rent or lease shall comply with the following: 
A.  The business shall be located on a lot or parcel which has its frontage on a State of Michigan Highway. 
B.  The lot shall have a minimum of 150 feet of road frontage and at least 40,000 square feet. 
C.  All areas subject to vehicular use shall be paved in accordance with section 403 of this Ordinance. 
D.  The perimeter of the parking area, along with circulation drives, shall be defined with concrete curbing as required in chapter 4 of this Ordinance. 
a.  Exception: Landscaped islands are not required to be installed on the end of each row of parking of the display lot. 
E.  No repair or refinishing work shall be done on the lot, unless such work is performed within a wholly enclosed building in accordance with an approved site plan. 
F.  Devices for the transmission or broadcasting of voice or music shall be prohibited outside of any building. 
G.  No vehicle or product for sale, lease or rent shall be parked or displayed within 20 feet of a public right-of-way or proposed public right-of-way. 
H.  No temporary structures are allowed. 
I.  The applicant constructs and/or occupies a permanent building of at least 800 square feet on the site. 
J.  The placement of vehicles for display is of a professional nature, such as no upside-down cars. 
K.  Night lighting shall be shielded from all adjacent residential zoned districts in conformance with section 409 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
L.  Where adjoining a residential district, a decorative masonry wall six to eight feet in height shall be erected along any common lot line. Such wall shall be continuously maintained in good condition. The planning commission may approve a landscaped berm as an alternative. 
M.  A type c bufferyard is required on any side or rear property line abutting a residential district. (Fence with a 15-foot setback including shrubs and evergreens). 
N.  Display areas, storage areas and all other vehicle parking contained on the site shall comply with the parking design and layout requirements of chapter 4 of this Ordinance. 
8.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
9.  Off-street parking and loading, as required and allowed. 
10.  Restaurants, taverns, and other eating or drinking establishments which provide food or drink and/or entertainment on the premises, including drive-through restaurants subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, sections 2216 and 2218. 
11.  Adult entertainment businesses. [Repealed.] 
12.  Nonmanufacturing research and development establishments including: 
a)  Laboratories, office and other facilities for research both basic and applied. 
b)  Production of prototype products, limited to the scale necessary for full investigation of the merits of the products. 
13.  Contracting and service establishments, including offices and accompanying warehouse or shop area for plumbers, mechanical contractors, home builders and other similar uses or trades, provided: 
a)  The parcel is not directly adjacent to any residential development or zoning district. 
b)  The outdoor storage of materials and equipment, including trailers, shall be allowed under the following conditions: 
1)  Outdoor storage shall not exceed 1,000 square feet. 
2)  All outdoor storage shall be enclosed by a eight-foot opaque fence. 
3)  Outdoor storage shall not be stored in height over the maximum eight-foot fence. 
c)  All vehicles over a one-ton-rated capacity must be stored within an enclosed building. 
d)  The gross area of the building used principally for storage, does not exceed 10,000 square feet. 
e)  Any prefabrication of materials or products, including equipment repairs, must be within a wholly enclosed building. 
f)  The proposed use is designed, constructed, operated and maintained in harmony with adjacent land uses or zoning districts. 
14.  Religious institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
15.  Social institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
16.  Day nurseries, subject to the standards specified in chapter 22, section 2209. 
17.  Blood plasma donation centers. 
a.  An indoor waiting area with a restroom shall be provided and open at least one hour prior to the opening of the center. 
b.  The storefront/façade shall be active. No mirrored, tinted or screened out/blacked out windows are permitted. 
c.  All loading and unloading shall be performed in the rear of the building. At least one designated loading area shall be provided. 
d.  Hours of operation: 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. if within 600 feet of a residential district and/or private and public schools. 
e.  Must provide a designated break area for employees, including outdoor space for smoking if permitted, as approved by staff. 
f.  Bike racks and benches may be required to be installed per the Planning Commission at specific locations as approved by staff. 
g.  Blood plasma centers shall not be located closer than 2,000 feet to another blood plasma center, as measured from property line to property line. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 1, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 561, 10-28-1996; Ord. No. 664, 5-24-2004; Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008; Ord. No. 744 , 1-11-2016)  
Sec. 1904. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structures may be permitted by the applications for the issuance of a special use permit when specified procedures of chapter 22 and the requirements as outlined in the chapter and sections are met: 
1.  Drive-in businesses, including banks, restaurants and drive-in facilities related uses permitted in B-4 districts, subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212. 
2.  Manufacturing and processing establishments selling their entire output at retail on the premises, subject to the standards of chapter 20, section 2006. 
3.  Open-air businesses limited to retail sales of lawn furniture, playground equipment, garden supplies, building materials, and similar items. 
4.  Automobile car wash, subject to site development and car wash standards cited in chapter 22, section 2212. 
5.  Funeral homes and mortuaries, subject to chapter 22, section 2210. 
6.  Sexually oriented businesses shall be permitted subject to the standards cited in chapter 22, section 2215, sexually oriented businesses, and shall be subject to special approval review as required by chapter 22, special uses-special use permit requirements, but shall not be subject to section 2203, permit standards. 
7.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 516, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 724, 9-26-2011)  
Sec. 1905. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Requirements for B-4 districts are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  Requirements for B-4 districts are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Requirements for B-4 districts are the same as specified for B-2 districts. 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  A maximum of 60 percent of the lot may be covered by all buildings. 
5.  Off-street parking requirements. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Loading requirements. 
a)  The required number of standard berths for B-3 retail business uses and wholesale or processing uses shall be provided in amounts not less than shown in the following schedule: 
Square Feet 	Berths 
0—6,000 	None 
6,001—35,000 	1 
35,001—75,000 	2 
75,001—150,000 	3 
Each additional 100,000 	1 additional 
 
b)  Supplementary regulations are contained in chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004)  
CHAPTER 20. - CB-1 CAMPUS BUSINESS DISTRICT 
 
Sec. 2001. - Intent and purpose. 
The Campus Business Zoning District is intended for a varying range of development from the highest intensity uses immediately adjacent to Tittabawassee Road to the lowest intensity uses adjacent to existing residential neighborhoods. It is intended to implement the designated future land use area within the comprehensive development plan called campus business and designed to: 
1.  Promote development that enhances Saginaw Charter Township's position as a location for corporate campuses, light industrial development that is capable of operation in such a manner as to control the external effects of the manufacturing process, such as odors, vibrations, emissions, or other nuisance characteristics through prevention or mitigation devices and conduct operations within wholly enclosed buildings. 
2.  Promote development that is adjacent to existing and/or concurrent with proposed capital improvement projects, thus not burdening the township's infrastructure; 
3.  Facilitate development that establishes a unique visual and economic identity for Saginaw Charter Township; 
4.  Protect and enhance critical environmental and natural features as well as existing residential neighborhoods; 
5.  Develop light industrial, research, office and mixed use areas that are safe, comfortable and attractive to pedestrians; and allow a mixture of complimentary land uses that may include housing, retail, offices, commercial services, and civic uses to create economic vitality; 
6.  Provide flexibility in the siting and design of new developments and redevelopment to anticipate changes in the marketplace; 
7.  Reinforce streets as public places that encourage pedestrian and bicycle travel; 
8.  Encourage efficient land use by facilitating compact development and minimizing the amount of land that is needed for surface parking. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2002. - Uses permitted by "right". 
The following are the principal permitted uses in the CB-1 District: 
1.  Teaching facilities in a college or university setting, including classroom buildings, assembly halls, administrative offices, libraries, and laboratories along with vocation schools and other types of technical training facilities. 
2.  Hospitals, medical centers, medical offices, clinics, including accessory laboratories but excluding blood plasma centers and similar uses. 
3.  Laboratories, including but not limited to, life science technology and medical laboratories, including biomedical engineering, biotechnology, genomics, proteomics, molecular and chemical ecology. 
4.  Research, design, engineering, testing, diagnostics and pilot or experimental product development, including but not limited to medical device and alternative energy technologies. 
5.  Administrative and professional offices. 
6.  Light Industrial and manufacturing uses, when located within a wholly enclosed building. 
7.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any principal use permitted. 
8.  Residential uses, subject to the following: 
a.  Residential uses in conjunction with commercial uses (mixed use). 
b.  Residential uses, when located at least 1,320 feet from Tittabawassee Road, and complying with section 2004. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2003. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
In developing the Campus Business District, the township acknowledges that there are uses which may be ancillary to those businesses for which the district was created. These ancillary uses are intended to act in a support function to the office, light industrial, research, etc., uses within the district. Though these uses may be independent of a use permitted by "right," these general commercial types of uses are not the primary purpose of the district and are therefore restricted in terms of size, square footage and location. Because the uses are intended to function as support, the following special conditions apply: 
1.  Where Campus Business District support uses, are proposed, the following development limits apply: 
a.  Uses permitted under special conditions are not intended to be located along frontage of Tittabawassee Road, as that area is designated for more intensive uses identified in Section 2002. 
b.  No single building shall be more than 30,000 square feet, with no more than 20,000 square feet designated for uses in Section 2003.2. 
c.  Loading doors shall not be visible from nor be located within 75 feet of any street or property boundary. 
d.  When a building wall is adjacent to a road or when a building wall is within 50 feet of a property, the building wall(s) shall be constructed with no less than 35 percent glass. 
e.  The aggregate floor area for uses devoted to Campus Business District support uses shall not exceed 30 percent of the gross floor area in the Campus Business District. 
2.  When the conditions of Section 2003.1 are met, the following uses are permitted. 
a.  Food stores. 
b.  Retail. 
c.  Business services. 
d.  Restaurants/food service. 
e.  Personal service uses. 
f.  Banks. 
g.  Entertainment. 
h.  Commercial recreation. 
i.  Day care. 
j.  Other similar services not yet classified. 
k.  Mixed use. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2004. - Campus Business District residential uses. 
Campus Business District residential uses are intended to provide housing in densities and form not found elsewhere in the township. The purpose of permitting residential uses in this district is to supplement not replace, existing residential uses within the township. Uses the township wishes to encourage include creative forms of owner occupied housing, specifically attached townhomes, attached single family condominiums, traditional new urban neighborhood design and similar developments. It is not intended to permit scatter site development but creative integration of residential uses into a campus business environment. Residential uses are permitted, subject to the following: 
1.  Residential uses in conjunction with commercial uses (mixed use), subject to the standards in Section 2002.8. 
2.  Residential development, consisting of at least ten units, when located at least 1,320 feet from Tittabawassee Road when the following are met: 
a.  Uses as identified in Section 2207.4.a. through e. regardless of the underlying district noted in this section. 
b.  Minimum lot area as identified in Section 2207.f. 
c.  Design standards as prescribed in [Section] 2207.6. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2005. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum yard requirements for Campus Business District principal uses. 
a.  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 50 feet and said yard, except for necessary drives or walks, shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading or accessory structures. 
b.  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 50 feet, with a minimum of 25 feet on each side. A side yard abutting a residential (R) district or use shall be not less than 100 feet; and further, in the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 50 feet. 
c.  Each lot shall have a rear yard of 50 feet. A rear yard abutting a residential (R) district shall be not less than 100 feet. 
d.  When the side or rear yard areas abut a residential (R) district, a bufferyard, as specified in Section 303.4 shall apply. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements for Campus Business District uses permitted under special conditions. 
a.  Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 30 feet and said yard, except for necessary drives or walks, shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading or accessory structures. 
b.  Each lot shall have a total side yard of 25 feet, with a minimum of ten feet on each side. A side yard abutting a residential (R) district shall be not less than 100 feet; and further, in the case of a corner lot, the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 30 feet. 
c.  Each lot shall have a rear yard of 20 feet. A rear yard abutting a residential (R) district shall be not less than 100 feet. 
d.  When the side or rear yard areas abut a residential (R) district, a buffer is required as specified in Section 303.4. 
3.  Minimum yard requirements for Campus Business District residential uses. 
a.  Mixed-use residential uses shall meet the minimum yard requirements for uses permitted under special conditions. 
b.  Residential developments as defined shall follow the lot regulations as contained in Section 2207.5.f. 
4.  Exceptions to setback requirements. 
a.  No setback from railroads. No setback is required from a lot line that abuts the right-of-way of a railroad track. However, for the provisions of this district, if there is a R district adjacent to a railroad then a setback consistent with Section 2005.1.b. shall be provided. 
5.  Maximum building height. 
a.  Buildings shall not exceed 100 feet, provided the following: 
i.  Any buildings within 150 feet of a residential (R) district shall not exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet. 
ii.  Any buildings located within 151 to 200 feet of a residential (R) district shall not exceed three and one-half stories in height or 45 feet. 
b.  Exceptions (refer to Chapter 3, Section 304). 
6.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a.  A maximum of 50 percent of the lot may be covered by buildings. 
7.  Minimum lot size. All lots shall meet the minimum standards below, with the acknowledgement that for residential uses, which require a minimum of ten units, shall be a minimum of five acres with individual lot sizes guided by standards contained in Section 2207.5.f. 
a.  Each lot shall contain a net minimum of 217,800 square feet, or five acres, in the Campus Business District unless a smaller lot size is specifically approved by the planning commission. 
b.  Each lot shall be a minimum of 250 feet in width at the front building line. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2006. - General use requirements. 
Uses in this district shall conform to the following standards: 
1.  Storage, loading and service areas: Outdoor storage of materials and/or equipment may be permitted, however, the storage areas, loading or unloading and/or delivery areas need to be creatively shielded/screened from all public views including the roadway and adjacent properties. Screening shall be accomplished by using an existing building wall, a decorative masonry wall, or a combination of a masonry wall and landscaping. All masonry walls shall be a minimum of eight feet in height and shall provide a six- to eight-foot landscaping strip on the exterior of the wall. Within this landscaping strip at least one evergreen tree, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be provided every 20 lineal feet. When equipment or materials being stored have a height that exceeds eight feet the planning commission may require installation of a wall taller than eight feet to more appropriately screen the site. 
2.  Uses shall emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases which are harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare except those produced by internal combustion engines under design operating conditions. 
3.  Uses shall emit no smoke, odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at or beyond any boundary of the use of the parcel. 
4.  Uses shall produce no heat or glare to such an extent as to be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundaries. 
5.  Uses shall produce no physical vibrations to such an extent as to be determined detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundary. 
6.  Uses shall not include in the manufacturing process any production or storage of any material designed for use as an explosive. 
[7.  Reserved.] 
8.  Uses shall conform to all local, state and applicable federal pollution control standards, including noise, air, and water quality requirements. 
9.  In addition to meeting the requirements of Chapter 20, Section 311 and Section 314, the planning commission may require studies, reports and additional information relative to how a proposed use will meet the performance standards in this section. This includes, but is not limited to: noise studies, odor maps, engineering analysis of proposed vibration, emission maps, schematics and renderings of the proposed buffers and buildings when viewed from the adjoining property, etc. Based on this information and/or documentation that the proposed use may deleteriously impact the adjoining property, the planning commission may require additional setbacks and screening, including time limits or restrictions on certain improvements to mitigate potential adverse effects, protect existing uses and to ensure compliance with the specific purposes and intent of the Campus Business District. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2007. - Comprehensive sign plan. 
A comprehensive sign plan provides a means for defining common sign regulations for multi-tenant projects and for consistency with the Campus Business District by providing incentives in the design and display of signs. A comprehensive sign plan shall be required for all developments and uses within the Campus Business District. An application for a comprehensive sign plan shall be included with the conceptual drawings, illustrations and building elevations and shall address the standards contained in this chapter. The sign plan shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission, in association with building and site design, as a part of the site plan approval process and shall meet all the standards and requirements contained in Saginaw Charter Township's Sign Ordinance, Chapter 48. 
1.  An application for a comprehensive sign plan shall include information on the following: 
a.  The location of all wall, projecting, monument, and freestanding signs. 
b.  A description of the signs including construction materials, color scheme, unifying design elements, and any proposed lighting. 
c.  An itemization of sign sizes including height and area at all identified sign locations. 
d.  The location of any area designated for temporary signs, and documentation of the means by which such signs may be illuminated if approved. 
2.  A comprehensive sign plan shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  The signs and their associated buildings hall share common design elements. The content of any sign message shall not be considered in determining whether common design elements are present. 
b.  The comprehensive sign plan shall accommodate future revisions that may be required because of changes in principal uses or tenants. 
c.  The comprehensive sign plan shall comply with the standards of this chapter, including any special allowances for sign area, number, location, and height provided for in this section. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
CHAPTER 21. - M-1 SCIENCE AND INDUSTRY[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 703, adopted Sept. 8, 2008, amended this appendix by redesignating Ch. 20, §§ 2001—2006, as Ch. 21, §§ 2101—2106. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 2101. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended for light industrial uses with few, if any, nuisance characteristics, but also permits commercial establishments not engaged in retail sales, service establishments which are of a type engaged in retail sales, and service establishments which are of a type not generally requiring the customer to call at the place of business. The M-1 district is designed to permit manufacturing, processing, assembling, packaging, or treatment of products from previously prepared materials. It is also intended to prohibit residential uses and intensive retail enterprise as being incompatible with the primary industrial and related uses permitted. 
It is the purpose of these regulations to promote sound industrial areas within the community which are also protected from incompatible uses. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2102. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an M-1 district: 
1.  Office buildings for any of the following: executive, administrative, professional, accounting or writing, clerical or stenographic, and drafting. 
2.  Production, processing, assembling, packaging or treatment of such products as bakery goods, candy, cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, toiletries, food products, hardware and cutlery, tool, die, garage and machine products. 
3.  Production, processing, assembling, packing or treatment of articles or products from the following: previously prepared or semifinished materials, bone, hair, fur, leather or feathers, fibers, plastics, glass or cellophane, wood, paper or cork, sheet metal or wire, tobacco, rubber, precious or semiprecious stones, and similar articles or products which are previously prepared or semifinished. 
4.  Manufacturing of pottery and ceramics. 
5.  Manufacturing of musical instruments, toys, novelties or other small, molded products. 
6.  Manufacturing and assembly electronic instruments and equipment and electrical appliances and devices. 
7.  Laboratories, including experimental, film, testing. 
8.  Trade, skills or industrial schools and veterinary hospitals or clinics. 
9.  Public utility installations and buildings, including power, fuel, communications, and water treatment. 
10.  Truck terminals. 
11.  Contractor's establishments. 
12.  Wholesale, warehouses and storage buildings and yards, and wholesale firms. 
13.  Other uses similar and with no more objectionable character to those permitted hereby, provided they meet the requirements of section 2005. 
14.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
15.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
16.  Manufacturing of electronics equipment, computers and similar items. 
17.  Nonmanufacturing research and development establishments as specified in chapter 19, section 1903(15). 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2103. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structure shall be permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Accessory uses clearly subordinate to the principal use of the lot or building such as: 
a)  Uses which can meet the requirements as herein specified or as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
b)  Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees. 
c)  Caretakers' residences, if situated upon a portion of the lot complying with all of the requirements of the R-1 residential districts. 
2.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
4.  Restaurants, taverns, and other eating or drinking establishments which provide food or drink on the premises, however, not including "drive-in" establishments. 
5.  Personal wireless communication facilities as provided in section 2219. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2104. - Uses permitted by special use permit. 
The following uses of land and structures may be permitted by the applications for the issuance of a special use permit when specified procedures of Chapter 22 and the requirements as outlined in the chapter and sections are met: 
1.  Religious institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
2.  Social institutions, subject to the standards contained in section 2204. 
(Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2105. - General use requirements. 
1.  Storage activities in this district within 300 feet of any other district shall be carried on in completely enclosed buildings. Storage may be permitted out-of-doors; provided, that it will not be within 300 feet of any other district. All outdoor storage shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence with solid entrance and exit gates, which fence or wall shall be at least five feet in height, but in no case shall the fence be lower than the enclosed storage up to a maximum of eight feet in height. Such storage shall be deemed to include the parking of licensed motor vehicles over 1½ tons rated capacity. 
2.  Retail sales are expressly prohibited except as may herein (chapter 21) be specifically allowed. 
3.  Uses in this district shall conform to the following standards: 
a)  Uses emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases which are harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare except those produced by internal combustion engines under design operating conditions. 
b)  Uses emit no smoke, odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at or beyond any boundary of the use of the parcel. 
c)  Uses produce no heat or glare to such an extent as to be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundaries. 
d)  Uses produce no physical vibrations to such an extent as to be determined detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundary. 
e)  Uses do not include in the manufacturing process any production or storage of any material designed for use as an explosive nor in the use of any such material in production. 
f)  Uses shall conform to all local, state and applicable federal pollution control standards, including noise, air, and water quality requirements. 
g)  Outdoor storage of sand, dirt, stone, and other similar materials shall be properly controlled or covered so as to prevent particles from blowing onto adjacent lots or creating a nuisance to the public. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 2106. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  All structures are required to have a minimum front yard or setback of not less than 30 feet from the property line. Rear yards shall be ten percent of the lot depth, but need not exceed 40 feet. A minimum side yard of ten feet is required on each side. The total for both sides shall be 20 feet or ten percent of the width, whichever is greater. Where a lot in this district abuts a lot in any residential district, no building in the M-1 district shall be closer than 100 feet to the property line of such residential district lot. 
Except for landscape improvements and necessary drives and walks, the front yard shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage, or accessory structures. Side and rear yards, except for a strip along the lot boundary ten feet in width, may be used for parking and loading but not for storage. The side or rear yard may be eliminated where a railroad service to the site is obtained at the edge of the lot. 
b)  Structures and solid fences or walls shall be no closer to the lot boundary than a distance equal to twice their height. This provision shall not apply to main buildings 15 feet or less in height nor to accessory structures, fences, or walls ten feet or less in height. 
c)  When the side or rear yard areas about land within a residential district and when such yard areas are to be used for parking, loading, unloading, or servicing, then such side and rear yard areas shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence. Such wall or fence shall be at least five feet in height, but in no case shall the fence or wall be lower than the enclosed parking, loading, or servicing activity to be screened up to a maximum of eight feet in height. 
2.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Buildings shall not exceed 3½ stories in height or 45 feet, provided any buildings within 75 feet of a residential district shall not exceed 2½ stories or 35 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
3.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  There is no maximum lot coverage requirement for M-1 districts. 
4.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall be a minimum 100 feet in width for nonmanufacturing land uses and a minimum of 150 feet for manufacturing uses. No lot, in any event, shall be less than 130 feet in depth. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Minimum off-street loading area for M-1 uses. 
a)  Industrial or manufacturing uses and warehouse operations shall provide loading areas in amounts not less than shown in the following schedule: 
Square Feet 	Berths 
0—10,000 	1 
10,001—20,000 	2 
20,001—50,000 	3 
50,001—100,000 	4 
Each additional 100,000 	1 additional 
 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
CHAPTER 21a. - M-2 MANUFACTURING[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 703, adopted Sept. 8, 2008, amended this Appendix by redesignating Ch. 21, §§ 2101—2105, as Ch. 21a, §§ 21a01—21a05. 
Cross reference— Businesses, ch. 18. 
 
Sec. 21a01. - Intent and purpose. 
This district is intended for intensive industrial uses but also permits light industrial, commercial establishments not engaged in retail sales, and service establishments which are of a type not generally requiring the customer to call at the place of business. The M-2 district is designed to permit the manufacturing, processing or assembling of semifinished or finished products from raw material as well as previously prepared material. It is also intended to prohibit residential uses and intensive retail enterprise as being incompatible with the primary industrial and related uses permitted. It is the purpose of these regulations to promote sound industrial areas within the community which are also protected from incompatible uses. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 21a02. - Uses permitted by "right." 
The following are the principal permitted uses by "right" within an M-2 district: 
1.  Uses permitted by "right" within an M-1 district. 
2.  Heating and electric power generating plants. 
3.  Any manufacturing, processing, testing, assembling, storage, and distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and other semifinished or finished products from raw materials. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 21a03. - Uses permitted under special conditions. 
The following uses of land and structures are permitted, subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed for each use: 
1.  Accessory uses that are clearly subordinate to the main use of the lot or building such as: 
a)  Uses which can meet the requirements as herein specified or as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1). 
b)  Restaurant or cafeteria facilities for employees. 
c)  Caretakers' residences if situated upon a portion of the lot complying with all the requirements of the R-1 residential districts. 
2.  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
3.  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
4.  Communications towers (meeting requirements of section 2219). 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 536 added as paragraph 4 "Communications towers. (Meeting requirements of § 2219)." Ord. No. 578 effectively superseded Ord. No. 536. While Ord. No. 578 did not repeal the amendment to § 2103 made by Ord. No. 536, as the obvious intent of Ord. No. 578 was to replace Ord. No. 536, the amendment made by Ord. No. 536 has been deleted.  
Sec. 21a04. - General use requirements. 
1.  Enclosed buildings. Activities in this district shall be carried on in completely enclosed buildings. Storage may be permitted out-of-doors; provided, that within 200 feet of any other district said storage shall be in completely enclosed buildings. All outdoor storage shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence with a solid entrance and exit gate, which fence or wall shall be at least five feet in height, but in no case shall the fence be lower than the enclosed storage, up to a maximum height of eight feet. Such storage shall be deemed to include the parking of licensed motor vehicles every 1½ tons rated capacity. 
2.  Retail sales. Retail sales are expressly prohibited except as may herein (chapter 21a) be specifically allowed. 
3.  Standards of conformance. Uses in this district shall conform to the following standards: 
a)  Uses emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases which are harmful to the public health, safety or general welfare, except those produced by internal combustion engines under design operating conditions. 
b)  Uses emit no smoke, odorous gases or other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at or beyond any boundary of the use of the parcel. 
c)  Uses produce no heat or glare to such an extent as to be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundaries. 
d)  Uses produce no physical vibrations to such an extent as to be determined detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare at or beyond the lot boundaries. 
e)  Uses do not include in the manufacturing process any production or storage of any material designed for use as an explosive nor in the use of any such material in production. 
f)  Uses shall conform to all local, state and applicable federal pollution control standards, including noise, air, and water quality requirements. 
g)  Outdoor storage of sand, dirt, stone, and other similar materials shall be properly controlled or covered so as to prevent particles from blowing onto adjacent lots or creating a nuisance to the public. 
(Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
Sec. 21a05. - Dimensional requirements. 
1.  Minimum lot size. 
a)  Each lot shall contain a minimum of 13,000 square feet. 
2.  Minimum yard requirements. 
a)  All structures are required to have a minimum front yard or setback of not less than 30 feet from the front property line. Rear yards shall be ten percent of the lot depth, but need not exceed 40 feet. The total of the side yards shall be at least ten percent of the lot width, but need not exceed 40 feet, and may be divided between two side yards as desired. Where a lot in this district abuts a lot in any residential district, no building in the M-2 district shall be closer than 100 feet to the property line of such residential district lot. 
Except for landscape improvements and necessary drives and walks, the front yard shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading, storage, or accessory structures. Side and rear yards, except for a strip along the lot boundary ten feet in width, may be used for parking and loading but not for storage. The side or rear yard may be used for parking, loading or storage where a railroad service to the site is obtained at the edge of the lot. 
b)  Structures and solid fences or walls shall be no closer to the lot boundary than a distance equal to twice their height. This provision shall not apply to main buildings 15 feet or less in height nor to accessory structures, fences, or walls ten feet or less in height. 
c)  When the side or rear yard areas abut land within a residential district and when such yard areas are to be used for parking, loading, unloading, or servicing, then such side and rear yard areas shall be effectively screened by a solid, uniformly finished wall or fence. Such wall or fence shall be at least five feet in height, but in no case shall the fence or wall be lower than the enclosed parking, loading, or servicing activity to be screened up to a maximum of eight feet in height. 
3.  Maximum building height. 
a)  Buildings shall not exceed five stories in height or 70 feet, provided any buildings within 100 feet of a residential district shall not exceed 3½ stories or 45 feet. 
b)  Exceptions (refer to chapter 3, section 304). 
4.  Maximum lot coverage. 
a)  There is no maximum lot coverage requirement for M-2 districts. 
5.  Minimum off-street parking. 
a)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking Requirements" in chapter 4 (refer to section 404). 
6.  Minimum off-street loading area for M-1 uses. 
a)  Industrial or manufacturing uses and warehouse operations shall provide loading areas in amounts not less than shown in the following schedule: 
Square Feet 	Berths 
0—10,000 	1 
10,001—20,000 	2 
20,001—50,000 	3 
50,001—100,000 	4 
Each additional—100,000 	1 additional 
 
(Ord. No. 455, 4-22-1991; Ord. No. 678, 11-8-2004; Ord. No. 703, 9-8-2008)  
PART III - [SPECIAL USES][13] 
Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
State Law reference— Special land uses, MCL 125.286b, 125.286d. 
 
CHAPTER 22. - SPECIAL USES—SPECIAL USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 2201. - Intent and purpose. 
It is the intent of this section to provide a set of procedures and standards for special uses of land or structure which, because of their unique characteristics, require special consideration in relation to the welfare of adjacent properties and the community as a whole. 
It is the express purpose of the regulations and standards herein to allow on one hand practical latitude for the investor or developer, but at the same time maintain adequate provisions for the protection of the health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the community. The following, together with previous references in other chapters of this Ordinance, designate the requirements, procedures and standards which must be met before a special use permit can be issued. 
(Ord. No. 718, 1-24-2011)  
Sec. 2202. - Permit procedures. 
The application for a special use permit shall be submitted and processed under the following procedures: 
1.  Submission of application. An application shall be submitted through the zoning administrator on a special form for that purpose. Each application shall be accompanied by the payment of a fee as established by the local legislative body. In the event the allowance of a desired use requires both a rezoning and special use permit, both requests may be submitted jointly, subject to the following: 
a)  The ordinance procedures for each [request] shall be followed as specified. 
b)  All applicable standards and specifications required by the ordinance shall be observed. 
2.  Data required. 
a)  The special form shall be completed in full by the applicant including a statement by the applicant that section 2203 can be complied with. 
b)  Final approval of a site plan that conforms to the requirements of section 311. 
c)  Preliminary plans and specifications of the proposed development. 
3.  Planning commission review and hearing. 
a)  The planning commission shall publish notice and hold a public hearing as required for a special use review within 60 days of receiving a technically complete special use and site plan application, as required by chapter 3, site plan review requirements and procedures and chapter 22, special uses - special use permit requirements. 
b)  The planning commission will make its recommendation regarding the special use application at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission following the public hearing held to review the application, unless additional information is required from the applicant. If additional information is required, the planning commission will make its recommendation at the next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of the requested additional information, provided the additional information is received no later than 15 days prior to the meeting. 
c)  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be forwarded to the township board within 60 days of the approval of the minutes of the meeting at which the planning commission issues its recommendation. The township board will consider the recommendation of the planning commission and render its decision to grant or deny a special use permit, or to grant approval with conditions, as stipulated by this Ordinance at this meeting, within 60 days of the receipt of the application recommendation from the planning commission, unless additional information is requested. If additional information is requested, the township board will make its decision at the next regularly scheduled township board meeting after receipt of the requested additional information, provided the additional information is received no later than 15 days prior to the meeting. 
d)  Failure of the township to act within the above-specified time limits shall not be deemed to constitute the grant of a special use permit. 
4.  Township board action. Upon receipt of the planning commission's recommendation, the township board shall consider the special use permit application within the time frame as stated in 3.c) above. The township board shall approve or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. Only upon approval by the township board may a special use permit be issued by the zoning administrator. 
5.  Expiration and extensions of special use permits. 
a)  Expiration: A special use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance of said permit. If construction or change in use has not commenced and proceeded meaningfully toward completion by the end of this one-year period, the zoning administrator shall notify the applicant in writing of the expiration of said permit, and no further notice or hearing shall be required. 
b)  Extensions: Upon written application prior to expiration, the township board may authorize an extension of the time limit of the site plan approval for a period not to exceed one year. The extension shall be based on evidence from the applicant that the development has a likelihood of commencing construction within the extension period. The township board may require compliance with any amendments to the zoning ordinance since the site plan was originally approved. 
6.  Suspension or revocation. 
a)  The township board shall have the authority to revoke any special use permit after it has been proved that the holder of the permit has failed to comply with any of the applicable requirements in chapter 22 or other applicable requirements or the standards as set forth in 6.b) or c) below. 
b)  The township board may suspend or revoke a special use permit if one or more of the following circumstances should be found to exist: 
i.  The special use was not constructed in conformance with the approved plans, or the property is not being used in conformance with the approved special use; or 
ii.  Compliance with the special use permit and any conditions have not been consistently demonstrated and administrative attempts to secure compliance have been unsuccessful; or 
iii.  The special use permit is issued erroneously on the basis of incorrect or misleading information supplied by the applicant and/or his/her agent; or 
iv.  The operation of the use granted by the special use permit has created a risk or danger to the public health, safety or welfare 
c)  The township board may also suspend or revoke a special use permit upon a finding that conducting or omitting any act, or permitting any condition to exist in connection with the special land use, is: 
i.  Contrary to the health, morals, safety or welfare of the public; or 
ii.  Unlawful, irregular or fraudulent in nature; or 
iii.  Unauthorized or beyond the scope of the special use permit granted; 
iv.  Forbidden by the provisions of this Ordinance or any other duly established rule or regulation of the township applicable to the business for which the license has been granted; or 
v.  A nuisance upon or in connection with the premises including, but not limited to the following: 
1.  An existing violation(s) of building, electrical, mechanical, plumbing, zoning, health, fire or other applicable regulatory codes or ordinance; or 
2.  A pattern of patron conduct in the neighborhood of premises which is in violation of the law and/or disturbs the peace, order and tranquility of the neighborhood; or 
3.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the premises free from litter, debris or refuse blowing or being deposited upon adjoining properties; or 
4.  Failure to maintain the grounds and exterior of the premises in accordance with an approved site plan. 
d)  Procedure for suspension or revocation of license. 
i.  If the zoning administrator determines that a holder of a special use permit has committed a violation of this Ordinance, the zoning administrator shall prepare a report in writing specifying (1) the specific factual details of such violation(s), and (2) the particular ordinance subsection(s) violated. 
ii.  The zoning administrator shall file the original report so prepared with the township manager. The township manager shall conduct an investigation of the facts contained in such report, and upon belief that such facts provide evidence of a violation of this Ordinance, shall provide a copy to the township board, and serve a copy of such report upon the holder of the special use permit or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail. 
iii.  Within 20 days from the date such report has been filed with the township board, the township clerk shall set a date for a hearing within a reasonable period of time before the township board on the alleged violations(s) for a determination by township board as to whether or not the special use permit shall be suspended or revoked. Notice of the hearing shall be served by the township clerk upon the holder of the special use permit or its authorized agent or employee personally or by registered mail not less than 15 days before a scheduled hearing date, and such notice shall advise the holder of the permit of its right to be represented by legal counsel at the hearing before the township board. 
iv.  At all such hearings, the special use holder of the permit shall have the legal right to defend against the allegations made by way of confronting any adverse witnesses, by being able to present witnesses in its own behalf, by being allowed to present arguments, personally or through legal counsel in its own behalf. 
v.  The township board shall prepare a written statement of its findings within 30 days of the conclusion of all such hearings and shall serve such findings with the licensee either personally or by registered mail. If the township board decides that the special use permit shall be suspended or revoked, the holder of the permit shall not thereafter conduct, operate or carry on the business for which the special use permit was granted unless and until a new special use permit is issued. 
7.  Right to challenge decision. An applicant who has been denied a special use permit, or whose special use permit has been suspended or revoked, may file an action challenging that denial in a court of competent jurisdiction. No application for a special use permit, which has been denied wholly or in part, shall be resubmitted to the township for a period of one year from the date of said denial, except on the grounds of new evidence or proof of changed conditions. 
(Ord. No. 693, 11-27-2006; Ord. No. 718, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 724, 9-26-2011)  
Sec. 2203. - Permit standards. 
Before formulating recommendations on a special use permit application, the planning commission shall establish that the following general standards, as well as specific standards, shall be satisfied: 
1.  General standards. The planning commission shall review each application for the purpose of determining that each proposed use meets the following standards and, in addition, shall find adequate evidence that each use on the proposed site will: 
a)  Be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or intended character of the general vicinity [and] that such a use will not change the essential character of the area in which it is proposed. 
b)  Not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or intended uses in the same general area and will be an improvement to the property in the immediate vicinity and to the community as a whole. 
c)  Be served adequately by essential public facilities and services, such as highways, streets, police, fire protection, drainage structures, refuse disposal, water and sewage facilities and schools. 
d)  Not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for public facilities and services. 
e)  Not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, and equipment or conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons, property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors. 
f)  Be consistent with the intent and purpose of the zoning district in which it is proposed to locate such use. 
2.  Conditions and safeguards. The planning commission may recommend and the legislative body may stipulate such additional conditions and safeguards deemed necessary for the general welfare, for the protection of individual property rights, and for insuring that the intent and objectives of this Ordinance will be observed. The breach of any conditions, safeguards, or requirement shall automatically invalidate the permit granted. 
3.  Specific requirements. The general standards and requirements of this section are basic to all uses authorized by special use permit. The specific and detailed requirements set forth in the following sections relate to particular uses and are requirements, which must be met by those uses in addition to the foregoing general standards and requirements where applicable. 
4.  Permitted use. Uses permitted by special use permit shall be those listed by districts as noted in Part II and as herein regulated, controlled or defined. 
(Ord. No. 718, 1-24-2011)  
Sec. 2204. - Institutional uses. 
1.  Authorization. In recognition of the many institutional types of nonresidential functions that have been found compatible and reasonably harmonious with residential uses, certain institutional uses specified in this section may be authorized by the issuance of a special use permit. Such permit shall not be issued unless all the procedures and applicable requirements stated herewith, together with the additional requirements of this section, can be complied with. 
2.  Uses. The following uses may be authorized in those districts as noted in Part II and provided the applicable conditions are complied with: 
a)  Institutions for human care. Hospitals, sanitariums, nursing or convalescent homes, homes for the aged, and philanthropic and charitable institutions. 
b)  Religious institutions. Places of worship and premises used by a religious organization for worship along with any accessory uses on the same lot so long as they are subordinate, incidental to, and customarily found in connection with the primary use. Typical accessory uses may include a parish hall, a playground or picnic pavilion, or a daycare/nursery school. 
c)  Educational and social institutions. Public and private elementary and secondary schools, and institutions for higher education, provided, that none are operated for profit; auditoriums and other places of assembly; and centers for social activities, including charitable and philanthropic activities, other than activities conducted as a gainful business or of a commercial nature. 
d)  Public buildings and public service installations. Publicly owned and operated buildings, public utility buildings and structures, transformer stations and substation, and gas regulator stations. 
3.  Institutions specifically prohibited. The following types of uses, but not limited to those enumerated, shall not be permitted in any residential district but may be allowed in an agricultural district. 
a)  Institutions for human care. 
b)  Camps or correctional institutions. 
4.  Site location principles. The following principles shall be utilized to evaluate the proposed location of any institutional use within a permitted district. These principles are alterable, depending upon the specific conditions of each situation, but they shall be applied (by the planning commission) as general guidelines to help assess the impact of an institutional use upon the district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
a)  Any institutional structure or use to be located within a residential district should preferably be located at the edge of a residential district, abutting either a business or industrial district, or adjacent to a public open space. 
b)  Motor vehicle entrances should be made on a major thoroughfare or as immediately accessible from a major thoroughfare as to avoid the impact of traffic generated by the institutional use upon a residential area. 
c)  Site locations that offer natural or manmade barriers that would lessen the effect of the intrusion of the institutional use into a residential area are preferred. 
5.  Development requirements. A special use permit shall not be issued for the occupancy of a structure or parcel of land or for the erection, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure unless complying with the following site development requirements. These requirements are not alterable except as noted: 
a)  Institutions for human care. 
i)  The proposed site shall be at least five acres in area. 
ii)  The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major or minor arterial or principal collector as classified on the adopted major street plan. All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area (for guests, employees, staff) shall be directly from the arterial or collector street. 
iii)  All two-story structures shall be at least 60 feet from all boundary lines or street lines. Buildings less than two stories shall be no closer than 40 feet to any property or street line. For buildings above two stories, the building shall be set back from the initial 60-foot setback on additional one foot for each foot of additional height above two stories. 
iv)  No more than 25 percent of the gross site shall be covered by buildings. 
v)  Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view by a solid masonry wall six feet in height. Access to and from the delivery and ambulance area shall be directly from a major, minor, or principal collector thoroughfare. 
vi)  All signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlines in chapter 5. 
vii)  Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
b)  Places of worship. 
i)  The proposed site shall be at least one-half acre in size plus one-half per 100 seats in the main auditorium. 
ii)  The proposed site shall be so located as to have at least one property line on a major, minor or collector street as classified by the adopted street plan. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly onto said thoroughfares or a marginal access service drive thereof. 
iii)  No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property or street line. No building shall be erected to a height greater than that permitted in the district in which it is located unless the building is set back from the initial 40 feet an additional one foot for additional height above the district height limitation. 
iv)  No more than 25 percent of the gross site shall be covered by buildings. 
v)  All signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 48 of the Saginaw Charter Township's General Ordinances. 
vi)  Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
c)  [All other uses.] For all other uses that may be permitted except as previously controlled, and except public utility transformer stations, substations, gas regulator stations, and housing for religious personnel attached to a church or school function: 
i)  The proposed site shall be at least one-half acre in area. 
ii)  No building shall be closer than 40 feet to any property or street line. No building shall be erected to a height greater than that permitted in the district in which it is located, except as may be provided under height exceptions for the district in question. 
iii)  No more than 25 percent of the gross site area shall be covered by buildings. 
iv)  All buildings shall be of an appearance that shall be harmonious and unified as a group of buildings and shall blend appropriately with the surrounding area. 
v)  All signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 5. 
vi)  Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. No parking space shall be provided in the front yard, and the parking area shall be screened from surrounding residential area by a wall or fence in combination with suitable plant material not less than five feet in height. 
d)  For public utility transformer stations and substations, gas regulator stations, and housing for religious personnel attached to a church or school function: 
i)  Lot area and lot width shall be not less than that specified for the district in which the proposed use should be located. 
ii)  Yard and setback requirements shall not be less than that specified for the district in which the proposed use would be located. 
iii)  No building shall be erected to a height greater than that permitted in the district in which the proposed use would be located. 
iv)  Not more than 25 percent of the lot area may be covered by buildings. 
v)  All buildings shall be harmonious in appearance with the surrounding residential area and shall be similar in design and appearance to any other buildings on the same site development. 
vi)  Where mechanical equipment is located in the open air, it shall be screened from the surrounding residential area by suitable plant material and it shall be fenced for safety. All buildings housing mechanical equipment shall be landscaped and maintained to harmonize with the surrounding area. 
vii)  All signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 5. 
viii)  Off-street parking space shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
(Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006)  
Sec. 2205. - Golf courses and country clubs, tennis, racket sport, and swimming facilities. 
1.  Authorization. In recognition of the need for open space and recreational facilities to serve persons living and working within agricultural, residential and office-business areas, certain uses as stated in this section are considered to be compatible within the aforementioned districts. Such open space and recreational uses are only deemed compatible within residential, agricultural or office-business districts when authorized under Part II and by issuance of a special use permit pursuant to district allowance and all standards herein specified. 
2.  Uses. The following uses may be authorized pursuant to district allowance, provided the applicable requirements are complied with: 
a)  Golf courses and ancillary golf driving ranges. 
b)  Country clubs and ancillary golf driving ranges. 
c)  Tennis, racket sport, and swimming facilities (public or private). Accessory uses for the above uses shall be constructed to include restaurants and other eating or drinking establishments and such retail sales directly connected with the conduct of the principal use. 
3.  Site location principles. The following principles shall be used in evaluating the proposed location of a permitted use under section 2205: 
a)  Allowed use should be accessible from a major or minor arterial street or principal collector as classified by the adopted major street plan. 
b)  Site location should be allowed which enhance the natural environment and amenities of urban life. 
4.  Development requirements. The following standards shall be applicable as basic requirements for the use of land or for the erection, reconstruction, or alteration of permitted structures: 
a)  Minimum site shall be 50 acres or more and access shall be so designed as to provide all ingress and egress directly onto or from an arterial or principal collector thoroughfare; provided, however, that the minimum site for tennis, racket sport and swimming facilities may occupy no less than four acres. 
b)  Lighting shall be shielded to reduce glare and shall be so arranged and maintained as to direct the light away from all residential lands which adjoin the site. 
c)  Off-street parking shall be provided as required in chapter 4, which shall include additional spaces which may be required for such accessory uses as a restaurant or bar. 
d)  Signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 5. 
e)  Minimum yard standards shall be the dimensional requirements of the district in question. No building shall be erected to a height greater than that permitted in the district in which it is located, except as may be provided under height exceptions for the district in question.  
Sec. 2206. - Mobile home park development special use permit. 
1.  Authorization. Mobile home park developments are herein recognized as fundamentally a residential use and that treating mobile home parks as a residential classification, subject to particular conditions and standards, will best promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare as set out in this Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance. 
The special features and demands of mobile home parks require full considerations of their site location, design and improvement; their demands upon public services and utilities; and their relationship to and effect upon adjacent land uses. Mobile home park developments, because of their nature, are permitted, where compatible, pursuant to district allowance under chapter 9, A-2 agricultural district. 
The planning commission with approval of the township board may authorize the construction, expansion or operation of a mobile home park within an allowed district, subject to all the conditions and standards herein set forth. 
2.  Uses. A mobile home park development may include any or all of the following uses; provided, that a plan of the proposed development is approved by the State of Michigan in accordance with Public Act No. 243 of 1959, as amended, and provided further that said development proposal meets the standards and conditions and all other provisions as herein established. 
Editor's note— Public Act No. 243 of 1959 (MCL 125.1001 et seq.) is inapplicable to the above. Successor provisions are found in the Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). 
a)  Mobile homes designed for occupancy as a single-family dwelling unit, and containing a minimum of 720 square feet of living area within the mobile home. 
b)  Accessory buildings and services required for normal operation of the mobile home park. Such establishments or service facilities shall be designed and intended to serve frequent trade or needs of persons residing within the park and may be permitted, provided that such uses: 
i)  Shall not occupy more than ten percent of the area of the park. 
ii)  Shall be subordinate to the residential character of the park. 
iii)  Shall present no visible evidence of commercial character to any area outside of the park boundaries. 
c)  Maintenance building for conducting the operation and maintenance of a mobile home park. Only one permanent building can be established; however, a caretaker's residence may be established within or in addition to said permanent building. 
d)  Mobile home sales and display areas, provided it is an accessory use to the mobile home park and the following conditions are met: 
1.  Display areas for mobile homes must be compatible with the residential character of the park and maintained in a residential setting. 
a)  All mobile homes displayed for sale must be provided with a stand consisting of a solid concrete pad not less than four inches thick and not less than the length and width of the mobile home placed upon it. 
b)  Protective skirting shall be placed around the area between the ground surface and the floor level of each mobile home displayed so as to prevent that area from forming a harborage of rodents, to avoid the creation of a fire hazard, or to expose unsightly conditions. 
c)  Concrete walkways shall be installed leading from one mobile home site to another. 
d)  Suitable landscaping shall be installed adjacent to each mobile home so as to effectuate a residential setting. 
e)  Parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions contained within the general off street parking and loading standards cited in chapter 4 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
f)  Storage of mobile homes for sale (inventory) shall be located within a designated area of the park that is not visible from outside the park. 
2.  The planning commission may require other site improvements not listed within section 2206 to help insure that the display area is maintained in a residential character and that it does not have a detrimental effect on adjacent properties. 
3.  Uses specifically prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, establish, maintain, operate, alter or extend any mobile home park within the limits of the community except under the provision as herein set. It is further required that no recreation equipment or vehicles such as campers or camper trailers, snowmobiles, boats or items of similar character shall be parked or stored upon an individual mobile home site. Storage or parking shall be within a common facility or area provided as an integral part of the mobile home park. 
4.  Development requirements. The following minimum requirements, guidelines, and standards shall be used in considering the issuance of a special use permit for a mobile home park. 
In addition to the provisions to this Ordinance, all mobile home parks shall comply with Public Act No. 243 of 1959, as amended, proof of which shall be established by presentation of a certified copy of construction permit issued by the state prior to final approval of special use permit. 
If any of the requirements of this section are less restrictive than the State Act (Public Act No. 243 of 1959, as amended) the state requirements shall prevail. 
Editor's note— Public Act No. 243 of 1959 (MCL 125.1001 et seq. is inapplicable to the above. Successor provisions are found in the Mobile Home Commission Act (MCL 125.2301 et seq.). 
5.  Park site standards. 
a)  Minimum site size for mobile home park shall be 15 acres. 
b)  Minimum number of mobile home spaces shall be 60. At least 60 mobile home spaces shall be completed and ready for occupancy along with related park improvements before first occupancy. 
c)  Minimum length of residential occupancy shall be 30 days and no mobile home shall be admitted to any park unless it meets the requirements of subsection (d) as follows. 
d)  Minimum standards for plumbing, heating, electrical systems and construction shall be those set forth in the Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards as promulgated by the United States Department of Housing an Urban Development being 24 CFR 3280, as amended. 
e)  Arterial right-of-way. The developer shall deed to the county road commission any additional arterial streets right-of-way required under road classification standards. 
f)  Minimum site location standards require each proposed site to have at least one property line not less than 150 feet in length abutting an arterial street as defined by the major street plan. All ingress and egress points shall be provided directly from said arterials or collector streets. The arterial or collector road shall be paved and of sufficient design capacity as required by the Saginaw County Road Commission to safely and effectively handle any increased traffic generated by the mobile home park. If the arterial road does not meet the required standards of the Saginaw County Road Commission, the developer of the mobile home park shall pay the cost of the improvements on the roadway abutting the mobile home park site which are necessary before a special use permit is granted. 
g)  Minimum site access standards require a minimum of two site access points and all points of entrance or exit from the mobile home park are to be paved to a minimum width of 24 feet for a two-way or one-way. All street entrance or exit drives shall not be located closer than 200 feet from the intersection of any two arterial streets, and no street parking shall be allowed within 100 feet of intersection with public street. 
h)  Maximum height for any building or structure shall not exceed (2½ stories or 35 feet. 
i)  Each entrance to a mobile home park development shall be permitted to have a maximum of one ground-mounted sign not exceeding 24 square feet. The sign may be lighted, provided the source of the light is not visible and not the flashing or intermittent type. The sign shall not be located within any road right-of-way or proposed road right-of-way as defined in section 303. 
j)  Minimum site yard dimensions require that no mobile home or any building upon the premises shall be located closer than 60 feet from any property line. 
6.  Mobile home space standards. 
a)  The design and development of mobile home parks shall be subject to all current provisions of the Mobile Home Commission General Rules as adopted by the Michigan Mobile Home Commission or its successor, which are hereby incorporated by reference as part of this Ordinance. 
b)  Mobile homes must be tied down sufficiently to withstand shifting, overturning, and blowing away in sustained winds up to 80 miles per hour or buckling due to pressure of tie down straps. 
7.  Utilities standards. 
a)  Sanitary sewer and water facilities to all mobile homes shall be connected to public facilities. Mobile home parks are permitted only with connection to public facilities. The developer shall submit a report from a civil engineering firm showing the effect of the proposed development on the existing township sewer and water system. 
b)  Electric lines to each mobile home park space shall be installed underground and specially designed for that purpose. When separate meters are installed, each meter shall be located in a uniform manner. 
c)  Natural gas service to each mobile home park space shall be installed underground. When separate meters are installed, each meter shall be located in a uniform manner. 
8.  Parking, streets, and walkways. All driveways, streets, parking areas and walkways within the mobile home park shall be provided with surfacing of bituminous or concrete which shall be durable and well drained and adequately lighted with lighting units so spaced and of such capacity and height for safety and ease of movement of pedestrians and vehicles at night. 
a)  Minimum parking standards of two spaces per mobile home are required and required parking shall be off-street parking and shall be so located as to be convenient to residents and visitors. 
b)  Park street standards provide that each mobile home space shall have access to a street which shall meet the following specification where appropriate to its character. 
Minimum Pavement Widths 
Parking Allowance 	Traffic Flow 	Minimum Paved Width 
(feet) 
No Parking 	1 or 2 way 	30 
Parking 1 side 	1 or 2 way 	30 
Parking 2 sides 	1 or 2 way 	36 
 
All permitted on-street parking shall be parallel and so arranged as not to impair the free movement of traffic or the safety of residents or visitors. 
c)  Curb and gutter shall be provided for all streets and all street construction shall be in accordance with specifications as required by the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
d)  Walkway standards provide that walks [to] be provided from mobile homes to service buildings and mobile home facilities shall be at least four feet in width and walks used in common by one to three mobile homes shall be at least 30 inches in width. 
e)  Lighting. The developer shall submit a park lighting scheme previously approved by Consumers Power Company. 
9.  Buffers, landscaping and recreation. 
a)  Greenbelt buffer of 20 feet in width shall be located within the 60-foot yard area as established herein. 
This greenbelt shall be established and continually maintained and shall consist of trees and shrubs to protect privacy for the mobile home residents and to shield the mobile homes from surrounding areas. 
The greenbelt shall contain at least one row, either straight or staggered, of deciduous and/or evergreen trees spaced not more than 40 feet apart and at least three rows of deciduous and/or evergreen shrubs spaced not more than eight feet apart. 
b)  Fence requirements provide that a fence be built around the site of not less than five feet nor more than six feet in height, constructed of woven wire or open metal or wood pickets or boards or masonry, or any combination thereof. 
c)  Recreation space standards provide that common recreation space of not less than ten percent of the gross mobile home park area shall be developed and maintained by the mobile home park owner. This area shall not be less than 100 feet in its smallest dimensions and its boundary no further than 500 feet from any mobile home space within its service area. 
Yard requirements as set out in this Ordinance are not to be defined as recreational areas in obtaining the minimum area of ten percent as set forth herein. 
d)  Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of the mobile home park shall be paved or covered with stone or other solid material or protected with grass, trees or shrubs that are capable of preventing soil erosion. The ground surface in all parts of every mobile home park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner. 
10.  Public health and safety. 
a)  Storage, collection and disposal of refuse and garbage shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding area, fire hazards, or pollution of air or water bodies. All refuse and garbage shall be collected at least once weekly through a suitable public or private agency, if available. If such is not available, the mobile home park owner shall provide this service. Garbage containers shall be located in a uniform manner at each mobile home space and so designed to be of a permanent character or located out of general view of the public. 
b)  Suitable fire hydrants shall be installed in all mobile home parks in conformation with the determination of the fire chief. 
c)  To aid protection of the public safety, an orderly street naming system and numbering system shall be established by the mobile home park owner, and a plan of this system shall be verified by the local Post Office Department and filed with the community fire and police department. Mobile home space numbers shall be located uniformly on each space throughout the mobile home park and street names shall be adequately marked. 
d)  Dogs, cats, or other pets shall not be permitted to run at large or to commit any nuisance within the park. 
e)  Cooking shelters, barbecue pits or grills and fireplaces shall be so located, constructed, maintained and used as to minimize fire hazards and smoke or odor nuisances both on the site and on neighboring property. Open fires shall not be allowed except in facilities provided and all such fires must be attended. No fuel shall be used or items burned which emit dense smoke or objectionable odors. 
11.  Miscellaneous provisions. 
a)  (Resident) supervision and maintenance. The mobile home park shall be operated in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance, and the mobile home park owner(s) shall provide a designated individual, in residence, to adequately supervise and maintain the park, its facilities and its equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. 
b)  Performance bond. Upon granting a special use permit, a bond, executed by any surety company authorized to do business in the State of Michigan, may be required to be delivered to the township board by the applicant for the faithful performance of the provisions of this Ordinance and conditions of the special use permit. Said bond shall be in an amount to be determined by the township board and shall be conditioned upon the completion of all acts relative to the construction, alteration or extension of any mobile home park within a period of time to be determined as a condition of the special use permit. 
c)  [Annual inspections.] Inspection of mobile home parks is authorized and the building inspector is directed to make at least yearly inspections of the premises to insure conformance with these ordinance provisions and all other applicable codes and regulations. The chief of the local fire department or his designated representative is directed to make at least yearly inspections of the premises to insure adequate provisions for fire protection are being observed in the interest of the public safety. 
d)  [Television antennae.] Master television antenna shall be provided by the mobile home park development with underground connection to each homesite. No television antennas shall otherwise be provided or allowed within the mobile home park. 
e)  [Sale or lease restricted.] No lot within the mobile home park development shall be sold or leased for more than five years by the proprietor thereof or by his heirs, executors, administrators or legal representatives. 
f)  [Sectional or component homes.] Sectional or component homes as a permitted use are allowed within a mobile home park development, subject to all site requirements for residential uses as permitted in R-1 residential district, and further that only up to 25 percent of total allowed units within the park may be for sectional or component homes or a combination not to exceed 25 percent. 
(Ord. No. 620, 7-16-2001)  
Sec. 2207. - Planned unit development. 
1.  Authorization. Rapid and intensive urbanization over the past decades has produced a need for an economical single-family living unit that is adaptable to urban densities, while retaining many of the attractive features of the suburban home. Among the housing concepts emerging to meet this need are townhouses, row houses, garden apartments, and similar types of housing units with common property areas, cluster types of subdivisions in which housing units are arranged in cluster forms with clusters separated from each other by common open space, and housing units developed with related recreational space, such as golf courses, swimming pools, private parks, community centers, and other recreational facilities. 
It is the purpose of this section to permit greater flexibility and encourage more imaginative design of large parcels in residential areas than is possible under conventional zoning regulations without sacrificing established values and rights to adequate light, air, noise, and privacy. Rather than having specific standards applied to a development, the process of negotiation will play a significant role. Negotiation will allow each project to be reviewed on its own merits and considered in terms of what the site can bear rather than in terms of what is allowable under conventional regulations. Criteria set forth within this section will allow a planned reduction of averaging of individual lot area requirements for each zone district, providing the overall density requirements for each district remains the same. Such averaging or reduction of lot area requirements shall only be permitted when a landowner, or groups of landowners acting jointly, can plan and develop a tract of land as an entity and thereby qualify for regulation of the tract of land as one complex land use unit rather than an aggregation of individual buildings located on separate unrelated lots. 
A planned unit development shall be designed to achieve compatibility with the surrounding area, to encourage economy and efficiency in proving public services and utilities, and to bolster the development of more useful open spaces. A premises basic to this Ordinance is to consider only developments that will result in lasting value and make a contribution to both social and economic stability in the township. Finally, because flexibility is inherent in the concept of a planned unit development, a higher degree of public direction and scrutiny is an essential part of this Ordinance. Under these conditions, a special use permit may be issued for the construction and occupancy of a planned unit development, providing the standards, procedures, and requirements set forth in this section can be complied with. 
2.  Objectives. The following objectives shall be considered in reviewing any application for a special use permit for planned unit development: 
a)  To provide a more desirable living environment by preserving the natural character of open fields, stands of trees, brooks, ponds, floodplains, hills, and similar natural assets. 
b)  To encourage the provision of open space and the development of recreational facilities in a generally central location and within reasonable distance of all living units. 
c)  To encourage developers to use a more creative and imaginative approach in the development of residential areas. 
d)  To provide for more efficient and aesthetic use of open areas by allowing the developer to reduce development costs through the bypassing of natural obstacles in the residential site. 
e)  To encourage variety in the physical development pattern in the community by providing a mixture of housing types. 
3.  Definitions. 
a)  Planned unit development. A residential development planned and developed as a unit under unified control according to comprehensive and detailed plans, including a program providing for the continual maintenance and operation of such improvements, facilities, and services which will be for the common use of the occupants of the planned unit development. 
b)  Common yard areas. The area in a condominium project of a planned unit development that is utilized as part of the required setbacks for structures, including the area between the front of the structure and the street. 
c)  Common open space. Lands that are required to be set aside as part of the lot averaging or reduction requirement of this section. These lands shall be under the common ownership of all residents in the planned unit development and are to be used for park, recreation or environmental amenity. Common space shall not include public or private streets, driveways, or parking areas. Within these lands only facilities and structures for recreational purposes may be constructed. The total impervious area of roofs and paving shall constitute not more than one percent of the total open space. 
d)  Attached single-family dwelling. A single-family dwelling unit attached to one or more other single-family dwelling units by means of a common party wall or by a connecting wall or similar architectural feature, such as a garage or carport, and with such dwelling having its own doors which open outdoors. 
e)  Detached single-family dwelling. A detached building containing only one dwelling unit. 
f)  Homeowners' association. An association of all owners of a project organized for the purpose of administering, managing and maintaining the common open space and common property and facilities. This association shall be described in all covenants, deeds, or other recorded legal documents which affect the title to any land within the development. 
4.  Uses that may be permitted. The following uses of land structures may be permitted within planned unit developments, subject to the district limitation as thereinafter listed: 
a)  Single-family (in R-1A district). 
b)  Two-family dwellings (in R-2, R-3, or R-4 districts). 
c)  Townhouses and other similar housing types which can be defined as a single-family dwelling unit with no side yard between adjacent units within a structure; and further, the attached dwelling units shall offer separate and individual family living units with no other family living unit above or below it (in R-1A, R-2, R-3, or R-4 districts); provided, that in R-1A zones the density shall not exceed three units per acre and that a contiguous group with a uniform building line shall not exceed 160 feet in length within R-1A or R-2 districts. Furthermore, said units shall not have their common walls overlap by more than 30 percent so as to effectuate an offset of each dwelling unit contained within a structure. 
d)  Garden apartments, which are multiple-family structures that provide separate and individual living units at more than one level or story within a common structure of up to 2½ stories, but not exceeding 35 feet in height (in R-3 or R-4 districts). 
e)  Recreation and open space (in R-1A, R-2, R-3 or R-4 districts); provided, that only the following land uses may be set aside as common land for open space or recreation use under the provision of this section: private recreational facilities, such as golf courses, swimming pools, or other recreational facilities which are limited to the use of the owners or occupants of the lots located within the planned unit development, historic building sites or historical sites, parks and parkway area, ornamental parks, extensive areas with tree cover, areas of rough terrain when such areas have natural features worthy of scenic preservation. 
f)  Customary accessory uses, as permitted in districts where located. 
g)  Planned neighborhood shopping centers (in an R-3 or R-4 district), provided all standards of section 2208 are met and provided planned unit development contains a minimum of 40 acres. 
5.  General development standards. Any application for a special use permit shall meet all of the following conditions in order to qualify for consideration as a planned unit development: 
a)  Minimum project area. The planned unit development site shall be not less then ten acres in area. 
b)  Common open space. Common open space shall be distributed more or less uniformly throughout the total site area. Wherever possible open space shall be encouraged to be set aside in large blocks of land. Deliberate efforts must be made to preserve important landscape features and amenities of long-term value and use these features as key components of design. Common yard areas shall not be utilized as common open space. 
c)  Unified control. All common lands within a proposed planned unit development shall be under the control of a single applicant, with that applicant being an individual, partnership, corporation, or group of individuals, partnerships or corporations. 
d)  Utilities. Planned unit developments shall provide for the underground installation of utilities, including, electricity and telephone. An application shall not be approved until assurance is given that public sanitary sewer and water service will be provided to the development. 
e)  Density computation. The lot area for planned unit developments within residential districts may be averaged or reduced from those sizes required by the applicable zoning district within which said development is located by compliance with the following procedures: 
1)  Site acreage computation. The gross acreage proposed for a planned unit development shall be computed to determine the total land area available for development into lots or dwelling units. 
2)  [Gross acreage figure.] In arriving at a gross acreage figure, the following lands shall not be considered as part of the gross acreage in computing the maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units that may be created under this procedure: 
a)  Lands utilized by public utilities as easements for major facilities, such as electric transmission lines, sewer lines, water mains, road easements, or other similar lands which are not available to the owner because of such easements. 
3)  Maximum number of lots and dwelling units. After the total gross area available for development has been determined by the above procedure, the maximum number of lots and/or dwelling units that may be approved within a planned unit development shall be computed by subtracting from the total gross area available a fixed percentage of said total for street right-of-way purposes and dividing the remaining net area available by the minimum lot area requirement of the zoning district in which the planned unit development is located. 
a)  The fixed percentages for street right-of-way purposes to be subtracted from the total gross area available for development shall be determined according to the following schedule: 
District Use 	Percent of Project Area 
R-1A, R-2 (single-family, detached) 	25 
R-3, R-4 (single-family detached townhouses, two-family, multifamily) 	20 
 
These percentages shall apply regardless of the amount of land actually required for street right-of-way. 
4)  Density bonus. Recognizing that good project planning, with provisions for adequate and developed open space and sound site design minimize the effects of crowding associated with higher densities, the developer at the time of submission of a request for issuance of a special use permit may also request a maximum of up to ten percent increase in permitted dwelling unit density as computed above. 
a)  Said request may be granted as a condition of special use permit, provided increased density does not result in creation of any of these conditions: 
1)  Inconvenience or unsafe access to the planned development. Traffic congestion in streets which adjoin the planned development. 
2)  An excessive burden on public services or utilities, including schools which serve the planned development. 
5)  [Density of project; how determined.] When more than one zoning district is involved in an application for a planned unit development, the density of the project will be based on the average of the zoning districts involved, weighted in direct proportion to the size of the property within the project in each zone. 
f)  Permissive minimum lot area. Notwithstanding other procedures set forth in this section, lot sizes within planned unit developments shall not be varied or reduced in area below the following minimum standards: 
1)  One-family detached dwelling structures: 8,250 square feet of lot area. 
2)  Two-family dwelling structures: 9,350 square feet of lot area. 
3)  Townhouses, row houses, or other similar permitted dwelling types: 4,000 square feet of lot area for the first dwelling unit in each structure plus 2,800 for each additional dwelling unit within a structure. 
4)  Garden apartment structures: 4,000 square feet of lot area for the first dwelling unit in each structure plus 2,250 square feet of lot area for each additional dwelling unit within the structure. 
6.  Design standards. A planned unit development project shall be developed in accordance with the following standards: 
a)  Site perimeter. 
1)  Where a planned unit development abuts a residential or commercial zoning district, all structures shall be at least 30 feet from any perimeter boundary line, except that structures in excess of 40 feet in length shall be set back an additional foot for every five feet by which the building exceeds 40 feet. 
2)  Where a planned unit development abuts a residential zoning district, no intensive recreational building or facility shall be located within 50 feet of any perimeter boundary line. 
3)  Except for single-family detached dwelling units, where a planned unit development abuts a residential district, no parking area shall be within 40 feet of any perimeter boundary line. 
b)  Dimensional requirements. 
1)  Front yard. Sixty [feet] from the centerline of the road for dwellings. Front yard requirements may be varied by the planning commission after consideration of common greens or other common open space. In no case shall front yard setbacks be less than 50 feet from the center of the road. 
2)  Side yard. Ten feet on each side for all one-family and two-family dwellings; for townhouses or row houses, provided that there shall be a minimum of 20 feet between ends of contiguous groups of dwelling units. Side yard requirements may be varied by the planning commission after consideration of common greens or other common open space. In no case shall side yard setbacks be reduced below six feet on each side or 12 feet between contiguous groups of buildings. 
3)  Rear yard. Twenty-five feet for all dwellings. Rear yard requirements may be varied by the planning commission after consideration of common space lands or parks which abut the rear yard. 
4)  Lot width. Lot width requirements may be varied from by the planning commission after consideration of the common greens or other common open space. 
5)  Maximum permissive building height. Two and one-half stories but not exceeding 35 feet. Accessory buildings shall not exceed a height of 15 feet. 
6)  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit. Minimum floor area per dwelling unit shall be the same as specified for the district within which the planned development is located. 
c)  [Reserved.] 
d)  Access and circulation. 
1)  Public streets shall be encouraged. However, private streets may be permitted by approval of the township planning commission or township board, provided they are designed to allow sufficient access for emergency vehicles to the dwelling units they will serve. Private streets shall be constructed with curb and gutter and in accordance with standards adopted by the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
2)  Roadway access for planned unit developments will be reviewed in accord with standards set forth in the subdivision regulations of the township. 
3)  Improved walkways shall be provided to allow access to all common open spaces within the planned unit development. 
e)  Parking standards. 
1)  Design and layout of parking areas shall be compatible with the surrounding development. Parking for residence and guests must be considered in the overall design. 
2)  A single parking area shall contain no more than 20 parking spaces. 
3)  Within a parking area, no more than ten spaces shall be permitted in a continuous row without being interrupted by landscaping. 
4)  All areas shall be adequately lighted. Lighting shall be in accordance with section 407 of this Zoning Ordinance. 
5)  Spaces required: 
i)  One-bedroom units—two spaces. 
ii)  Two or more bedroom units—three spaces. 
6)  Parking lots shall be screened from adjacent roads and buildings with hedges, fences, walls, dense plantings or berms. 
f)  Landscaping. A minimum of two trees shall be provided in the front yard areas of each lot or dwelling structure. Tree spacing shall not exceed 25 feet. Trees shall be a minimum of six feet at time of planting. 
1)  All unimproved surface areas of the site shall be planted with grass, ground cover, shrubbery, or other suitable landscaping material. The planning commission or township board may waive this requirement in an effort to maintain the natural characteristics of the land. 
2)  The perimeter of a planned unit development shall be landscaped in accordance with a Type B bufferyard as required in section 303(4) of this Zoning Ordinance. The planning commission or township board may waive this requirement for all or a portion of the perimeter based upon existing conditions. 
g)  Privacy. Each development which contain attached units shall provide visual and acoustical privacy for dwelling units. Features such as fences, screening walls, insulation, walks, barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants. 
7.  Open space requirements. For each square foot of land gained through the averaging or reduction of lot sizes under the provisions of this section, equal amounts of land shall be provided in open space. 
a)  Preservation of common open space. All open spaces, tree covers, recreational areas, scenic vistas, or other authorized open land areas shall be either set aside through an irrevocable conveyance for use as common land for the sole benefit, use, and enjoyment of present and future lot or home owners within the development or shall be dedicated to the township as park land for the use of the general public. The planning commission shall recommend as part of its approval of a special use permit for a planned unit development: 
1)  That open space land shall be covered by proper legal procedures from the tract owner or owners to a homeowners' association or other similar nonprofit organization so that fee simple title shall be vested in tract lot owners as tenants in common. 
2)  That open space land shall be dedicated to the general public for park or recreational purposes by the tract owner or owners; provided, that the location and extent of said land conforms to the development plan of the township; and provided further, that access to and the characteristics of said land is such that it will be readily available to and desirable for public use, development, and maintenance. It is the intent of this section that in cases where this option is determined to be in the best interests of the township that the owners or developers of the planned unit development shall not be compelled or required to improve the natural condition of said open space lands. 
b)  Dedication of open space. The dedication of open space may include: 
1)  A recorded deed restriction; 
2)  Covenants that run perpetually with the land; or 
3)  A conservation easement established per Public Act No. 197 of 1980, as amended [now repealed. See pt. 21, subpt. 11 of the Natural Resources and Environmental Protection Act (MCL 324.2140 et seq.).] 
c)  Language contained in conveyance. Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as shown on an approved site plan, and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall: 
1)  Indicate the proposed allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space. 
2)  Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space. 
3)  Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space. 
4)  Provide for maintenance to be undertaken by the township in the event that the dedicated open space is inadequately maintained or is determined by the township to be a public nuisance, with the assessment of cost upon the property owners. 
d)  Structures built in open space areas. Any structure(s) or building(s) accessory to recreation, conservation or agriculture may be erected within the dedicated open space subject to an approved open space plan. These accessory structure(s) or building(s) shall not exceed, in the aggregate, one percent of the required open space area. 
8.  [Signs.] Signs in accordance with chapter 5. 
9.  Review process. A planned unit development shall be reviewed in accordance with the standards set forth in section 311 of this Zoning Ordinance. Any planned unit development which will result in the creation of parcels of land under separate or common ownership shall comply with the provisions of the following public acts: 
a)  Subdivision Control Act [now Land Division Act], (Public Act No. 288 of 1967 (MCL 560.101 et seq.). 
b)  Condominium Act, (Public Act No. 59 of 1978 (MCL 559.101 et seq.). 
State Law reference— Planned unit developments, MCL 125.286c, 125.286d.  
Sec. 2208. - Planned neighborhood shopping centers. 
1.  Authorization. Continued urban expansion, combined with the ever increasing needs of neighborhood residents for services and goods which are conveniently located and attractive, together with the undesirable nature of strip commercial and scattering of commercial uses, require a provision for planned neighborhood shopping centers within developing areas. These centers are required to have some flexibility of location, yet their impact upon adjacent properties and public facilities must be controlled in the public interest. 
A planned neighborhood shopping center is intended to permit developments that will, over time, be enhanced by coordinated site planning and a mix of uses. Such developments are intended to provide a safe and efficient system for vehicular and pedestrian traffic, to enable economic design in the location and provision of public and private utilities, and to provide for controlled growth while minimizing the impacts of scattered and sometimes leap-frog development. 
The proposed neighborhood shopping centers are then developed with unified architecture and site design. This special land use is intended to allow for flexibility of overall development design with benefits from such design flexibility intended to be derived by both the developer and the community. 
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the potential of these shopping centers, without the necessity of indicating specific sites in advance. 
2.  Objectives. The following objectives shall be considered in reviewing any application for a special use permit for a planned neighborhood shopping center: 
a)  To promote a more completed urban design which includes necessary neighborhood services conveniently located and attractively designed. 
b)  To encourage developers to use creative and imaginative approaches in the development of neighborhoods. 
c)  To allow for appropriate commercial development in conjunction with a residential planned unit development. 
3.  Qualifying conditions. In applying for a special use permit as a planned neighborhood shopping center, applicants should keep in mind that the approval of the shopping center, in terms of layout, design, uses and all other related site improvements runs with the property itself and not the property owner. This means that any transfer of property will require the new owner or owner(s) to meet the provisions of the shopping center as approved by the township. Modifications or transfer must follow requirements as set forth in section 2208(7). 
To qualify for consideration as a planned neighborhood shopping center the following conditions shall be met: 
a)  The proposed center is designed and will be developed with a unified architectural treatment as provided for in section 2208(6). 
b)  If developed independently of a residential planned unit development, the center shall be on a site of no less than four acres and shall contain at least five individual uses. 
c)  To be eligible for consideration as part of a residential planned unit development, the planned unit residential development must be a minimum of 40 acres. 
d)  The center must have one property line on a street classified as a principle arterial as shown on the township's road designation map. Ingress and egress to the development shall be coordinated and approved by the planning commission. 
4.  Uses that may be permitted. The following uses of land and structures may be permitted within a planned neighborhood shopping center: 
a)  Retail food establishments, as permitted in B-3 districts. 
b)  Other retail businesses, as permitted in B-2 districts. 
c)  Personal service establishments, as permitted in B-2 districts. 
d)  Offices for professional services, as permitted in B-2 districts. 
e)  Professional offices, as permitted in B-2 districts. 
f)  Restaurants and other eating or drinking establishments which provide food or drink for consumption on the premises provided that such establishments shall not be so-called "drive-in" facilities. 
g)  Temporary outdoor uses, such as displays, Christmas tree sales lots, revival tents, or other quasi-civic activities may be permitted on a temporary basis in accordance with the conditions stated in section 1603(2). 
h)  Outdoor uses including public parks, recreational facilities. 
i)  Off-street parking and loading as required and allowed. 
5.  Development requirements. In addition to the qualifying conditions listed in susbsection (3) above, the following requirements shall be met: 
a)  Minimum yard requirements. 
Each lot shall have a minimum front yard of 40 feet and said yard, except for necessary drives or walks, shall remain clear and shall not be used for parking, loading, or accessory structures. 
Side yards shall not be less than 20 feet and in the case of a corner lot the side yard on the street side shall be a minimum of 40 feet. 
Each lot shall have a rear yard of 30 feet. 
The planning commission may vary the lot width, building setbacks, and other dimensional requirements in its review of the site plan. In determining the appropriate requirements, the planning commission shall take into account: 
i)  The nature of existing and future land uses adjacent to and near the site; 
ii)  The number, type and size of the building proposed for the site: 
iii)  Location of natural and cultural features on the site; 
iv)  Topography of the site; 
v)  Provision of public utilities to the site; 
vi)  Requirements for adequate fire, police and emergency vehicle access; and 
vii)  The objectives of the planned neighborhood shopping center contained herein. 
Additionally, side yards abutting any residentially zoned property shall contain a decorative masonry wall or opaque fencing no less than five feet nor more than eight feet in height consisting of a durable material and associated landscaping as approved by the planning commission. 
b)  Maximum building height. The maximum building height shall be three stories or 40 feet. 
c)  Maximum lot coverage. The maximum coverage of land by all buildings shall not exceed 30 percent. 
d)  Off-street parking and loading requirements: 
i)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements" in chapter 4 of the Zoning Ordinance. 
e)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required within a planned neighborhood shopping center. In addition, the planning commission may require additional sidewalks within a site in order to improve pedestrian access to buildings and protect pedestrian safety throughout the development. When requiring additional sidewalks, the planning commission shall consider the following criteria: 
i)  The number, location, types, and use(s) of buildings proposed within the site. 
ii)  The amount of traffic generated by the proposed uses. 
iii)  The relationship of the roadway networks with individual site development. 
(Ord. No. 651, 10-27-2003)  
Sec. 2209. - Day nursery. 
1.  Authorization. In order to facilitate the care of preschool children within a desirable environment, this section provides for the inclusion of nursery schools and child care centers within designated residential districts, in religious institutions within any zone district, and within designated commercial areas. This use may be authorized by the issuance of a special use permit or as otherwise cited when all of the procedures and applicable requirements stated and the additional requirements of this section can be complied with. 
2.  Uses that may be permitted. Nursery schools, day nurseries, and child care centers (not including dormitories) may be authorized. 
3.  Development requirements. The following requirements for site development, together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, shall be complied with: 
a.  Minimum site size. Eleven thousand and fifty square feet with 85-foot lot width at front building line. 
b.  Outdoor play space: If an outdoor play area is provided it shall be screened with opaque fencing. When adjacent to residential uses and/or zoning districts, the outdoor play area shall be screened with a combination of landscaping and fencing. 
c.  [Licensing and standard requirements.] Meet the licensing and standard requirements from the State of Michigan. 
d.  [Maximum building height and maximum lot coverage.] Maximum building height and maximum lot coverage shall be no greater than what is permitted in the underlying district. 
e.  [Off-street parking.] Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
f.  [Signs.] Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
g.  [On-site circulation.] Provide for adequate on-site circulation, parking, loading, and unloading of children. 
(Ord. No. 701, 3-26-2008)  
Sec. 2210. - Funeral homes and mortuaries. 
1.  Authorization. Because funeral homes and mortuaries perform special and necessary services to urban populations, and in recognition of the unique location and site development characteristics of these functions, such uses of land may be authorized by special use permit within designated residential districts or as otherwise cited when all of the procedures and applicable requirements stated and the additional requirements of this section can be complied with. 
2.  Uses that may be permitted. Funeral homes, undertaking parlors and mortuaries, provided that the conduct of all aspects of activities related to such uses shall take place within the principal building and not in an accessory building. A caretaker's residence may be provided within the principal building. 
3.  Development requirements. The following requirements for site development, together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, shall be complied with: 
a)  Minimum site size. One and one-half acres with a minimum width of 150 feet. 
b)  Site location. The proposed site shall front upon a major or minor arterial or principal collector as classified on the adopted street plan. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from said thoroughfare. 
c)  Yards. Front, side and rear yards shall be at least 40 feet, except on those sides adjacent to nonresidential districts, where upon it shall be 20 feet. All yards shall be appropriately landscaped with trees, shrubs, and grass. No structure or parking areas shall be permitted in said yards, except that rear yards may be used for parking purposes under the requirements specified and except for required entrance drives and those walls and/or fences used to obscure the use from abutting residential districts. 
d)  Signs as provided in chapter 5. 
e)  Off-street parking as provided in chapter 4.  
Sec. 2211. - Multiple-family service and office business retail uses. 
1.  Authorization. Increased demand for service facilities designed and intended solely to serve frequent trade or needs of families residing within larger multiple family complexes, as well as select retail uses compatible with office business complexes has created a need to provide limited mixed use alternatives within these types of developments. Specific establishments may be permitted by issuance of a special use permit when said permitted uses are an integral part of a complex as allowed and cited under Part II provisions. 
2.  Multiple family service uses. 
a)  Uses that may be permitted. Retail businesses and personal service establishments as defined in chapter 16, section 1602 (1), (2), and (5). 
b)  Development requirements. Any application for a special use permit shall meet the following conditions in order to qualify for consideration for issuance of said permit: 
i)  The multiple family development site shall contain a minimum of 150 family units and shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners at the time of development and shall be planned as a unit development. 
ii)  No more than ten percent of the site shall be devoted to non-residential uses together with its required parking. Required yard areas shall be excluded from the total site are used for computing the allowed ten percent. 
iii)  Commercial uses shall be subordinate to the residential character of the development and shall present no visible evidence outside of the site boundaries. 
iv)  Unified architectural design requirements. A unified architectural design shall be incorporated into each multiple family service use in accordance with section 315 of the zoning ordinance. 
3.  Office-business retail uses. 
a)  Uses that may be permitted. Retail businesses and personal service establishments as defined in chapter 16, section 1602 (1), (2), and (5). 
Exceptions: 
i)  Developments containing 20 acres or more may have a retail establishment incorporated into the unified project that exceeds 4,000 square feet. 
ii)  Retail establishments exceeding 4,000 square feet shall not be directly located adjacent to any residential district. 
b)  Development requirements. Any application for a special use permit shall meet the following conditions to qualify for consideration for issuance of said permit. 
i)  The office-business retail complex shall be located upon a minimum site of three acres and shall be under the control of one owner or group of owners at the time of development. 
ii)  No more than 20 percent of the area of the site shall be devoted to permitted retail uses together with its required parking. Required yard areas shall be excluded from the total site area used for computing the allowed 20 percent. 
iii)  Dimensional requirements of chapter 18, section 1805 shall be complied with. 
iv)  Such projects shall be permitted only on a site that abuts a principle arterial or minor arterial street as shown on the townships road designation map. 
v)  Required front yards and exterior side yards shall be limited exclusively for landscaping, driveways, internal circulation, walkways, parking signs, and other related streetscape features. Storage of material or products within such yards shall be prohibited. 
vi)  Provisions for landscaping shall be included in the development plan for special use approval. These may include, but are not limited to, screen planting, lawn areas, trees, shrubs, fences and walls. Minimum landscape areas shall be provided equal to 25 percent of the required yard areas or equal to two and one-half square feet per lineal foot of street frontage. Additionally, landscape areas shall be distributed throughout the project site, including required yard areas between buildings, structures and the adjacent street right of way line. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or developer to carry out this program and provide such maintenance and care as is required to obtain the effect intended by the original plan. 
vii)  In addition to other buffer requirements, when the back of a development adjoins property in a residential district, then a solid masonry wall or fence not less than six feet nor greater than eight feet in height or equivalent form of screening shall be installed and maintained by the developer to screen the back of the project form the residential property. Such screening shall be approved by the planning commission. 
viii)  Lighting of parking lots shall be required for safety and security purposes. A common decorative lighting fixture and pole shall be prevalent throughout the project. 
ix)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required within an office business retail development. In addition, the planning commission may require additional sidewalks within a site in order to improve pedestrian access to buildings and protect pedestrian safety throughout the development. When requiring additional sidewalks, the planning commission shall consider the following criteria: 
a)  The number, location, types, and use(s) of buildings proposed within the site. 
b)  The amount of traffic generated by the proposed uses. 
c)  The relationship of the roadway networks with individual site development. 
c)  Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
i)  Requirements for an allowed use shall be determined from the "Schedule of Parking and Loading Requirements" in chapter 4 of the zoning ordinance. 
d)  Unified architectural design requirements. A unified architectural design shall be incorporated into each office business retail complex. 
4.  Amending or transferring a multiple family service use or an office business retail planned development. 
Prior to a transfer of ownership or a change in use, the property owner or owners of the multiple family service or office business retail development must contact Saginaw Charter Township in writing to declare their intent and initiate an administrative review process. 
a)  Administrative review process shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
i)  During and after the establishment of the multiple family service use or office business retail complex, the owners(s) or proponents of the proposed development shall strictly adhere to all conditions, schedules and development requirements recommended by the planning commission. 
ii)  The owner(s) or proponent must submit any proposed modifications to the approved plan that specifically affects established densities, uses, an increase or reduction in size and scope of the project, modifications affecting publicly dedicated rights of way or easements, and alterations to the approved overall plan, including architectural design changes. 
iii)  Should the owner/developer(s) wish to change a use or uses located in the development, the owner must submit a site plan application to the township describing the change. The submittal should meet all requirements as outlined in chapter 3, section 311 of the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 653, 10-27-2003)  
Sec. 2212. - Automobile service station. 
1.  Authorization. Facilities to serve motor vehicles are of considerable importance within urbanizing areas where the basic mode of transportation is by private automobile. The continued growth of motor vehicle registrations and of total miles traveled annually has stimulated additional needs for retailing gasoline and associated products. To meet the demands of location and space for this type of retail facility requires careful planning to properly integrate the service station function into the pattern of other commercial and retail activities serving the community. Because such integration requires special considerations relating to location, site layout, storage facilities, traffic, safety, and compatibility with surrounding uses of land, this Ordinance requires conformance to the standards set for a gasoline service station a[nd] permitted use within cited commercial districts. 
2.  Objectives. It is the intent of this section to exercise a measure of control over service stations and permitted buildings and their sites and to establish a basic set of standards within which individual solutions may be developed to meet the retail service needs of motor vehicles. The objective of the regulations set forth in this section are to: 
a)  Promote the type of development which will be compatible with other land use activities located in areas where service stations will be constructed. 
b)  Control those aspects of service station design, site layout, and operation which may, unless regulated, be damaging to surrounding uses of land. 
c)  Minimize the traffic congestion and safety hazards which are inherent in service station activity. 
3.  Uses that may be permitted. Gasoline service stations, as defined in chapter 2, section 202(4), including the servicing of motor vehicles under 1½ tons rated capacity, such as minor adjustments to motor vehicles, sales and installation of automotive accessories, and other servicing of motor vehicles, provided such accessory uses and services are conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building. Body repair, engine overhauling, steam cleaning, or other mechanical or physical modifications to motor vehicles is specifically prohibited. 
4.  Site development requirements. The following requirements for site development, together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, shall be complied with: 
a)  Minimum site size. Twenty thousand square feet with a minimum width of 150 feet. 
b)  Site location. The proposed site shall have at least one property line on a major or minor thoroughfare or principal collector as classified on the adopted street plan. 
c)  Building setback. The service station buildings, canopies, pump islands, and service drives shall conform to the yard requirements for the district in which it is located, but shall in no case be closer than 50 feet to any property line of a residential district or use unless separated by a public street. Hydraulic hoists, pits, and all lubrication, greasing, automobile washing, and repair equipment shall be entirely enclosed within a building. 
d)  Access drives. No more than two driveway approaches shall be permitted directly from any major or minor thoroughfare nor more than one driveway approach from any minor street, each of which shall not exceed 35 feet in width at the property line. If the service station or permitted building site fronts on two or more streets, the driveways shall be located as far from the street intersection as practical, but no less than 50 feet. 
No driveway or curb cut for a driveway shall be located within ten feet of an adjoining property line and shall be no less than 25 feet from any adjacent lot within an R district as extended to the curb or edge of the pavement. 
e)  Curbing and paving. The entire service area shall be paved with a permanent surface of concrete. A raised curb at least seven inches in height shall be installed along the perimeter of all paved areas including street access drives. 
f)  Fencing. A solid fence or wall five feet in height shall be erected along all property lines abutting any lot within a residential district. 
g)  [Signs.] Signs as provided on chapter 5, provided that no signs, whether permanent or temporary, shall be permitted within the public right-of-way. 
h)  [Off-street parking.] Off-street parking shall be provided in conformance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
i)  Lighting. Exterior lighting may be allowed as provided for under section 407. 
5.  Automobile car wash establishments. In addition to meeting site development requirements as aforesaid, listed automobile car washes shall comply with the following standards: 
a)  Drainage. Adequate provision shall be made to keep all water from washing operations on the site. Where mechanical or manual drying is not done, a mechanical device shall be provided to insure that each vehicle shall wait on the site a minimum of 60 seconds following the end of each washing operation. 
b)  Off-street vehicle waiting area in accord with section 404. A vehicle waiting area shall be provided on the site which will accommodate a number of vehicles, under actual operating conditions, equal to 50 percent of the maximum hourly capacity of the washing facility. In determining the number of vehicle waiting spaces available to meet requirements, the number of vehicles normally accommodated within the building can be counted. 
c)  [Building exit.] The building exit shall be no closer than 500 feet to the nearest intersection as a vehicle would be forced to travel.  
Sec. 2213. - Miscellaneous special uses. 
1.  Authorization. Because of particular functional and other inherent characteristics, certain land and structural uses have a high potential of being injurious to surrounding properties by depreciating the quality and value of such property. Many of these uses may also be injurious to the community as a whole unless they are controlled by minimum standards of construction and operation. It is the intent of this section to provide a framework of regulatory standards which can be utilized by the planning commission and legislative body as a basis for approving or disapproving certain special uses which may be permitted by the issuance of a special use permit within the particular zone districts cited. 
2.  Special uses that may be permitted. The following land and structural uses may be permitted within the particular zone districts cited; provided, that requirements specified and the applicable specified conditions established herein can be complied with: 
a)  Sewage treatment and disposal installations within any zone district cited in Part II. 
b)  Drive-in theaters, race tracks, golf driving ranges, and miniature golf courses within any zone district as cited in Part II. 
c)  Special open space uses, such as public beaches, bathhouses, private resorts, recreational camps, and other space uses operated for profit within any zone district as cited in Part II. 
d)  Camps or correctional institutions within any zone district as cited in Part II. 
e)  Sand or quarries and gravel pits within any zone district as cited in Part II. 
f)  Institutions for the mentally disadvantaged, physically impaired and substance abuse rehabilitation centers within any zone district as cited in Part II. 
3.  Site development requirements. A special use permit shall not be issued for the occupancy or use of a structure of a parcel of land, or for the erection, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure, unless complying with the following site development requirements. 
Without limiting the powers of the legislative body in other sections of this Ordinance, the legislative body shall have the authority to revoke any special use permit when, after reasonable warning, the operators of any use permitted under this section fail to comply with any of the requirements stipulated. In addition, the planning commission, as part of its approval of a particular special use permit, may recommend to the legislative body any additional conditions and safeguards that are deemed necessary for the protection of the public welfare with respect to a proposed use permit. 
a)  Sewage treatment and disposal installation. All uses shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable State of Michigan statutes. If any of the requirements of this subsection are less than those in applicable state statutes, the state requirements shall prevail. All operations shall be completely enclosed by a fence not less than six feet high. 
All operations and structures shall be surrounded on all sides by a transition strip at least 100 feet in width within which grass, plant materials, and structural screens shall be placed to minimize the appearance and odors of the installation. The planning commission shall approve all treatment of transition strips. 
b)  Drive-in theaters, race tracks, golf-driving ranges, and miniature golf courses: 
All sites shall be located on a major or minor thoroughfare or principal collector as classified on the adopted street plan. All traffic ingress and egress shall be from said thoroughfare. Local traffic movement shall be accommodated within the site so that entering and exiting vehicles will make normal and uncomplicated movements into or out of the major thoroughfare. 
All points of entrance or exit for motor vehicles shall be located no closer than 200 feet from the intersection of any two streets or highways. 
All vehicles shall have clear vertical and horizontal sight distance approaching a public street within 100 feet of the street for a sight distance of 500 feet in either direction along the street. 
Acceleration and deceleration lanes shall be provided at points of ingress and egress to the sight. Left turns at entrances and exits should be prohibited on the major thoroughfare where possible. 
Whenever any use that may be permitted in the subsection abuts property within a residential or agricultural district, a transition strip at least 100 feet in width shall be provided between all operations and structures, including fences, and the residential or agricultural property. Grass, plant materials, and structural screens of a type approved by the planning commission shall be placed within said transition strip. 
A minimum yard of 100 feet shall separate all uses, operations, and structures permitted herein, including fences, from any public street or highway used for access or exit purposes. This yard shall be landscaped in accordance with plans approved by the planning commission. 
Race tracks and drive-in theaters shall be enclosed for the entire used site for their full periphery with a solid screen fence at least eight feet in height. Fences shall be of sound construction, painted or otherwise finished attractively and inconspicuously. Drive-in theater ticket gates shall be provided in accordance with the following ratios: One ticket gate for 300-car capacity theaters; two ticket gates for 600-car capacity theaters; three ticket gates for 800-car capacity theaters; four ticket gates for 1,000-car capacity theaters. Vehicle standing space shall be provided between the ticket gates and the street or highway right-of-way line equal to at least 30 percent of the vehicular capacity of the theater. 
Drive-in theater picture screens shall not be permitted to face any public street and shall be so located as to be out of view from any major thoroughfare. The picture screen tower shall not exceed 65 feet in height. 
c)  Special open space uses. The proposed site shall be at least two acres in area. The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major thoroughfare or principal collector as classified on the adopted street plan. All ingress and egress to the site shall be directly from said thoroughfare or collector street. 
All buildings and structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from any property or street line. Whenever the installation abuts upon property within a residential district, a 200-foot setback shall be required and landscaped with trees, grass, and structural screens of a type approved by the planning commission to effectively screen the installation from surrounding residential properties. 
No more than 25 percent of the gross site shall be covered by buildings. 
d)  Camps or correctional institutions. The proposed site shall be at least 20 acres in area. 
The proposed site shall have at least one property line abutting a major or minor thoroughfare or principal collector as classified by the adopted street plan. All ingress and egress to the off-street parking area shall be directly from the major thoroughfare, or collector. 
All two-story structures shall be at least 100 feet from all boundary lines or street lines. Buildings less than two stories shall be no closer than 50 feet to any property or street line. For buildings above two stories, the building shall be set back an additional one foot for each foot of additional height above two stories. 
No more than 25 percent of the gross site shall be covered by buildings. 
Ambulance and delivery areas shall be obscured from all residential view by a solid masonry wall six feet in height. Access to and from the delivery and ambulance area shall be directly from a major thoroughfare. 
All signs shall be in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 5. 
Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the schedule outlined in chapter 4. 
e)  Sand, clay, or gravel pits, quarries and top soil stripping. 
1)  Scope of regulations. This section regulates extraction, filling or repositioning of soil, sand, gravel, clay or other geologic deposit, when such activity is not related to the construction of a building, structure, or parking lot. 
2)  Additional information required for site plan. At the time of the application for a special use permit, the applicant shall submit a site plan which outlines the use of the property during mining operations. The site plan shall provide the following information: 
i)  Boundary lines of the property; dimensions and bearings of the property lines, correlated with the legal description. 
ii)  An aerial photograph may be required by the planning commission which depicts the subject property and adjacent areas, location and outline of wooded areas, streams, marshes and other natural features. 
iii)  Existing site improvements such as buildings and drives. 
iv)  Existing site improvements such as buildings and drives. 
v)  A profile of the proposed excavation, illustrating elevations and changes in slope, with elevations noted in five-foot intervals. If water is expected to accumulate in the excavation, the projected water level must also be shown. 
vi)  Location and nature of structures and stationary equipment to be located on the site during mining operations. 
vii)  Location and description of soil types. 
viii)  An estimate of the kind and amount of material to be withdrawn from the site and the expected termination date of mining operations. 
ix)  Description of all operations to be conducted on the premises, such as, but not limited to, digging, sorting and washing operations, screening, crushing, and the type, size and nature of equipment to be used with each operation. 
x)  Location and width of drives, including sight distances at public roads. 
xi)  Tree areas and other natural features to be retained. 
xii)  Description of erosion control measures. 
xiii)  Map showing truck routes to and from the site. 
3)  Excavation site requirements: 
i)  All uses shall be established and maintained in accordance with all applicable State of Michigan statutes. If any of the requirements of this subsection are less than those in applicable state statutes, the state requirements shall prevail. 
ii)  All fixed equipment and machinery shall be located at least 200 feet from any property or street right-of-way line and 500 feet from any existing residential zoning district or residential use. No cut or excavation shall be made closer than 100 feet to any property line or street right-of-way line in order to insure sublateral support to surrounding property. 
iii)  Where it is determined by the planning commission to be a public hazard, all uses shall be enclosed by a fence six feet or more in height for the entire periphery of the property or portion thereof. Fences shall be adequate to prevent trespass and shall be placed no closer than 50 feet to the top or bottom of any slope. 
iv)  No building shall be erected on the premises except as may be permitted in the General Zoning Ordinance or except as temporary shelter for machinery and field office subject to approval by the planning commission. 
4)  Construction and operation requirements. 
i)  The planning commission shall establish routes for truck movement internally as well as to and from the site in order to minimize the wear on public streets and to prevent hazards and damage to properties in the community. Routes shall not be directed through residential areas, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the planning commission that such a route would not adversely impact the adjacent residential parcels. That portion of access roads within the area of operation shall be provided with a dustless surface. 
ii)  All permitted installations shall be maintained in a neat, orderly condition so as to prevent injury to single property, any individual, or to the community in general. 
iii)  On said site no stockpiling, equipment storage or repair shall take place closer than 200 feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. Stock piles of stripped topsoil shall be seeded with grass or similar plant materials approved by the planning commission in order to prevent erosion onto other properties. 
iv)  On said lot all roads, driveways, parking lots and loading and unloading areas shall be paved or chemically treated so as to limit the nuisance caused by windborne dust on adjoining lots and public roads. 
v)  Each operator shall be held responsible for all public roads upon which trucks haul materials from the mining operation to keep these roads in a drivable condition at least equal to that which existed prior to the beginning of mining operations and to keep the roads dust free and to clean any and all spillage of material and dirt, rock, mud and any other debris carried onto the roads by these trucks or other equipment. 
vi)  Proper measures, as determined by the planning commission, shall be taken to minimize the nuisance of noise and flying dust or rock. Such measures may include, when considered necessary, limitations upon the practice of stockpiling excavated materials upon the site. 
vii)  An excavation shall not change the surface drainage so as to adversely impact neighboring properties or uses. 
viii)  Any pond banks shall have a maximum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical which extends below the projected low water surface elevation to a depth of at least eight feet. 
ix)  Minimum designed water depth of a pond must be ten feet to insure proper aeration and circulation of the water. 
x)  Any excavated material not removed from the site shall be graded to a continuous slope which does not exceed three feet horizontal to one foot vertical and arranged to prevent runoff from impacting adjacent properties. Said fill shall blend visually with the surrounding landscape. 
xi)  By October 15 of each year, the completed portion of an excavation and any disturbed area around it shall be graded and seeded. This will minimize any soil erosion or damage to surrounding properties that may occur from flooding. 
xii)  Such operations shall be permitted only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, and between 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Saturday. Operations shall not be permitted on Sunday. 
xiii)  When excavation and removal operations or either of them are completed, the excavated area shall be graded so that no gradients-disturbed earth shall be steeper than a slope of three feet horizontal to one foot vertical. A layer of arable topsoil, of a quality approved by the zoning administrator, shall be spread over the excavated area, except exposed rock surfaces or areas lying below natural water level, to a minimum depth of four inches in accordance with the approved contour plan. The area shall be seeded with a perennial rye grass and blended with the general surrounding ground so as to appear natural. 
xiv)  Where excavation operations result in a body of water, the owner or operator shall place appropriate "Keep Out—Danger" signs around said premises not more than 150 feet apart. 
xv)  The planning commission may require a security deposit from the applicant to ensure compliance with the requirements, specifications and conditions imposed by this Ordinance, as well as guarantee restoration of the site. Such deposit shall not be released until performance is certified by the township engineer. Any expense incurred by the township engineer shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
xvi)  The applicant shall provide a date for completing the mining operation, such date to be based upon the estimated volume of material to be extracted and average annual extraction rates. The special use permit shall expire on that date. Any extension of operations beyond that date shall require the issuance of a new special use permit. 
xvii)  Only equipment owned or leased by the operator of the mining operation and used in the direct operation of the quarry shall be stored overnight or for longer periods anywhere on the premises of the quarry. Storage of any other equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
f)  Institutions for the mentally disadvantaged, physically impaired and substance abuse rehabilitation centers. 
At a minimum, the following site improvements shall be required: 
1.  Frontage and access. Such uses shall front onto a county primary or state trunk line. The main means of access to the facility for patients, visitors and employees shall be via the primary road or state trunk line. In no case shall access be off of a residential street. 
2.  Setbacks. The principal building shall be set back at least 75 feet from side and rear property lines. The front yard setback shall meet the requirements of the district in which the facility is located. 
3.  Recreation/open space. Recreation and open space areas shall be required at a rate of one-half acre, plus 700 square feet per patient, based upon the maximum number of patients capable of being lodged overnight. 
a.  Recreation/open space areas shall be fenced with a six-foot tall fence. Sufficient tree plantings shall be installed around the perimeter of the fenced area. 
b.  The recreation/open space shall include places for walking and sitting. Off-street parking areas, driveways, and accessory uses shall not be counted as required recreation/open space area. 
4.  Screening. The perimeter of the site shall be screened from adjacent properties with a type C bufferyard approved by the planning commission. 
g)  [ Miscellaneous uses. ] Other miscellaneous uses as cited under land use district regulations. 
(Ord. No. 553, 4-22-1996; Ord. No. 633, 10-14-2002)  
Sec. 2214. - Senior citizens' housing development. 
1.  Authorization. The increasing needs for housing for the elderly represents a critical need. It is the purpose of this section to encourage and provide for the housing needs which are particular to the elderly. 
2.  Qualifying conditions. Any application for a special use permit shall meet the following conditions to qualify for consideration: 
a)  "Senior citizens' housing development" is defined as to be specifically for dwelling units constructed to provide housing for: 
Two or more persons related by blood, marriage or operation of law who occupy the same unit, one of which must be at least 55 years of age. 
Single persons 55 years of age or older. 
Married couple, provided one is at least 55 years of age. 
Two persons not related, of same sex, and both have reached 55 years of age. 
Two relatives, provided both have reached 55 years of age. 
A handicapped person. A person is handicapped if he has a physical impairment which is expected to be of long-continued and definite duration, substantially impedes his ability to live independently, or is of such nature that his ability to live independently could be improved by more suitable housing conditions. 
Eligibility for the project cannot depend on the race, religious [religion], national origin or color of the applicant. 
b)  The proposed site shall not be less than five acres and ownership must be that of a single owner or a corporation under unified control. 
3)  Uses that may be permitted. Housing types as listed according to the district within which the site is located are permitted, and, further, the provisions of a planned unit development are herewith included as permissible under the terms of this section, as may be approved by the planning commission. Contiguous housing units may be exempted from the PUD length restrictions if approved by the planning commission. 
4)  Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements as listed according to the district within which the site is located shall be complied with except as hereinafter listed or as may be modified according to a planned unit development. 
a)  The minimum gross floor area per dwelling unit shall be 450 square feet for an efficiency dwelling unit. A minimum of an additional 100 square feet of floor area shall be required for each additional bedroom in a dwelling unit.  
Sec. 2215. - Sexually oriented businesses. 
1.  Intent. It is recognized that there are some uses, which because of their very nature, have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances thereby having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas. Special regulation of these uses is necessary to ensure that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of the surrounding neighborhood. These special regulations are itemized in this chapter. Prior to adopting these regulations, the township reviewed studies prepared on these uses, reviewed ordinances and regulations prepared by other municipalities, and reviewed applicable federal and state case law. Based on evidence of the adverse effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the township board, and on findings incorporated in the cases of Pap's AM v Township of Erie, 529 US 277 (2000); Deja Vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of Nashville & Davidson County, 466 G3d 391 (6th Cir 2006); Sensations, Inc. v Township of Grand Rapids, 2006 WL 2504388 (WD MI 2006); Van Buren Township v Garter Belt, 258 Mich App 594; 673 NW2d 111 (2003); Bronco's Entertainment v Charter Township of Van Buren, 421 F3d 440 (6th Cir 2005); Thomas v Chicago Park District, 122 S Ct 775 (2002); Township of Renton v Playtime Theatres Inc, 475 US 41 (1986); Young v American Mini Theatres, 426 US 50 (1976); Barnes v Glen Theatre Inc, 501 US 560 (1991); California v LaRue, 409 US 109 (1972); DLS Inc v Township of Chattanooga, 107 F3d 403 (6th Cir 1997); East Brooks Books Inc v Township of Memphis, 48 F3d 2200 (6th Cir 1995); Broadway Books v Roberts, 642 F Supp 4867 (ED Tenn 1986); Bright Lights Inc v Township of Newport, 830 F Supp 378 (ED Ky 1993); Richland Bookmart v Nichols, 137 F3d 435 (6th Cir 1998); Richland Bookmart v Nichols, 278 F3d 570 (6th Cir 2002); Déjà vu of Cincinnati v Union Township Board of Trustees, 411 F3d 777 (6th Cir 2005); Déjà vu of Nashville v Metropolitan Government of Nashville, 274 F3d 377 (6th Cir 2001); Bannon Corp v Township of Dayton, 7923 F2d 470 (6th Cir 1991); Threesome Entertainment v Strittmather, 4 F Supp 2d 710 (ND Ohio 1998); JL Spoons Inc v Township of Brunswick, 49 F Supp 2d 1032 (ND Ohio 1999); Triplett Grille Inc v Township of Akron, 40 F3d 129 (6th Cir 1994); Nightclubs Inc v Township of Paducah, 202 F3d 884 (6th Cir 2000); O'Connor v Township and County of Denver, 894 F2d 1210 (10th Cir 1990); Deja Vu of Nashville Inc et al v Metropolitan Government of Nashville and Davidson County, 2001 USA App LEXIS 26007 (6th Cir Dec 6, 2001); ZJ Gifts D-2 LLC v Township of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir 1998); Connection Distribution Co v Reno, 154 F3d 281 (6th Cir 1998); Sundance Associates v Reno, 139 F3d 804 (10th Cir 1998); American Library Association v Reno, 33 F3d 78 (DC Cir 1994); American Target Advertising Inc v Giani, 199 F3d 1241 (10th Cir 2000); ZJ Gifts D-2LLC v Township of Aurora, 136 F3d 683 (10th Cir 1998); ILQ Investments Inc v Township of Rochester, 25 F3d 1413 (8th Cir 1994); Bigg Wolf Discount Video Movie Sales Inc v Montgomery County, 2002 US Dist LEXIS 1896 (D Md Feb 6 2002); Currence v Cincinnati, 2002 US App LEXIS 1258 (3rd Cir Jan 24, 2002); and other cases; and on testimony to Congress in 136 Cong Rec S 8987; 135 Cong Rec S 14519; 135 Cong Rec S 5636; 134 Cong Rec E 3750; and reports of secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix, Arizona - 1979; Minneapolis, Minnesota - 1980; Houston, Texas - 1997; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Austin, Texas - 1986; Seattle, Washington - 1989; Oklahoma Township, Oklahoma - 1986; Cleveland, Ohio - and Dallas, Texas - 1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin - 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square 1993; Bellevue, Washington, - 1998; Newport News, Virginia - 1996; New York Times Square study - 1994; Phoenix, Arizona - 1995-98; and also on findings from the paper entitled "Stripclubs According to Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence, " by Kelly Holsopple, Program Director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An Insider's View," by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan House committee on Ethics and Constitutional Law, Jan 12, 2000, and the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On the Regulation of Sexually Oriented Businesses (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the township board finds that sexually oriented businesses as a category of establishments are correlated with harmful secondary effects, and that the foregoing reports are reasonably believed to be relevant to the problems that Saginaw Township is seeking to abate and prevent in the future. The primary control or regulation is for the purpose of preventing a concentration of these uses in any one area that would create such adverse effect(s). It is further the intent of these regulations that these uses only be permitted as special land uses. Uses (collectively "regulated uses") subject to these controls are as follows: 
2.  Definitions. Sexually oriented businesses, as defined in chapter 2 (definition section of the zoning ordinance), shall be subject to the regulations of this chapter. 
3.  Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as, and include, the following: 
a)  Adult arcades. 
b)  Adult bookstores or adult video stores. 
c)  Adult cabarets. 
d)  Adult massage parlors. 
e)  Adult motels. 
f)  Adult motion picture theaters. 
g)  Adult theaters. 
h)  Adult nudity or retail stores. 
i)  Escort and escort agencies. 
j)  Nude model studios. 
k)  Sexual encounter centers. 
4.  Location of sexually oriented business; miscellaneous requirements. 
a)  A sexually oriented business shall not be located closer than 1,000 feet to the property line of any of the following: 
i)  Church, religious institution, or building used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities. 
ii)  Public or private elementary or secondary school, vocational school, special education school, junior college or university. 
iii)  Any single-family, two-family or multiple-family zoning district. 
iv)  Lot or parcel in residential use. 
v)  Public park. 
vi)  Existing sexually oriented business. 
vii)  Child care facility, nursery or preschool. 
Measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property site boundary of a sexually oriented business to the nearest property line of the premises of any use, district or right-of-way listed above. The distance between any two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects from the site or property boundary in which each business is located. Access easements or portions of the parcel that are exclusively used to provide access to the site of the sexually oriented business shall be excluded from the parcel boundary in determining whether the site complies with the required separation. The intent of this exclusion is to allow sexually oriented businesses to comply with the separation requirement from major thoroughfares by means of an access easement or access strip of land from the site to the thoroughfare. 
b)  A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of another sexually oriented business. 
c)  A person is in violation of this Ordinance if he/she causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion thereof or the substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business. 
d)  All off-street parking areas and entry door areas of a sexually oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk until the closing time of the business with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of three footcandles on the pavement with an average to minimum uniformity not greater than four to one of light on all parking surfaces and/or walkways and/or meet or exceed the recommendations of the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IESNA) enhanced security guidelines and recommendations for parking lots. This requirement is to ensure the personal safety of patrons and employees, and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and other criminal conduct. 
e)  No employee in a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or intentionally appear in view of any patron in a semi-nude condition unless the employee, while semi-nude, shall be and remains at least six feet from all patrons and on a fixed stage at least 18 inches from the floor in a room of at least 600 square feet. 
f)  No employee in a sexually oriented business shall knowingly or intentionally mingle with patrons unless they are not dancing or have not danced for at least 30 minutes. 
g)  Any business now classified as a sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the date of adoption of the Ordinance that is in violation of this Ordinance shall be deemed a nonconforming use. 
5.  Nude entertainment prohibited in alcoholic commercial establishment. It shall be unlawful for any person to perform in any alcoholic commercial establishment, to knowingly permit or allow to be performed therein, any of the following acts or conduct: 
a)  The public performance of acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, beastiality, oral copulation, flagellations, or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
b)  The actual or simulated touching, caressing or fondling on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals in public; or 
c)  The actual or simulated public displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitals. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator, agent or employee of an alcoholic commercial establishment to allow any female to appear in an alcoholic commercial establishment so costumed or dressed that one or both breasts are wholly or substantially exposed to public view. Topless or bottomless or totally uncovered waitresses, bartenders or barmaids, entertainers including dancers, impersonators, lingerie shows, or any other form for the attraction or entertainment of customers, is strictly prohibited. "Wholly or substantially exposed to public view" as it pertains to breasts shall mean the showing of the female breast in an alcoholic commercial establishment with less than a fully opaque covering of all portions of the areola and nipple, and the prohibition shall also extend to such events similar to wet t-shirt contests. 
6.  Exterior display and signs. A sexually oriented business is in violation of this chapter if: 
a)  The merchandise or activities of the establishment are visible from any point outside the establishment; 
b)  The exterior portions of the establishment or signs having any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any specified anatomical area or sexually explicit activity as defined in this Ordinance; or 
c)  There shall be no use of neon or flashing lights. 
7.  License required to operate a sexually oriented business. Special use and site plan approval shall be granted on the condition that the operator or owner of a sexually oriented business obtains a license to operate the business as required by chapter 18 of the Code of Ordinances. 
8.  Enforcement. A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable with a potential fine of $500.00 dollars or a jail term of 90 days, or both. 
9.  Injunction. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the township, at its option, may commence proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction under the appropriate court rule or statute to enjoin any activity conducted by a sexually oriented business that is deemed to be in violation of these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 516, 2-28-1994; Ord. No. 718, 1-24-2011; Ord. No. 724, 9-26-2011)  
Sec. 2216. - Drive-through establishments. 
1.  Authorization. In recognition of today's service- and convenience-oriented society, the need and demand for drive-through uses has increased greatly. With this increased demand, certain aspects of this form of business must be addressed in order to protect neighboring property owners from any potentially adverse impacts created by additional traffic flow generated by this use. Furthermore, this use is not compatible with all business or residential uses, and should therefore be limited to those districts where such a use can be properly accommodated under the conditions stated herein. 
2.  Uses that may be permitted. Accessory drive-through uses to financial institutions, fast food businesses, dry cleaners, convenience stores, or other uses as may be determined by the planning commission. 
3.  Development requirements. The following requirements for site development, together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, shall be complied with: 
a)  The drive designated for the drive-through shall have a minimum width of 12 feet and a minimum length of 100 feet. Said drive length shall not interfere with on-site traffic flow or parking arrangements. 
b)  Curbing of at least seven inches in height and/or steel concrete bumper poles must be installed between the drive-through lane and any structure. 
c)  All pedestrian walkways crossing the drive shall be accessible to handicapped persons, properly painted, and posted with signs warning drivers of pedestrians. 
d)  Lighting shall be installed so as to provide adequate illumination of any walkways intersecting with said drive, subject to the standards set forth in section 407. 
e)  An opaque fence or wall a minimum of five feet in height shall be erected along all property lines where a drive-through lane or associated structure are within 40 feet of any residential district or property. 
f)  No drive-through lane may be closer than five feet to any residential property or district. 
g)  Drive-through lane shall not result in an additional curb cut unless approved by the planning commission as necessary to ensure the safety of motorists and/or pedestrians. 
h)  Aboveground directional signs shall be installed in accordance with section 505(4).  
Sec. 2217. - Bed and breakfast establishments. 
1.  Authorization. Due to the growing popularity of bed and breakfast establishments in single-family dwellings, it is of evermore importance that any potentially adverse impacts resulting from such developments be properly addressed. It is the intent of the township to permit the development of such operations when developed in a way which emphasizes the protection of detrimental change in the single-family character of any site proposed for a bed and breakfast operation. 
2.  Uses that may be permitted. Bed and breakfast establishments where provided and as permitted under the appropriate single-family zoning districts. 
3.  Development requirements. The following requirements for site development, together with any other applicable requirements of this Ordinance, shall be complied with: 
a)  The residence is the principal single-family detached dwelling unit on the property and is owner-occupied at all times. 
b)  The residence abuts one or more of the primary streets specifically listed under section 303(2) with the exception of Wieneke and Lawndale Roads extended. 
c)  The rooms utilized for sleeping are a part of the primary residential use and not specifically constructed or significantly remodeled or altered for rental purposes. 
d)  The maximum stay for any occupants of bed and breakfast operations shall be 14 days. 
e)  A valid business license shall have been obtained from the Saginaw Township Clerk. 
f)  Paved parking shall be provided at a ratio as set by the zoning administrator. 
g)  Occupancy of any bed and breakfast operation is limited to five or fewer guests, and the use is further limited to not more than two rental sleeping rooms. 
h)  Each operator shall keep a list of names of all persons staying at the bed and breakfast operation. Such list shall be available for inspection by township officials at any time. 
i)  Meals shall be served only to residents and overnight guests, and meals shall comply with the restrictions of the state and county health departments for nonresidential uses. There shall be no separate cooking facilities for the bed and breakfast stay. 
j)  The rental sleeping room shall have a minimum size of 100 square feet for each two occupants with an additional 30 square feet for each additional occupant to a maximum of four occupants per room. At no time shall a bed and breakfast operation utilize more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the dwelling, excluding attached garages, porches and unfinished basements. Each sleeping room used for the bed and breakfast operation shall have a separate smoke detector alarm. 
k)  One sign identifying the bed and breakfast operations not to exceed one square foot in area shall be permitted. 
l)  No premises shall be utilized for a bed and breakfast operation unless there are at least two exits to the outdoors from such premises. 
m)  Bed and breakfast operations shall not be permitted on any premises where there exists any violation of a township ordinance or in any building or on any parcel of land which does not conform to the requirements of the Township Zoning Ordinance and adopted construction codes. 
n)  No bed and breakfast operation shall be established without prior approval by the Saginaw Township Board in accordance with the special use permit requirements of chapter 22. Two sets of floor plans of the establishment, drawn to an architectural scale of not less than one-eighth inch equals one foot shall also be submitted to the zoning administrator. One set shall remain on file in the township offices, and one set shall be filed with the fire department.  
[Section 2218. - Reserved.] 
Editor's note— There is no § 2218.  
Sec. 2219. - Personal wireless communication facilities. 
1.  Authorization. Changing technology in the field of communications has resulted in a reliance upon more versatile convenient forms of communication. Businesses, individuals and governments have all developed a strong dependence upon the ability to quickly contact others. The use of radios and cellular phones have proven themselves over and over [a]gain in emergency situations. 
[2.]  Qualifying conditions: 
a)  The following site and developmental requirements shall apply: 
i)  A minimum site of 0.75 acre and 125 feet of road frontage. 
ii)  Communication towers shall be restricted to self-supporting structures. The use of guy wires is prohibited. 
iii)  The base of the tower and wire cable supports shall be enclosed with a minimum five-foot-high fence. 
b)  Special performance standards: 
i)  The tower must be setback from all property lines a distance equal to its height, unless engineering plans and specifications have been verified by the township engineer that the structural integrity of the tower will withstand high winds and impacts, and the likelihood of a tower failure is minimal. The applicant shall incur all cost associated with township engineering review. 
a)  Towers shall not be erected on a parcel in which a single-family, two-family, three-family or four-family dwelling unit exists. 
b)  Towers shall be set back from property lines a minimum distance equal to its height when erected on a parcel that abuts other A-2, R-1A, R-1 or R-2 zoned or used parcels. This requirement is independent of section 2219(b)(i). 
ii)  Accessory structures are limited to uses associated with the operation of the tower and may not be located any closer to any property line than 30 feet. 
a)  Accessory structures shall be designed to be aesthetically compatible with the adjoining properties. This may include the construction of a brick facade and a pitched roof. 
iii)  Accessory structures shall not exceed 600 square feet of gross building area. 
iv)  All bufferyard requirements within this Zoning Ordinance shall be met. 
v)  All towers shall be equipped with an anticlimbing device to prevent unauthorized access. 
vi)  The plans of the tower construction shall be certified by a registered structural engineer. 
vii)  The applicant shall provide verification that the antenna mount and structure have been reviewed and approved by a professional engineer and that the installation is in compliance with all applicable codes. 
viii)  All towers must meet the standards of the Federal Aviation Administration and the Federal Communications Commission. 
ix)  Communication towers in excess of 100 feet in height above grade level shall be prohibited within a two-mile radius of a public airport or one-half-mile radius of a helipad. 
x)  No part of any tower or antenna shall be constructed, located or maintained at any time, permanently or temporarily, on or upon any required setback area for the district in which the antenna or tower is to be located. In no case shall a tower or antenna be located within 30 feet of a property line. 
xi)  Metal towers shall be constructed of, or treated with, corrosive-resistant material. 
xii)  Antennae and metal towers shall be grounded for protection against a direct strike by lightning and shall comply as to electrical wiring and connections with all applicable local statutes, regulations and standards. 
xiii)  Towers with antennae shall be designed to withstand a uniform wind loading as prescribed in the building code. 
xiv)  All signals and remote control conductors of low energy extending substantially horizontally above the ground between a tower or antenna and a structure, or between towers, shall be at least eight feet above the ground at all points, unless buried underground. 
xv)  Towers shall be located so that they do not interfere with reception in nearby residential areas. 
xvi)  Towers shall be located so there is room for vehicles doing maintenance to maneuver on the property owned and or leased by the applicant. 
xvii)  The base of the tower shall occupy no more than 500 square feet. 
xviii)  Minimum spacing between tower locations shall be one-quarter mile in order to prevent a concentration of towers in one area. 
xix)  Height of the tower shall not exceed 150 feet from grade within all applicable districts. 
xx)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
xxi)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
xxii)  There shall not be displayed advertising or identification of [any] kind intended to be visible from the ground or other structures, except as required for emergency purposes. 
xxiii)  The antenna shall be painted to match the exterior treatment of the tower. The chosen paint scheme should be designed to minimize off-site visibility of the antenna. 
xxiv)  Structures shall be subject to any state and federal regulations concerning nonionizing electromagnetic radiation. If more restrictive state or federal standards are adopted in the future, the antenna shall be made to conform to the extent required by such standard or the special use approval will be subject to revocation by the township board. Cost for testing and verification of compliance shall be borne by the operator of the antenna. 
xxv)  There shall be no employees located on the site on a permanent basis to service or maintain the antenna. Occasional or temporary repair and service activities are excluded from this restriction. 
xxvi)  All parking and drive areas must be paved as provided in this Ordinance. 
xxvii)  Where the property adjoins any residentially zoned property or land use, the developer shall plant two alternating rows of evergreen trees with a minimum height of five feet on 20-foot centers along the entire perimeter of the tower and related structures. In no case shall the evergreens be any closer than ten feet to any structure. 
xxviii)  The tower shall be removed by the property owner or lessee within six months of being abandon[ed]. The township may require a performance bond to ensure its removal. 
xxix)  A conceptual build out pla[n] must be submitted by the applicant which indicates the contemplated areas within the township that the communication provider may construct other towers. 
xxx)  Towers shall be designed to provide for collocation. 
(Ord. No. 536, 7-10-1995; Ord. No. 578, 1-26-1998)  
Sec. 2220. - Open space preservation developments. 
1)  Authorization. The purpose of this section is to provide open space preservation provisions for residential development as required by Public Act 177 of 2001. It grants developer's greater flexibility and efficiency in the design of single-family residential developments by allowing homes to be clustered on smaller lots and then surrounded permanently with preserved open space. The development community supports the concept because it reduces the cost of many infrastructure components including roads and public utilities. The environmental community supports the concept because it allows developers to avoid and preserve unique characteristics of a given parcel including small wetlands, tree lots and steep terrain. 
2)  Objectives. It is the intent of this section to encourage alternative subdivision designs which preserve Saginaw Charter Township's character and other important environmental elements, while providing neighborhoods that are desired by the community and the general public through permanent dedication of open space and a planned reduction of individual lot area requirements. 
a)  To promote the type of development that will compliment and enhance other land use activities located in the Agricultural and Low Density Residential Transitional areas of the township. 
b)  To encourage the use of open space provisions that will encourage developers to be creative and imaginative in the development of residential areas. 
c)  To utilize dedicated open space within a development as an amenity. 
d)  Maintain an image of open space within the township. 
3)  Definitions. 
a)  Common driveway. A driveway shared by two or more people and not considered to be road frontage. Frontage requirements can only be met by having frontage on a private or public road. 
b)  Cluster. A development design technique that concentrates buildings on a part of the site to allow the remaining land to be used for recreation, common open space, and preservation of environmentally sensitive features. 
c)  Cluster subdivision. A form of development that permits a reduction in lot area and bulk requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of lots permitted under a conventional subdivision or increase in the overall density of development, and the remaining land area is devoted to open space, active recreation, preservation of environmentally sensitive areas or agriculture. 
d)  Front-loaded garage. Accessed from the side facing the street or roadway. 
e)  Open space. Land within or related to a development that is set aside as common land for recreational, conservation and agricultural uses and preserved in an undeveloped state or in such fashion approved by the planning commission. Further subdivision of open space lands or their use for other than recreation, conservation or agriculture shall be prohibited. Open space shall not include areas devoted to the public or private road rights-of-way or any land that has been or is to be conveyed through deed or easement to a public agency for utilities. 
f)  Private road. A road that provides direct access to a parcel which is not dedicated to and accepted by an authorized governmental road agency and is not maintained by any governing agency. A common driveway as used in this section does not constitute a private road. 
g)  Traffic calming techniques. A form of roadway design that naturally slows traffic by means of winding the roadway, creation of planting islands between traffic lanes and the planting of trees along the edge of roadways. 
4)  Permitted uses. 
a)  Single family use. Single-family residential dwellings (including site condominiums) are permitted having a minimum of 1,040 square feet of living area. 
(1)  Setbacks. The following design parameters will be used to establish setbacks. 
(a)  The minimum distance between dwellings shall be 12 feet, six feet from property lines. 
(b)  Front and rear yard setbacks may be staggered to provide for maximum variety in the size of such yards. In no case shall the front yard setback be reduced below 20 feet. Rear yard setbacks may be reduced to 20 feet if said rear yard is contiguous with dedicated open space. Otherwise, said rear yard setback may not be less than 30 feet. 
1.  Exception. If a garage is to be front loaded from the street, the minimum front yard setback from the street right-of-way or street easement shall be 24 feet. 
(2)  Lot width. The following design parameters will be used to establish lot widths: 
(a)  Lots not served by public sanitary sewer shall have a minimum of 100 feet of frontage at the front building line. 
(b)  Lots served by public water and sewer shall have a minimum of 70 feet of frontage at the front building line. 
(3)  Minimum exterior road buffer. The developer shall preserve a minimum of a 100-foot buffer from the proposed right of way along any county road or state highway servicing the open space development. 
b)  Residential accessory uses. For every single-family residential dwelling, two accessory buildings shall be permitted per parcel. One accessory building may be constructed up to 144 square feet in size and one accessory building may be constructed up to 720 square feet in size. 
(1)  Overall height may not exceed 15 feet to the peak from the average grade. 
(2)  Setbacks within an open space preservation development for residential accessory buildings shall be eight feet from the side property line and five feet from the rear property line. 
c)  Incidental accessory uses. Accessory uses incidental to the principal permitted uses include recreational activities, which are passive and occur on common open space lands only, such as soccer fields, softball fields and similar type fields, including parks and boat launches. 
5)  General development standards. 
a)  Ownership and control. A proposed open space preservation development shall be under single or limited ownership control, such that a single person or entity has proprietary responsibility for the completion of the development. The applicant shall provide documentation of ownership or control in the form of agreements, contracts, or covenants that indicate the development will be completed as proposed. 
b)  Density standards. 
(1)  Number of dwellings. 
(a)  The total number of residential dwelling units permitted in a open space preservation development shall be determined by submitting a limited detail conventional subdivision plan identifying the lots and buildable lands using the underlying zoning district in which the project will be located in. 
(b)  The maximum number of lots allowed within an open space preservation development is the same as the number allowed in a conventional subdivision plan, not including additional lots allowed due to lot credits. In an open space preservation development each lot is smaller, according to the chart in example one. Once additional lots allowed are computed using credits, the open space preservation development site plan may be reviewed by the planning commission. 
(c)  The planning commission shall review the limited detail conventional subdivision plan during the same meeting that the proposed new open space preservation development site plan is reviewed, this will ensure no delay during the review process. 
(d)  In no case shall the maximum density specified for the zoning district in which the open space preservation development is located, be increased by more than the bonus percentage credit. 
c)  Lot sizes: Lots not served by public or common sanitary sewer shall have a minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet. Lots served by public or common sanitary sewer and public water shall have a minimum lot area of 8,260 square feet. 
Example One 
Status 	Lot Size 
	
No sanitary sewer 	15,000 square feet 
	
With public water & sewer 	8,260 square feet 
	
Maximum lot size 	20,000 square feet 
 
d)  Density standards credit. The total number of dwelling units permitted in an open space preservation development shall be determined as explained in the density standards, and in the following bonus percentage increase given for the following credits; 
(1)  Shoreline credit. To encourage preservation of river and stream areas and to provide an incentive for property owners to incorporate the areas surrounding water bodies into an open space network, a shoreline credit shall be permitted if all of the following requirements are met: 
(a)  Step 1. One additional lot may be added to the open space conservation development for each 500 lineal feet of shoreline protected. 
(b)  Step 2. A minimum of 100 feet of open space must be created along the shoreline that is protected subject to permanent open space dedication. 
(c)  Step 3. All provisions of the Flood Plain Ordinance must be complied with when considering this credit. 
(2)  Pathway credit. To encourage the development of a pathway within the open space area, a pathway credit will be given to a developer who completes the following steps: 
(a)  Step 1. A credit of one additional lot shall be given if a pathway is created and installed. It must be installed prior to the sale of any lot within the development. 
(b)  Step 2. The pathway is no less than five feet wide, has a raised base so that it drains properly, is covered by a surface other than grass or dirt, such as wood chips, pavement or stone. 
(c)  Step 3. All pathways are significant in length as determined by the planning commission, in order to take advantage of the available open space. It is recommended that the pathway be circular in nature going around the development and connecting developments when feasible. 
(3)  Recreation area credit. To encourage the development of parks, playgrounds or recreational fields, a recreational area credit will be given to a developer who completes the following steps: 
(a)  Step 1. A credit of one additional lot shall be given if a recreation area is developed. The recreation area must be shown on brochures and must be staked out prior to the sale of any lot within the development so that potential buyers are aware of its location. 
(b)  Step 2. The recreation area must include one of the following items: 1) a baseball, soccer, football or similar field; 2) a picnic area with tables, park benches and a pavilion; 3) other non-motorized recreation areas that are approved by the planning commission. 
(c)  Step 3. All recreation areas will be significant in overall size and will be beneficial to the residents as determined by the planning commission, in order to take advantage of the available open space. 
(d)  Step 4. These recreation areas may be open to the public or limited to the use of residents living within the open space preservation development depending upon how the open space is restricted from further development. The means to allow public access or restricted access must be in the deed restrictions or master deed of the development. 
(4)  Open space area credit. To encourage the preservation of open space, an open space area credit will be given to a developer who can show a significant increase in open space area preservation. One of the following two options must be met: 
(a)  Option 1. A credit of one additional lot shall be given if a development preserves 60 percent of the determined buildable area as open space within a development. 
(b)  Option 2. A credit of two additional lots shall be given if a development preserves 70 percent of the determined buildable area as open space within a development. 
6)  Open space standards. 
a)  Areas not considered open space. The following areas shall not be calculated as dedicated open spaces: 
(1)  Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private road rights of way or any land that has been or is to be conveyed through a deed or easement to a public agency for utilities. 
(2)  Any area devoted to county drain easements. 
(3)  All existing surface water bodies and regulated wetlands. 
(4)  Area within a lot or condominium unit. 
b)  Calculating open space. Except as noted above, any undeveloped land area within the boundaries of the parcel may be included as required open space. 
(1)  Use of open space percentage. Dwelling units shall be grouped so that open space within a development is at least 50 percent of the total area of buildable land. The planning commission may approve a lesser percentage of open space within a development if an alternative density is calculated using bonus percentages and/or credits are approved. 
(2)  Open space access. Pedestrian access points to open space shall be required between rows of ten or more lots and at the end of cul-de-sacs. Access points must be of common ownership and a minimum of six feet in width. The planning commission shall determine if additional access points are necessary for pedestrian access to open areas or if a modification of this standard is necessary. 
(3)  Maintenance vehicle and open space access. Open space preservation developments shall provide maintenance vehicle access to interior common areas that require mowing or tiling. Maintenance vehicle access points shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide. 
(4)  Waterway buffering. All dwellings and accessory structures shall be no less than 100 feet from any lakes, ponds, rivers and streams. Only with approval of the planning commission may a roadway be placed within this buffer area and efforts should be made to eliminate any encroachment when possible. Within said buffer area, the planning commission shall determine whether or not it shall remain in a natural state or if landscaping is required. 
c)  Preservation of open space. Open space shall be set aside by the developer through an irrevocable conveyance that is acceptable to the township. All forms of protecting open space within an open space preservation development shall be subject to the review of the township attorney and all transfers of property to the township are subject to approval by the township board. Forms of dedicating open space may include: 
(1)  A conservation easement established per Public Act 197 of 1980, as amended. 
(2)  Covenants that run perpetually with the land. Use of dedicated open space may be restricted to dwelling owners within the development; 
(3)  Transfer of deed to township, county or state ownership with township board approval. The open space must be suitable for parks, ball fields, or public access to waterways and for a boat launch. The transferred dedicated open space will be considered public lands. 
(4)  Two forms of the above-mentioned preservation options may be used together if a portion of a parcel is being deeded to the township, county or state and a portion of a parcel is being retained for the development's dwelling owners to use exclusively as covenant protected open space. 
d)  Conveyance standards. Such conveyance shall assure that the open space will be protected from all forms of development, except as allowed under this section and shown on an approved site plan and shall never be changed to another use. Such conveyance shall: 
(1)  Indicate the allowable use(s) of the dedicated open space with site plan approval. 
(2)  Require that the dedicated open space be maintained by parties who have an ownership interest in the open space. 
(3)  Provide standards for scheduled maintenance of the open space. 
(4)  Be recorded on every deed of parcels within the development. 
e)  Trees in open space. Twenty-five trees per acre of open space preserved must be planted within the open space area. The trees shall not be less than six feet tall. The location of tree plantings and type of tree to be planted is subject to planning commission approval. All tree plantings shall be on dedicated open space areas only. No more than 50 percent of the same species of tree may be planted within the developments open space area. If recreation areas or farm fields are developed within the open space, the tree plantings may be located around the perimeter of the fields or in groups. In addition, three trees each six feet tall must be installed on each unit or lot. 
Number of Trees Required In 
Open Space Area Per Lot Developed 
25 Trees Per Acre of Preserved Open Space 
(1)  An inspection of the required open space area and tree plantings shall be required by the developer a minimum of 12 months after initial planting. Any tree plantings that died or have been removed must be replaced. 
(2)  The planning commission may require a performance bond or cash deposit equal to the cost of the trees and their installation. The proceeds of this deposit shall be returned to the developer only after a written report from the developer is presented to the township stating the findings of the inspection. The township may inspect the site to verify all findings. 
f)  Installation delay. If seasonal conditions such as snow and ice do not allow for the planting of trees in open space areas or the installation of sidewalks along open space, a delay in planting or installation may be granted. 
(1)  The delay may only be granted until May 31, at which time planting of said trees and/or installation of pathways, must be commenced as determined by the community development director of the township. 
(2)  A performance bond or other acceptable monetary assurances will be required to ensure the required installation of sidewalks and/or tree plantings is completed. The township engineer shall determine the amount of monetary assurance to be held by the township until the required work is completed. 
(3)  If after May 31, the required sidewalk installation or tree plantings have not commenced as determined by the building inspector, the township may use the deposited funds to complete the required work. 
(4)  All additional funds necessary to complete said work above the deposited amount will be charged to the parcel owner(s) and if necessary a lien will be placed on the parcel and required funds may be collected from the property tax paid on said parcel(s). 
7)  Housing development standards. 
a)  Dwelling placement. Dwelling units shall be carefully located and designed. Dwelling placement shall be planned to screen homes from off-site vantage points, away from environmentally sensitive areas, existing agricultural uses and away from areas subject to land management practices that will cause dust, noise, smoke, odors or similar problems. 
b)  Residential tree planting. All residential lots shall have three trees planted in the front yard area a minimum of six feet high prior to obtaining an occupancy permit. 
c)  Sanitary sewer. If sanitary sewer or public water is provided within the development, all provisions for the review and approval by the township must be completely followed. If there is public sanitary sewer within 500 feet from any portion of the proposed development, the sanitary sewer shall be provided according to township requirements. 
d)  Water. If there is an existing or extendible public water supply within 500 feet from any portion of the proposed development, the water shall be provided according to township requirements. 
e)  Lot drainage. All lots shall have lot drainage that shall comply with requirements of Saginaw Charter Township's Storm Water Management Ordinance. Undisturbed open space area may not be required to be evaluated for storm water review. 
f)  Septic system. If not served by public sanitary sewer, the following on-site septic system procedure may be followed upon township approval: 
(1)  In order to meet the Saginaw County Health Department and Department of Environmental Quality's requirement for lot size, a portion of the open space area may be used for septic system lot size computation and if necessary for its installation. 
(2)  The open space area used for septic system computation and installation must be restricted to the installation of an individual dwelling septic system only. The following conditions must be met prior to township planning commission approval of any such system: 
(a)  The development is not served by public or common sanitary sewer. 
(b)  The septic system must be placed as close as possible to the dwelling using the system. 
(c)  The county health department and all state required installation details must be followed. 
(d)  Open space area used as part of the required septic system computation may only be used once. 
(e)  The site plan submitted for review by the township planning commission must show the area to be used in the septic system calculation. 
(f)  The parcel owner must remove the septic system from the open space if public sanitary sewer is connected to the dwelling. 
(g)  Open space areas having septic systems on them may not in any way be turned over to the township as township property. 
(h)  If the open space is farmed, no plantings shall be allowed over the septic system. 
(i)  No trees may be planted over a septic system in the open space. 
8)  Prior to construction. Prior to any residential construction within an open space preservation development, all roadways, drainage and utilities must be installed within one year of the first home start. All pathways must be installed prior to any residential construction. 
9)  Signage. All proposed signage in the residential area shall be regulated as if it were zoned R-1, Low Density Residential. 
10)  Provisions not specifically mentioned. Any requirement not specifically mentioned within this section shall automatically revert to standards associated with the R-1, Low Density Residential Zoning District. 
11)  Government construction authority standards. Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting further construction or use of land by any government body for public purposes where consistent with the zones and regulation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 636, 2-24-2003)  
Sec. 2221. - Planned neighborhood development (PND). 
1.  Scope. The following requirements apply to all planned neighborhood development (PND) special use permit applications. 
2.  Purpose. These regulations are intended to ensure neighborhood compatibility, maintain harmony and character of existing residential areas, and ensure residential infill development occurs in an orderly and desirable manner. It is also intended to: 
a.  Allow flexibility in lot sizes to facilitate infill development. 
b.  Provide development standards and guidelines to promote compatibility between existing and new development. 
c.  Eliminate regulatory constraints (e.g., restrictive zoning) to residential infill development and establish public processes and regulations that support appropriate infill development. 
3.  Applicability. These regulations pertain to the R-1 and R-1A zoning districts where PNDs are permitted by special use permit. The PND regulations can be used for development proposals that meet the following criteria: 
a.  Minimum lot size: A parcel, or a group of adjacent parcels, existing on the date of the adoption of these provisions not less than five acres in total area. 
b.  Maximum lot size: Shall be less than ten acres. 
c.  Uses: Single-family dwellings and customary accessory uses, as defined in chapter 2, section 202(1) and section 305. 
4.  Design standards. 
a.  [Compatibility with existing infrastructure.] The project shall be compatible with the existing infrastructure. 
b.  Compatibility with adjacent uses. The proposed planned neighborhood development project shall set forth in detail all specifications with respect to height, setbacks, density, parking, circulation, landscaping, views and other design features that exhibit due regard for the relationship of the development to surrounding properties, the character of the site and the land uses. In determining whether this requirement has been met, consideration shall be given to: 
i.  The bulk, placement, and materials of construction of proposed structures. 
ii.  Pedestrian and vehicular circulation. 
iii.  The location and screening of vehicular use or parking areas. 
iv.  The provision of landscaping and other site amenities. 
c.  Circulation. A PND project shall provide internal circulation for vehicular, pedestrian, and non-motorized movement within public rights-of-way and/or general common elements as follows: 
i.  Internal access: The vehicular and non-motorized circulation system shall provide access to all lots, uses, and buildings within the planned neighborhood development. 
ii.  Connections: The vehicular and non-motorized circulation system shall connect with existing adjacent developments and non-motorized systems or shall be designed to provide connections to future adjacent developments and planned street and non-motorized improvements, as recommended by the planning commission. 
d.  Architectural and site element design. 
i.  To encourage diversity in design, at least three significantly different architectural styles shall be provided for each floor plan. Elevations shall be structurally different with different roof types facing the street. The entry should be the focal point of the home through the use of roof elements, columns, porticos, and/or other architectural features. 
ii.  Exterior building wall finish on all primary structures, exclusive of windows and doors, that face the street shall consist of a minimum 35 percent brick veneer, rock, or stone masonry. No more than 15 percent EIFS, stucco, wood, or concrete-board shall be permitted. Excepting for metal roofs, exposed metal or exposed concrete block buildings shall not be permitted. 
iii.  Garages should be designed and located to reduce the visual impact of garage doors along street frontages. A mix of garage orientations (i.e. significantly recessed front facing, side entry, tandem) shall be provided. 
iv.  Signage, lighting, entryway features, landscaping, building materials for the exterior of all structures, and other features of the project shall be designed and completed with the objective of achieving an integrated and cohesive development, consistent with the character of the surrounding area, and natural features of the area. Street and/or site lighting shall be required. 
e.  Enhanced landscaping. 
i.  All PND proposals shall provide landscaping that is above and beyond that of the requirements listed in the zoning ordinance. Street trees are required on each lot. Trees shall be provided in the front yard, be placed at a rate of at least two per lot, and be at a maximum distance apart of 20 feet. Such trees shall be of the large deciduous type such as oak, hard maple, or similar type. Black locust, box elder, catalpa, elms, chestnut, poplars, and willows shall not be allowed. Trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height at the time of planting. PND landscaping shall enhance the street frontage, and will promote privacy between units. 
5.  Resulting lots. A parcel that meets the requirements outlined in this section shall be divided into individual lots or site condominiums no smaller than the requirements outlined within this section. 
a.  Minimum resulting lot size: 8,000 square feet. 
b.  Minimum resulting lot width: 65 feet. 
c.  Minimum resulting lot depth: 120 feet. 
d.  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
e.  Minimum rear yard: 30 feet. 
f.  Minimum side yard: Eight feet. 
( Ord. No. 753, 8-14-2017 )  
PART IV - [ADMINISTRATION]  
CHAPTER 23. - ADMINISTRATION[14] 

Footnotes: 
--- (14) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, ch. 2. 
 
Sec. 2301. - General administration. 
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be administered by the township planning commission and the township board in conformance with Public Act No. 184 of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), Township Zoning Act and Public Act No. 168 of 1959 (MCL 125.321 et seq.). 
1.  Responsibility. The legislative body shall employ a zoning administrator to act as its officer to effect proper and adequate administration of this Ordinance. The legislative body may designate the building inspector as the zoning administrator. The term of employment, compensation, and any other conditions of employment shall be established by the legislative body. For the purposes of this Ordinance, the zoning administrator shall have the power of the code enforcement officer and shall delegate the duties of such as needed. 
2.  Duties of zoning administrator. All applications for sign permits or certificates of occupancy shall be submitted to the zoning administrator who may issue certificates of occupancy or sign permits when all applicable provisions of this Ordinance have been met. The zoning administrator shall be empowered to make inspections of buildings or premises to carry out his duties in the enforcement of this Ordinance. 
Under no circumstances is the zoning administrator permitted to make changes in this Ordinance nor to vary the terms of this Ordinance in carrying out his duties. 
3.  Sign permit. Prior to the construction, erection or structural alteration of a sign, a permit shall be obtained from the zoning administrator. Application shall be on a standard prepared form obtained from the zoning administrator. 
4.  Certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the zoning administrator for any of the following: 
a)  Occupancy and use of vacant land (including parking lot construction) or of a building hereafter erected or structurally altered. 
b)  Change in the use of land or building, except to another use which represents a continuation of a use under a previous certificate of occupancy. 
c)  Any change in use or enlargement of a nonconforming use or building. 
No such occupancy, use or change of use shall take place until a certificate of occupancy therefor shall have been issued by the zoning administrator. 
5.  Application for certificate of occupancy. 
a)  Application. In all cases where a building permit is required, written application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made coincident with the application for such building permit, and in all cases shall be made not less than ten days prior to the time when a new, changed, or enlarged use of a building or structure is intended to begin. 
b)  Information required. Application for certificate of occupancy shall be accompanied by a plat, in duplicate and drawn to scale, showing the exact dimensions of the premises to which the certificate of occupancy is to apply; the lines of all lots or parcels under separate ownership contained therein; the width and alignment of all abutting streets, alleys, easements of access and public open spaces; the size, position and height of all buildings or structures erected or altered thereon; and such other information as may be deemed necessary by the zoning administrator for the proper enforcement of this Ordinance. 
c)  Accessory buildings or structures. When erected at the same time as the principal building or structure on a lot shown on the application therefor, [accessory buildings or structures] shall not require a separate certificate of occupancy. 
d)  Record of applications. A record of all such applications for certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file by the zoning administrator. Whenever the buildings, structures, premises and uses thereof as set forth on the application are in conformity with the provisions of this code and other applicable regulations, it shall be the duty of the building inspector to issue any necessary building permit, and when such permit is denied, to state such refusal in writing, with cause. 
e)  Issuance of certificate of occupancy. After notification that the building, structure or premises, or part thereof, is ready for occupancy and inspection, the zoning administrator shall make final inspection thereof, and if all provisions of this code and other applicable regulations have been complied with, he shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall show such compliance. When a certificate of occupancy is denied on the grounds of a zoning violation, such refusal shall be stated in writing with reasons for said denial. 
A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the zoning administrator for a part of a building or structure or premises prior to completion of the entire building, structure or premises, provided it is sufficiently clear all provisions of this Ordinance will be met. 
The zoning administrator shall certify, after proper examination, the extent and kind of use, and whether or not the use conforms to district requirements. Failure to file such application shall place the burden of proof as to the date of establishment of any use upon the owner.  
Sec. 2302. - Enforcement. 
The zoning administrator shall enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. 
1.  Violations and penalties. Violations of any provision of this Ordinance are declared to be a nuisance per se. Any and all building or land use activities considered possible violations of the provisions of this Ordinance observed by or communicated to a township official or employee shall be reported to the zoning administrator. 
a)  Inspection of violation. The zoning administrator shall inspect each alleged violation or violations he observes or is aware of and shall order correction, in writing, of all conditions found to be in violation of this Ordinance. 
b)  Correction period. All violations shall be corrected within a period of ten days after the order to correct is issued or in such longer period to time, not to exceed six months, as the zoning administrator shall determine necessary and appropriate. A violation not corrected within this period shall be reported to the township attorney, who is hereby authorized to and shall initiate procedures to eliminate such violation. 
c)  Penalties. Every person, whether as principal agent, servant, employee, or otherwise, including the owners of any building, structure or premises, or part thereof, where any violation of this Ordinance shall exist or shall be created who shall violate or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of maintaining a nuisance per se and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a term of not to exceed 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. [After] the permissible grace period a separate offense shall be declared. 
d)  Cumulative rights and remedies. The rights and remedies provided herein are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law. 
2.  Conflicting regulations. In the interpretation, application, and enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, whenever any of the provisions or limitations imposed or required by this Ordinance are more stringent than any other law or ordinance, the provisions of this Ordinance shall govern; provided also that whenever the provisions of any other law or ordinance impose more stringent requirements than are imposed or required by this Ordinance, then the provisions of such other law or ordinance shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 641, 4-28-2003) 
Editor's note— The penalty in subsection 2302 1.c) has been superseded by Ord. No. 600, making violations a municipal civil infraction. See Township Code, § 1-5.  
Sec. 2303. - Amendment. 
1.  Legislative body may amend. The legislative body may amend the regulations and provisions stated in the text of this Ordinance, and the boundaries of zoning districts shown on the zoning district map may be amended, supplemented, or changed by ordinance by the legislative body in accordance with the applicable zoning enabling legislation of the state. 
2.  Initiation of amendments. Proposals for amendments, supplements, or changes may be initiated by the legislative body of its own action, by the planning commission, or by petition of one or more owners of property to be affected by the proposed amendment. 
3.  Amendment procedure. 
a)  Petition to legislative body. Each petition by one or more owners for an amendment shall be submitted upon an application of standard form to the township clerk. A fee as established by the legislative body shall be paid at the time of application to cover costs of necessary advertising for public hearings, for use of a standard amendment sign, and investigation of the amendment request. No part of such fee shall be returnable to a petitioner. The township clerk shall transmit the application to the planning commission for recommended action. In the event the allowance of a desired use requires both a rezoning and special use permit, both requests may be submitted jointly, subject to the following: 
i)  The ordinance procedures for each shall be followed as specified. 
ii)  All applicable standards and specifications required by the ordinance shall be observed. 
b)  Recommendation. The planning commission shall consider each proposal for amendment in terms of its own judgment on particular factors related to the individual proposal and in terms of the likely effect of such proposal upon the development plans for the community. The planning commission may recommend any additions or modifications to the original amendment petition. 
c)  Public hearing. The planning commission shall conduct at least one public hearing with notice given in accordance with section 2305. 
d)  Saginaw County Metropolitan Planning Commission. Following the conclusion of the public hearing, the township planning commission shall submit the proposed amendment, including any zoning district map, to the Saginaw County Metropolitan Planning Commission for its review. The approval of the county planning commission shall be conclusively presumed unless such commission shall, within 30 days of its receipt, have notified the legislative body of its disapproval or approval. 
e)  Legislative body. Upon receipt of the planning commission together with the county planning commission's recommendation, the legislative body shall review said recommendations. 
If the legislative body shall deem any amendments, changes, additions, or departures are advisable to the proposed ordinance amendment recommended by the planning commission, it shall refer the same back to the planning commission for a report thereon within a time specified by the legislative body. 
After receiving the proposed amendment recommendations heretofore specified, the legislative body shall grant a hearing on the proposed amendment to any property owner who has filed a written request to be so heard and shall request the planning commission to attend such hearing. 
Thereafter, the legislative body may deny or adopt the amendment with or without any changes. 
f)  Resubmittal. No application for a rezoning which has been denied by the legislative body shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of the last denial, except on grounds of newly discovered evidence or proof of changed conditions found upon inspection by the legislative body to be valid. 
4.  Findings of fact required. In reviewing any petition for a zoning amendment, the planning commission shall identify and evaluate all factors relevant to the petition and shall report its findings in full, along with its recommendations for disposition of the petition, to the township board within 90 days of the filing date of the petition. The facts to be considered by the planning commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
a)  The requested zoning change is consistent with the adopted comprehensive development plan, unless one of the following is substantially demonstrated: 
i)  There was an original mistake in the zoning classification. 
ii)  There have been significant changes in conditions since adoption of the plan. 
iii)  There has been a change in public development policies for the area in question. 
b)  Whether the requested zoning change is justified by a change in conditions since the original ordinance was adopted or by an error in the original ordinance. 
c)  The precedents and possible effects of such precedents which might result from approval or denial of the petition. 
d)  The capabilities of the township or other government agencies to provide any services, facilities and/or programs that might be required if the petition were approved. 
e)  The probability of any significant negative environmental impacts which would result if the petitioned zoning change occurred and the resulting permitted structures were built. 
f)  The effect of approval of the petition on the condition of and/or value of property in the township or in adjacent civil divisions. 
g)  The effect of approval of the petition on adopted development policies of Saginaw Township and other government units. 
h)  Whether the proposed change is consistent with other zones, land uses and the trend of development in the area. 
i)  All findings of fact shall be made a part of the public records of the meetings of the planning commission and the township board. An amendment shall not be approved unless these and other identified facts are affirmatively resolved in terms of the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Saginaw Township or civil divisions where applicable. 
5.  Conditional rezoning request. Saginaw Charter Township will not require nor imply that conditional zoning or zoning agreements are a necessity or a condition for approval. 
a)  A request for conditional zoning or a zoning agreement shall be submitted, in writing, to the zoning administrator, chairman of the township planning commission and the township supervisor. The request shall be required prior to any application for rezoning or appearance before the planning commission. 
b)  Upon receipt of the request, the zoning administrator will prepare a memo to the planning commission and the township board detailing that a request has been received, from whom and the area proposed for rezoning. The applicant will receive a copy as well. The zoning administrator, the township supervisor and the chairman of the planning commission will arrange for an informal meeting with the developer to discuss the specific request or requests. 
c)  Informal review process. An informal meeting will be held with the zoning administrator, the township supervisor and chairman of the planning commission and the proposed developer or developers. During the meeting the developer should be prepared to provide the following information, in writing: 
i.  The zoning district desired. 
ii.  The specific use proposed. 
iii.  A conceptual layout. A full site plan is not needed at this time. 
iv.  Identification of particular items that might be necessary to mitigate the proposed rezoning and associated development. 
d)  From this informal meeting, the township will provide a follow-up letter to the developer and copied to the planning commission and township board which details the following: 
i.  The proposed use of the parcel and the desired zoning district. 
ii.  A discussion of all related zoning requirements included within the existing zoning ordinance. 
iii.  A discussion of potential items in addition to the typical zoning requirements, which may be necessary or desirable to mitigate the proposed rezoning, and associated development. 
iv.  A proposed timeline for the process, identifying key dates for submittal, public hearings and tentative approval. 
v.  An overview of the discussion, including any relative buffering or other such items which may be considered by the planning commission in terms of surrounding uses, intensity of surrounding uses and the purpose and intent of the zoning regulations and the adopted master plan and any other policy documents or guide so adopted by the township. 
e)  Formal review process. Using the proposed timeline as a guide, the developer or developers will submit all their required information, which for conditional zoning or zoning agreement shall be: 
i.  At a minimum, a site plan done to such a level of detail that assures the basic arrangement of any structures and connection to required utilities. 
ii.  An elevation of the proposed structure. 
iii.  The rezoning request must be submitted in accordance with the township's rezoning policy, which requires submission at least 30 days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission meeting. 
• It is important to note that these items will be made part of the approval of the rezoning. Failure to complete the project as approved by the township may result in a loss of the status of the conditional zoning. 
f)  All public notifications, reviews and hearings will be scheduled and advertised as set forth in the zoning ordinance and as typically practiced in the township for the rezoning of land. If the proposed use requires a special land use permit, the special land use permit and hearing may be conducted concurrently if the site plans and appropriate documentation are provided. 
g)  The township attorney will draft a zoning agreement for execution by the township and the developer. 
h)  Any and all conditions imposed as part of the conditional zoning or zoning agreement process must meet the following criteria: 
i.  Conditions such as building appearance, landscaping, setbacks in an amount more than what is required by the current zoning ordinance; screening or buffering in an amount more than what is required by the current zoning ordinance, etc., shall be directly related to the proposed project and serve to mitigate any potentially deleterious effects on surrounding properties or properties in general. 
ii.  Conditions serving as additional performance standards, including but not limited to lighting, noise, traffic, etc., shall be directly related to the proposed project and development and should serve to mitigate any potentially deleterious effects on surrounding properties, the road network, and the general area. 
iii.  Conditions limiting the specific use of the property are permitted, however, the planning commission and township board should be mindful of being too specific. For example, limiting a use to a "professional office" may prevent the parcel from being used for something similar in intensity, yet different, such as a day care center or commercial or private school. Care should be taken to be specific in terms of standards and intensity and more flexible in terms of naming specific uses. 
iv.  The planning commission will forward their recommendations to the township board for consideration. 
i)  If the planning commission recommends, and the township board approves a conditional zoning or zoning agreement request, the zoning designation will be noted on the zoning map as an overlay district and the zoning will be referenced as a footnote on the map itself. The footnote will refer to the actual zoning case, the zoning approval and specific conditions and the ordinance number. 
j)  Final zoning agreement. A zoning agreement shall be drafted by the township attorney and executed. The developer shall be responsible for all costs associated with the drafting and executing of the zoning agreement. 
i.  The developer, the chairman of the planning commission and the township clerk shall all sign the submitted documentation. A copy will be returned to the developer and the original shall stay with the township. 
ii.  A copy will be recorded at the Saginaw County Register of Deeds office. 
k)  Enforcement. By approving the conditional zoning or zoning agreement, the township grants rezoning and then, subsequently or concurrently, site plan approval. The specific conditions imposed and agreed to by the developer and the township become part of the approval. 
l)  Should the developer not meet the conditions as specified, they will be considered in violation of the Township Zoning Ordinance and will be pursued as such. 
m)  Any change to the conditions shall require a rezoning and shall follow the same procedure as identified in subsection 2303.5. 
n)  Should the developer not complete the proposed project within 18 months, the property shall revert to the previous zoning classification. 
o)  Should the developer abandon the specific use and it is vacant and/or abandoned for a period of 18 months, the parcel shall convert to its previous zoning classification. 
p)  A property that reverts from conditional zoning will be considered a legal nonconforming use and subject to all applicable zoning regulations. Reversion of the subject property shall require: 
i.  The original developer, the current property owner (if different) and the occupant(s) of the property shall be notified of the pending reversion by certified mail. The township board and planning commission shall receive the same notice. The notice will provide a 30-day period for which the developer/owner can seek an extension of the time frame or begin construction. 
ii.  If, after the 30 day time frame, no action or formal request has been made, the property in question and so legally described and noted, will be published as a rezoning. The same notice and publication requirements followed for a typical rezoning process shall be followed. The notice will include a time and date for a public hearing at which comments related to the reversion will be held. 
(Ord. No. 692, 10-23-2006; Ord. No. 694, 1-8-2007) 
State Law reference— Zoning amendments, MCL 125.284.  
Sec. 2304. - Board of appeals. 
1.  Creation and membership. 
a)  Establishment. The township board, upon exercising the authority of Public Act No. 184 of 1943 (MCL 125.271 et seq.), provides that a township board of appeals be established. 
b)  Membership, terms of office. The township board of appeals shall consist of five members. The first member of the board of appeals shall be a member of the township planning commission. The remaining members of the board of appeals shall be selected from the electors of the township. The members selected shall be representative of the population distribution and of the various interests present in the township. One member may be a member of the township board. An elected officer of the township shall not serve as chairman of the board of appeals. An employee or contractor of the township board may not serve as a member or an employee of the township board of appeals. The township board may appoint not more than two alternate members for the same term as regular members to the zoning board of appeals. An alternate member may be called as specified to serve as a member of the zoning board of appeals in the absence of a regular member if the regular member will be unable to attend one or more meetings. An alternate member may also be called to serve as a member for the purpose of reaching a decision on a case in which the member has abstained for reasons of conflict of interest. The alternate member appointed shall serve in the case until a final decision is made. The alternate member has the same voting rights as a regular member of the zoning board of appeals. A member of the zoning board of appeals may be removed by the township board for misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office upon written charges and after public hearing. A member shall disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest. Failure of a member to disqualify himself or herself from a vote in which the member has a conflict of interest constitutes malfeasance in office. The term of office for members appointed to the zoning board of appeals shall be for three years, except for members serving because of their membership on the planning commission or legislative body, whose terms shall be limited to the time they are members of those bodies. The term of each member shall be for three years, except that of the members first appointed two shall serve for two years and the remaining members for the three years. A successor shall be appointed not more than one month after the term of the preceding member has expired. All vacancies for unexpired terms shall be filled for the remainder of the term. A township board of appeals shall not conduct business unless a majority of the members of the board are present. 
2.  Organization and procedures. 
a)  Rules of procedure. The board of appeals shall adopt its own rules of procedure as may be necessary to conduct its meetings and carry out its function. The board shall choose its chairman and, in his absence, an acting chairman. 
b)  Meetings. Meetings shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such times as the board of appeals may determine. All meetings by the board shall be open to the public. The board may declare any meetings, or part of any meeting, a study meeting to pursue matters of business without comment or interruption from the public in attendance. 
c)  Records. Minutes shall be recorded of all proceedings which shall contain evidence and date relevant to every case considered, together with the votes of the members and the final disposition of each case. Such minutes shall be filed in the office of the township clerk and shall be made available to the general public. 
d)  Counsel. The township attorney shall act as legal counsel for the board and shall be present at all meetings upon request by the board. 
3.  Appeals to the appeals board. 
A.  A demand for a zoning appeal is received by the zoning administrator. Appeals can be filed by: 
(1)  A person aggrieved; or 
(2)  An officer, department, board, or bureau of the state or local unit of government. 
B.  The appeals board shall have the authority to hear appeals concerning: 
(1)  All questions that arise in the administration of the zoning ordinance, including interpretation of the zoning map. 
(2)  All administrative orders, requirements, decisions or determinations made by an administrative official or body charged with enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
(3)  All decisions of the zoning administrator. 
(4)  All decisions concerning site plan review. 
C.  A fee as established by the legislative body shall be paid to the zoning administrator at the time of filing application with the board. The purpose of such fee is to cover in part the necessary advertisements, investigations and other expenses incurred by the board in connection with the appeal. 
D.  Upon receipt of a demand for appeal, the zoning administrator will review the demand for appeal to insure it is complete and the fee is paid. 
(1)  If the application is not complete, the zoning administrator will return the application to the applicant with a letter that specifies the additional material required. 
(2)  If the application is complete, the zoning administrator shall establish a date to hold a hearing on the appeal. 
E.  The appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the body or officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the zoning board of appeals that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would in the opinion of the body or officer cause imminent peril of life or property, in which case proceedings may be stayed by a restraining order issued by the zoning board of appeals or a circuit court. 
F.  The notices shall be given in accordance with section 2305 of this Ordinance. 
G.  The appeals board shall hold a hearing on the demand for appeal. 
(1)  Representation at hearing. Upon the hearing, any party or parties may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(2)  Standards for variance decisions by the appeals board. The appeals board shall base its decision on variances from the strict requirements of this Ordinance so that the spirit of the ordinance is observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done based on the following standards: 
a.  For dimensional variances. A dimensional variance may be granted by the zoning board of appeals only in cases where the applicant demonstrates in the official record of the public hearing that a practical difficulty exists by showing all of the following: 
(i)  That the need for the requested variance is due to unique circumstances or physical conditions of the property involved, such as narrowness, shallowness, shape, water, or topography and is not due to the applicant's personal or economic difficulty. 
(ii)  That the need for the requested variance is not the result of actions of the property owners or previous property owners (self-created). 
(iii)  That strict compliance with regulations governing area, setback, frontage, height, bulk, density or other dimensional requirements will unreasonably prevent the property owner from using the property for a permitted purpose, or will render conformity with those regulations unnecessarily burdensome. 
(iv)  That the requested variance is the minimum variance necessary to do substantial justice to the applicant as well as to other property owners in the district. 
(v)  That the requested variance will not cause an adverse impact on surrounding property, property values, or the use and enjoyment of property in the neighborhood or zoning district. 
H.  If the demand for appeal is for a variance the appeals board shall either grant, grant with conditions, or deny the application. The appeals board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. A majority vote of the membership of the appeals board is necessary to grant a dimensional variance and rule on an interpretation of the ordinance. The decision shall be in writing and reflect the reasons for the decision. 
(1)  At a minimum, the record of the decision shall include: 
a.  Formal determination of the facts; 
b.  The conclusions derived from the facts (reasons for the decision); 
c.  The decision. 
(2)  After the zoning board of appeals approves the minutes of its decision or otherwise certifies its decision in writing, it shall be copied and delivered by first class mail to the person demanding the appeal, the administrator, and other parties. 
I.  Any person having an interest affected by such decision shall have a right to appeal to circuit court within 30 days of the certified decision of the appeals board, as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 693, 11-27-2006) 
Cross reference— Boards and commissions, § 2-291 et seq. 
State Law reference— Board of appeals, MCL 125.288 et seq.  
Sec. 2305. - Public notice. 
1.  Public notification. All applications for development approval requiring a public hearing shall comply with the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006 and the other provisions of this section with regard to public notification. 
A.  Responsibility. When the provisions of this Ordinance or the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act require that notice be published, the zoning administrator shall be responsible for preparing the content of the notice, having it published in a newspaper of general circulation in Saginaw Charter Township and mailed or delivered as provided in this section. 
B.  Content. All mail, personal and newspaper notices for public hearings shall: 
(1)  Describe nature of the request: Identify whether the request is for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, ordinance interpretation or other purpose. 
(2)  Location. Indicate the property that is the subject of the request. The notice shall include a listing of all existing street addresses within the subject property. Street addresses do not need to be created and listed if no such addresses currently exist within the property. If there are no street addresses, other means of identification may be used such as a tax parcel identification number, identifying the nearest cross street, or including a map showing the location of the property. No street addresses must be listed when 11 or more adjacent properties are proposed for rezoning, or when the request is for an ordinance interpretation not involving a specific property. 
(3)  When and where the request will be considered: Indicate the date, time and place of the public hearing(s). 
(4)  Written comments: Include a statement describing when and where written comments will be received concerning the request. Include a statement that the public may appear at the public hearing in person or by counsel. 
(5)  Handicap access. Information concerning how handicap access will be accommodated if the meeting facility is not handicap accessible. 
C.  Personal and mailed notice. 
1.  General. When the provision of this Ordinance or state law require that personal or mailed notice be provided, notice shall be provided to: 
a.  The owners of property for which approval is being considered, and the applicant, if different than the owner(s) of the property. 
b.  Except for rezoning requests involving 11 or more adjacent properties or an ordinance interpretation request that does not involve a specific property; to all persons to whom real property is assessed within 300 feet of the boundary of the property subject to the request, regardless of whether the property or occupant is located within the boundaries of Saginaw Charter Township. If the name of the occupant is not known, the term "occupant" may be used in making notification. Notification need not be given to more than one occupant of a structure, except that if a structure contains more than one dwelling unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses, or organizations, one occupant of each unit or spatial area shall receive notice. In the case of a single structure containing more than four dwelling units or other distinct spatial areas owned or leased by different individuals, partnerships, businesses or organizations, notice may be given to the manager or owner of the structure who shall be requested to post the notice at the primary entrance to the structure. The applicant shall provide the zoning administrator with a list of such persons along with the application. 
All neighborhood organizations, public utility companies, railroads and other persons which have requested to receive notice pursuant to sections X.Y.2 [subsection 2305.2], registration to receive notice by mail. 
c.  Other governmental units or infrastructure agencies within one mile of the property involved in the application. 
(2)  Notice by mail/affidavit. Notice shall be deemed mailed by its deposit in the United States mail, first class, properly addressed, postage paid. The zoning administrator shall prepare a list of property owners and registrants to whom notice was mailed, as well as anyone to whom personal notice was delivered. 
D.  Timing of notice. Unless otherwise provided in the Michigan Zoning Enabling Act, PA 110 of 2006, or this Ordinance where applicable, notice of a public hearing shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  For a public hearing on an application for a rezoning, text amendment, special land use, planned unit development, variance, appeal, or ordinance interpretation: Not less than 15 days before the date the application will be considered for approval (THIS MEANS IT MUST BE PUBLISHED IN A NEWSPAPER OF GENERAL CIRCULATION AND FOR THOSE RECEIVING PERSONAL NOTICE, RECEIVED BY MAIL OR PERSONAL NOTICE, NOT LESS THAN 15 DAYS BEFORE THE HEARING). 
2.  Registration to receive notice by mail. 
A.  General. Any neighborhood organization, public utility company, railroad or any other person may register with the zoning administrator to receive written notice of all applications for development approval pursuant to subsection 2305.1.C.(1)c., personal and mailed notice, or written notice of all applications for development approval within the zoning district in which they are located. The zoning administrator shall be responsible for providing this notification. Fees may be assessed for the provision of this notice, as established by the legislative body. 
B.  Requirements. The requesting party must provide the zoning administrator information on an official form to ensure notification can be made. All registered persons must re-register biannually to continue to receive notification pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 693, 11-27-2006)  
[CHAPTER 24. - ACCESS CONTROL] 
 
Sec. 2401. - Arterial street access driveway regulations. 
1.  Intent and purpose. This article is intended to recognize the unique and disparate functions of major and minor arterials which include long-distance traffic movement as well as land access to individual traffic generators. It is the purpose of this article to serve the public interest by minimizing operational difficulties caused by these generally incompatible traffic functions. 
The regulations of this article strive to promote the efficient use of public thoroughfares, protect the public investment in long-distance traffic-carrying facilities, diminish hazardous traffic conditions, minimize accidents and property damage, and avoid future degradation of arterial street traffic capacity. Simultaneously, the regulations strive to protect the right of abutting land owners to reasonable access. 
These regulations are in effect in all communities that abut the Tittabawassee Road Corridor, as defined in section 2. The presence of this language in each municipality's zoning ordinance is intended to promote the consistent and continued intent and purpose of this Ordinance. 
2.  Applicability. The regulations set forth in this article will apply to the Tittabawassee Road Corridor from M-47 (Midland Road) to the Saginaw River and as designated on the official municipal zoning map. These regulations shall apply as an overlay district to the General Ordinance, as shown on the official Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Map. 
These regulations will only apply when the average daily bi-directional traffic volumes on Tittabawassee Road, for one-half mile east or west of the proposed access point, exceed 13,000 vehicles. In addition, these regulations will apply if traffic development is expected to cause the average daily bi-directional traffic volume to exceed 13,000 vehicles for one-half mile east or west of the proposed access point. 
As an overlay zone, these regulations will apply in addition to those regulations presently in force. Where there are actual or implied conflicts between regulations in the overlay zone and the base zoning district, the Tittabawassee Road Corridor Overlay Zone regulations shall apply. Construction or any alteration of a direct access driveway, except resurfacing, along any public street, road or highway within the overlay zone shall require issuance of an access permit from the planning commission and the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
The Saginaw County Road Commission will count and determine the average daily traffic count on Tittabawassee Road for purposes of this Ordinance. 
3.  Description of access control overlay zone. The overlay zone in Saginaw Township will be along the frontage of Tittabawassee Road from I-675 to M-47 (Midland Road) for a depth of 600 feet as measured from the proposed right-of-way line for Tittabawassee Road. Intersecting road frontages will also be included in the overlay zone for a distance of 600 feet. The overlay zone is shown on the Saginaw Charter Township Zoning Map. 
4.  Performance standards. It shall be unlawful to construct or utilize any direct access driveway which does not meet the following criteria: 
a)  Any driveway design utilized must allow an entering vehicle turning speed of 15 miles per hour to help reduce interference with through street traffic. 
b)  Driveway design and placement must be in harmony with internal circulation and parking design such that the entrance can absorb the maximum rate of inbound traffic during a normal weekday peak traffic period as determined by a traffic survey method approved by the planning commission. 
c)  There must be sufficient on-site storage to accommodate at least five queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without utilizing any portion of the paved street or in any other way interfering with street traffic. 
d)  Provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels should be provided through coordinated or joint parking systems, service drives, or other methods determined at the time of site plan review. 
e)  Driveway entrances must be able to accommodate all vehicle types having occasion to enter the site, including delivery vehicles, without inhibiting other vehicles either on the road or those entering or exiting the site. 
f)  Driveway placement should be such that loading and unloading activities will in no way hinder vehicle ingress or egress. 
g)  Direct access driveway placement must be such that an exiting vehicle has an unobstructed sight distance from the stop bar, according to the following schedule: 
Road Design Speed 
(mph) 	Site Distance 
(Feet) 
30 	220 
35 	225 
40 	275 
45 	325 
50 	350 
 
h)  Driveway design must be such that an entering vehicle will not encroach upon the exit lane of a two-way driveway. In addition, an exiting vehicle turning right must be able to enter traffic utilizing only the first through traffic lane available without encroachment into the adjacent through lane. 
5.  Permit application. All applications for driveway approach permits shall be made on a form prescribed by and available at Saginaw Township and the Saginaw County Road Commission. 
a)  Permit applications shall be accompanied by clear, scaled drawings (minimum of 1? = 20) in triplicate showing the following items: 
i)  Location and size of all structures proposed on the site. 
ii)  Size and arrangement of parking stalls on aisles. 
iii)  Proposed plan of routing motor vehicles entering and leaving the site. 
iv)  Property lines. 
v)  Right-of-way lines (existing and proposed, if different) 
vi)  Intersecting roads, streets, and driveways within 300 feet either side of the property on both sides of the corridor. 
vii)  Width of right-of-way. 
viii)  Width of road surface. 
xi)[ix)]  Type of surface and dimensions of driveways. 
x)  Proposed turning radii. 
xi)  Proposed treatment of right-of-way adjacent to driveway(s) and between the right-of-way line and property line. Show all proposed landscaping, signs, aboveground utilities, etc. 
xii)  Traffic analysis and trip generation survey results and methodology obtained from a licensed engineer if determined necessary by the planning director. 
xiii)  Design dimensions and justification for any alternative or innovative access design. 
xiv)  Dumpster location. 
xv)  Adjacent parcel information, such as, but not limited to, parking lots, buildings, structures, mutual drives, etc. 
6.  Permit review process. 
a)  Application for an access permit may be obtained from Saginaw Township. 
b)  The completed application must be received by the Saginaw Township Zoning Administrator at least 14 days prior to the planning commission meeting where the permit will be reviewed. 
c)  The applicant, the Saginaw County Road Commission and the zoning administrator may meet prior to the planning commission meeting to review the application and proposed access design. 
d)  The planning commission shall review and recommend approval, or denial, or request additional information prior to forwarding the access application to the Saginaw County Road Commission for their review. 
e)  The Saginaw County Road Commission shall review the access permit application and conclusions of the planning commission. One of three actions may result: 
i)  If the planning commission and the road commission approve the application as submitted, the access permit shall be granted. 
ii)  If both the planning commission and the road commission deny the application, the permit shall not be granted. 
iii)  If either the planning commission or road commission requests additional information, approve with conditions, or do not concur in approval or denial, there shall be a joint meeting of the administrative staff of the Saginaw County Road Commission, Saginaw Township Planning Commission and the applicant. The purpose of this meeting will be to review the application to obtain concurrence between the planning commission and the road commission regarding approval or denial. 
No application will be considered approved, nor will any permit be considered valid unless both above-mentioned agencies have indicated approval. 
f)  The zoning administrator shall keep a record of each application for an access permit which has been submitted, including the disposition of each one. This record shall be a public record. 
g)  An access permit remains valid for a period of one year from the date it was issued. If the permit holder fails to begin earnest construction authorized by the access permit by the end of one year, the permit is automatically null and void. Any additional rights which have been granted by the planning commission or the zoning board of appeals, such as special use permits or variances, expire together with the access permit. 
Any performance guarantee shall be refunded to the permit holder unless the failure to initiate activity has resulted in costs to Saginaw Township or the road commission. If any amount of the guarantee remains after said costs are satisfied, the balance of the guarantee shall be released and returned to the permit holder. 
h)  The permit may be extended for a period not to exceed one year. The extension must be required in writing by the permit holder before the expiration of the initial permit period. Administrative staff of Saginaw Township may approve a permit extension, provided there are no existing or planned deviations from the original access permit site or other sites within 300 feet, and there are no violations of applicable ordinances. If there is any deviation or cause for question, the administrative staff of the municipality shall consult a representative of the Saginaw County Road Commission for input. 
i)  Reissuance of an access permit which has expired requires a new access application form to be filled out and processed independently of previous action. 
j)  The permittee shall assume all responsibility for all maintenance of such driveway approaches from the right-of-way line to the paved edge of the traveled roadway. 
k)  Where a permit has been granted for entrances to a parking facility, said facility shall not be altered or the plan of operation changed until a revised plan has been submitted and approved as specified in this section. 
l)  Application for a permit to construct or reconstruct any driveway entrance and approach to a site shall also cover the reconstruction or closing of all nonconforming or unused entrances and approaches to the same site at the expense of the property owner. 
m)  When a building permit is sought for the reconstruction or remodeling of an existing site or a zoning or occupancy certificate is sought for use or change of use for any land, buildings, or structures, all of the existing as well as proposed driveway approaches and parking facilities shall comply or be made to comply with all design standards as set forth in this Ordinance prior to the issuance of a zoning or occupancy certificate. 
n)  Saginaw Township and the Saginaw County Road Commission acting jointly may require a performance bond or cash deposit in any sum not to exceed $5,000.00 for each such approach or entrance to insure compliance with all of the terms of the permit. Such bond shall terminate and the deposit be returned to the permittee when the terms of the permit have been met or when the permit is canceled or terminated. 
7.  Driveway spacing. Driveway spacing will be determined as a function of arterial road operating speeds. Spacing will be determined according to the following schedule: 
Driveway Spacing* 
Table 1 
Posted Road Speed 
(mph) 	Minimum Spacing 
(feet) 
25 	105 
30 	125 
35 	150 
40 	185 
45 	230 
50 	275 
 
*(Standards are derived from the American Association of State Highway Transportation Officials, Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, Table of Stopping Sight Distance.) 
These spacings are based on average vehicle acceleration and deceleration rates and are considered necessary to maintain safe stopping distances and traffic operation. Spacing will be measured from the midpoint of each driveway. In the event that a particular parcel or parcels lack sufficient arterial frontage to maintain adequate spacing, the landowner(s) have the following options: 
a)  The adjacent landowners may agree to establish a common driveway in compliance with the regulations stated herein. The driveway must meet standard specifications, and the estimated driveway volume will be the sum of the trip generation rate of all land uses in question. A joint easement agreement among all properties involved must be entered into prior to an access permit being granted. 
b)  If a common driveway cannot be established, for reasons beyond the property owners' (both the proponent and adjacent landowner's) control, the proponent can seek a variance from the zoning board of appeals from minimum spacing, but in no case should the variance be greater than the next lowest classification on Table 4. For example, on a 40 mile per hour arterial requiring a 185-foot spacing, the distance may be reduced to no less than 150 feet, which is the standard for a 35 mile per hour facility. 
8.  Number of driveways per parcel. 
a)  A maximum of one driveway opening may be permitted to a particular site from Tittabawassee Road and one abutting street. Wherever feasible, access must be obtained from an abutting street. 
b)  When, in the opinion of the Saginaw Township or the road authority's traffic engineer, and in the views of the permittee, it is in the interest of good traffic operation, the board may permit one additional driveway entrance along a continuous site frontage in excess of 300 feet or two additional driveway entrances along a continuous site frontage in excess of 600 feet. 
c)  Where a dual service driveway, as depicted in Figure 5, is used, it will be considered, for purposes of this section, to be only one direct access driveway. 
d)  In the case of dual one-way driveways, one pair may be used per 250 feet of frontage. Only one pair of one-way drives may be used per street frontage. 
9.  Design criteria. The design features described and illustrated in this section shall be used by the applicant in dimensioning a proposed driveway or driveway system or plans accompanying the driveway permit application. Figure 1 depicts the standard minimum driveway design. Every driveway constructed along and within a public right-of-way must at least meet the listed design criteria. 
a)  [Driveway traffic volumes in excess of 750/vehicles per day.] If projected driveway traffic volumes exceed 750/vehicles per day for all traffic using the driveway, a departure from the standard design may be required. Saginaw Township, in conjunction with the Saginaw County Road Commission, may specify a driveway system which will accommodate vehicle movements normally expected without creating undue congestion or hazard on the road. 
The applicant may also request a particular alternative design as part of the site plan accompanying the driveway application permit. 
i)  The following figures (1 through 8) and tables (2 through 5) depict driveway standards and reasonable working ranges for each standard. 
This standard shall be used unless the zoning administrator, in consultation with the Saginaw County Road Commission, determines that another dimension within the range is more suitable for a particular site or special condition and is approved by the appropriate road authority and municipality. 
Figure 1 
Standard Two-Way Driveway Permitted By Right 
(See Table 2)  
Standard two-way driveways permitted by right 
b)  [Right-turn lanes and tapers.] Right-turn lanes and tapers will be required when: 
i)  Expected right-turn ingress movements meet or exceed 50/hour during a typical weekday peak traffic period. 
ii)  When driveway volumes are expected to meet or exceed 1,000 vehicles per day. 
iii)  When the Saginaw County Road Commission or Saginaw Township Engineer can document, through traffic analysis, that such treatment is necessary to avoid congestion and/or unsafe conditions on the public thoroughfare. 
c)  [Center left-turn lanes with tapers.] Center left-turn lanes in conjunction with tapers will be required when: 
i)  Existing traffic volume or traffic generated by any new development or change to an existing development causes any bi-directional hourly volume to exceed 825 vehicles for one-half mile east or west of the proposed access point. The required storage length for left-turn lanes shall be according to the Federal Highway Administration's standards for left turn storage lanes, available in the Saginaw County Planning Office. 
A right-turn lane shall be preceded by a taper. The design feature dimensions of a right-turn lane and taper shall conform to those given in Figure 2 and Table 2. 
Figure 2 
Right-Turn Lane and Tapers 
(Entering Tapers)  
Right-turn lane and tapers 
Figure 3 
Right-Turn Lane and and Tapers 
(Exiting Tapers)  
Right-turn lane and tapers 
Table 3 
Right-Turn Lane and Tapers 
Standards For Design 
Design Features 	Curbed Road 	Uncurbed Road 
	Standard 	Range 	Standard 	Range 
Curb Ending 	B 	Not Applicable 	10 ft. 	No range 
Right-Turn Lane Length 	F 	Length of lane = width of lane × speed 	
Right-Turn Lane Width 	G 	12 ft. 	10—15 ft. 	12 ft. 	10—15 ft. 
Entering Tapers 	H 	150 ft.* 	50—150 ft. 	150 ft. 	50—150 ft. 
Exiting Tapers 	H 	150 ft.* 	50—150 ft. 	150 ft. 	50—150 ft. 
Exiting Radius 	D 	Not Applicable 	50 ft. 	50—150 ft. 
 
* If a right-turn lane is used, the entering or existing taper standard shall be 50 feet. Without a right-turn lane, the entering or existing taper standard shall be 150 feet. 
This standard shall be used unless the zoning administrator in consultation with the traffic engineer determines that another dimension within the range is suitable for a particular site or special condition. 
d)  Driveway profile. Driveway profiles shall be determined using the following criteria: 
i)  The grade of a two-way, one-way or divided commercial driveway shall not exceed 1.5 percent for a minimum distance of 25 feet from the edge of the pavement. Beyond this distance the grade shall not exceed five percent. 
ii)  If the road is curbed and if the sidewalk is ten feet or less from the edge of the pavement, the grade of a driveway shall be the grade required to meet the sidewalk elevation. If that grade would exceed the maximums specified in paragraph 1) above, the sidewalk shall be either tilted or inclined. 
iii)  If the road is uncurbed, the grade of the driveway between the road edge of pavement and the edge of the shoulder shall conform to the slope of the shoulder to the edge of the driveway approach. From that point the dimensions specified in section 2) will apply. 
iv)  For a driveway on an upgrade towards the road, a grade of 1.5 percent for a distance of 100 feet from the edge of the pavement is required. Beyond this distance, the grade shall not exceed four percent and the difference in grades where there is a change of grade shall not exceed three percent. 
v)  Vertical curves with a minimum length of 15 feet shall be provided at a change of grade of four percent or more. 
vi)  If the sidewalk elevation has to be adjusted to meet the driveway, the sidewalk shall be inclined at a rate not to exceed one foot vertical for every 24 feet horizontal. 
e)  Drainage. 
i)  A driveway shall be constructed so that it does not adversely affect the road drainage. The drainage and the stability of the road subgrade shall not be altered by driveway construction or roadside development. 
ii)  Drainage from adjacent parking or storage areas on private property in excess of existing drainage shall not be discharged into the road drainage system. 
Figure 4 
Standard Profile Design  
Standard profile design 
f)  Surfacing and curbing along curbed roads. A driveway shall be paved and curbed from the paved road edge to the proposed right-of-way line (section 303(2), as determined by the engineer. 
g)  Surfacing and curbing along uncurbed roads. A driveway shall be paved and curbed from the paved road surface to the proposed right-of-way line (section 303(2)) or to the point of curvature between the driveway edge and the larger radius, point (b) in Figure 2. The curb ending adjacent to the driveway shall be located at least 13.5 feet from the parallel to the edge of the pavement. 
h)  Surface materials and thickness. The surface of a paved driveway, excluding right-turn lanes, shall be concrete, bituminous or equivalent surfacing material. The thickness of the surface and the base to be used shall be sufficient to provide the bearing capacity needed to carry the proposed traffic loads. A 2½-inch, 250 pound per square yard bituminous mix on eight inches of compacted gravel, eight inches of nonreinforced concrete or equivalent surfacing material which meets current MDOT Standard Specifications for construction is acceptable for normal driveway traffic loads over stable soil. These specifications are minimum requirements and apply to the driveway only. 
i)  Surfacing of right-turn lanes and tapers. 
i)  The pavement of a right-turn lane and accompanying tapers shall match the road pavement, unless the road commission and Saginaw Township both permit the use of an equivalent pavement. 
ii)  The cross slope of a right-turn lane and tapers shall be: 
a)  A continuation of the cross slope of the roadway if the road is curbed. 
b)  Equal to the shoulder slope if the road is uncurbed. 
j)  Shoulders. 
i)  The surface of the shoulder adjacent to a right-turn lane and tapers shall be of the same material as the shoulder and conform to the material as the shoulder and conform to the current Michigan Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Roadway Construction. 
ii)  If the distance between two paved commercial driveways serving the same property is less than 100 feet, measured between adjacent ends of the nearest curbed radii, the applicant shall pave the shoulder between the driveways. 
k)  Driveway curb detail. The driveway curb shall either match the existing curb or shall conform to the current standards for curb and gutter as determined by the township and road commission. 
10.  Corner clearance. Intersecting streets and direct access driveways shall be spaced according to the same regulations for distances between direct access driveways, as listed in section 3, with the exception of the following: direct access driveways must be at least 400 feet from the intersections of M-84 (Bay Road), North Center Road, and Mackinaw Road. 
11.  Consistency with comprehensive plan. In some cases, on a particularly congested arterial, the Saginaw Township Planning Commission may call for specific innovative treatment of access control. Examples may include service drives, continuous right-turn lanes, access off and collector streets, commercial parks, and combined, coordinated parking/access systems. In such cases, any innovative design meeting the spirit and intent of these regulations, and performance standards, may be considered through site plan review. 
12.  Temporary driveway permits. Temporary driveway permits are intended to allow existing driveways and new driveways, necessary to access sites remote from adjacent access, to remain in use until such time as the conditions specified on the permit are met. 
a)  A temporary permit may be granted for: 
i)  Existing driveways that access existing development or are necessary to service farm fields and are only used for that purpose. Existing driveways are legal nonconforming driveways and may exist without a temporary permit under the conditions specified in subsection 13, nonconforming driveways. 
ii)  New driveways necessary to access new development where the new development is remote from adjacent drives that shared access is not feasible at the time of development. 
b)  Conditions upon which the temporary permit will expire may include: 
i)  Adjacent development within 15 feet of the site where the temporary driveway is located is planned. At this time, joint access provisions with the adjacent property owner must take place. 
ii)  The use of the site for which the temporary permit was granted has ceased for six months or more or the use of the site or the driveway has changed such that the use of the driveway is increased to any degree. 
13.  Nonconforming driveways. 
a)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Ordinance and were constructed before the adoption of this Ordinance shall be considered legal nonconforming driveways. 
Existing driveways granted a temporary permit are legal nonconforming driveways until such time as the temporary permit expires. 
b)  Loss of legal nonconforming status results when a nonconforming driveway ceases to be used for its intended purpose, as shown on the approved site plan, for a period of six months or more. Any reuse of the driveway may only take place after the driveway conforms to all aspects of this Ordinance. 
c)  Legal nonconforming driveways may remain in use until such time as the use of the driveway or property is changed or expanded in such a way that it impacts the use of the driveway. At that time, the driveway must be made to conform with all aspects of this Ordinance. 
d)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Ordinance and have been constructed after adoption of this Ordinance shall be considered illegal nonconforming driveways. 
e)  Illegal nonconformities must be cited as violations of this Ordinance, made to cease use of the driveway, and correct any nonconforming aspects of the driveway. Driveways constructed in illegal locations must be closed and all evidence of the driveway removed from the right-of-way and site on which it is located. 
f)  Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the repair, improvement, or modernization of lawful nonconforming driveways. 
14.  Variances for driveway designs. The applicant may apply for a variance from the standard driveway designs, under the following conditions: 
a)  When driveway volumes are expected to meet or exceed 1,000 vehicles per day. 
b)  When expected turning ingress or egress movements meet or exceed 50 per hour during a typical weekday peak traffic period as determined by a traffic study or generally accepted trip generation table, approved by the planning commission, such as the Institute of Transpiration Engineers Trip General Manual. 
c)  When in the judgment of the Saginaw County Road Commission or municipal traffic engineer, specific site conditions require alternative design treatments to provide for safe and efficient driveway operation. 
d)  When a joint or coordinated access-parking system is being used. When two adjacent property owners agree to combine access points, the municipality may grant an incentive bonus. The total road frontage normally required will each be reduced by ten percent for both landowners. (Site circulation and safety standards will still be enforced.) 
e)  When a permittee seeks a variance for an innovative method for access design or operations. 
Variances should be granted only where practical difficulties require an innovative access design or dimensional change that is consistent with the intent of this Ordinance. Variances may not be granted for financial hardship or in any instance where the intent of this Ordinance can be met by abiding by the standards in this document. 
The Saginaw Township Board of Appeals and one representative of the Saginaw County Road Commission shall hear and decide all requests for a variance, interpretation or administrative review of access control regulations. 
15.  Sample driveway design allowed by variance. 
Figure 5 
Dual Service Drive  
Figure 5 Dual Service Drive 
Table 4 
Design Standards 
Dual Service Drive 
Design Features 	Curbed 	Uncurbed 
	Standard 	Range 	Standard 	Range 
Intersecting Angle 	AR 	60° 	45°—90° 	60° 	45°—90° 
Entering Radius 	CR 	20' 	15'—35' 	25' 	15'—35' 
Exiting Radius 	DR 	10' 	5'—25' 	5' 	5'—25' 
Intersecting Angle 	AL 	120° 	90°—135° 	120° 	90°—135° 
Entering Radius 	CL 	10' 	5'—25' 	5' 	5'—15' 
Exiting Radius 	DL 	15' 	5'—50' 	20' 	5'—50' 
Driveway Width 	B 	24' 	20'—36' 	24' 	12'—50' 
30'—36' 
Distance Between Driveways 	S 	20' 	10'—150' 	20' 	10'—150' 
 
The standard shall be used unless the zoning administrator in consultation with the Saginaw County Road Commission and Saginaw Township Planning Commission determines that another dimension within the range is more suitable for a particular site or special condition. 
Figure 8 
Continuous Right Lane  
Continuous right lane 
Single two-way commercial driveway on curbed road. 
Single two-way commercial driveway on uncurbed road. 
Divided commercial driveway. 
Exit drive. 
Entrance Drive. 
Dual service driveways. 
Figure 6 
Sample Coordinated Access Parking System  
Sample coordinated access parking system 
Figure 7 
Sample Service Drives 
Design Standards Based Upon 
Site Plan Review 
[Not published—on file in the township offices] 
Cross reference— Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 58.  
[CHAPTER 25. - ACCESS MANAGEMENT AND OVERLAY] 
 
Sec. 2501. - M-84 and M-58 access management and overlay. 
1.  Purpose, intent and application. The provisions of this Ordinance are intended to: 
a)  Promote safe and efficient travel within the M-84 overlay district. 
b)  Minimize disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic conflicts. 
c)  Ensure safe access by emergency vehicles. 
d)  Protect the substantial public investment in the road system by preserving capacity and avoiding the need for unnecessary and costly reconstruction which disrupts business and traffic flow. 
e)  Separate traffic conflict areas by reducing the number of driveways. 
f)  Provide safe spacing standards between driveways and between driveways and intersections. 
g)  Provide for shared access between abutting properties. 
h)  Implement the M-84 and M-58 corridor access management plans and map recommendations. 
i)  Ensure reasonable access to properties, though not always by the most direct access. 
j)  Coordinate access decisions with the Michigan Department of Transportation and/or the Bay and Saginaw County Road Commission, as applicable. 
2.  Description of applicability. The provisions of this Ordinance apply to an area described as 660 feet east and west of the center line of M-84 between Weiss Street and 660 feet north and south of the center line of M-58 between M-47 and Passolt Road, in Saginaw Township, Saginaw County and M-13/Euclid Avenue in Monitor Township, Bay County. Single-family residential driveways are exempt from this Ordinance. 
In instances where this Ordinance conflicts with the Tittabawassee Road Corridor Overlay Ordinance, the Tittabawassee Overlay Ordinance and any subsequent amendments shall take precedence. 
Any development within the area described in this section that also requires a site plan review at the municipal level will be required to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. In instances where the site plan review procedure or site plan review standards conflict with the local procedures or standards, this Ordinance shall prevail. Aspects of the site plan that are not addressed in this Ordinance shall be governed by the municipality's Ordinance where applicable. 
3.  M-84 access management plan map and M-58 access management plan map. The M-84 and M-58 access management plan maps identify six and seven types of modifications, respectively, that will further the intent of this Ordinance. These modifications are listed both by number and color. Application of the regulations in this Ordinance are intended to achieve the mapped modifications at such time that a site is developed for the first time, redeveloped to the extent that a site plan is required, the owner chooses to make the modifications indicated, or the township causes the modification to take place to achieve necessary safety improvements. Driveways shown on the map without any modifications planned are permitted to exist as they are constructed and located. 
The modifications listed are: 
M-84 	M-58 
a) Entrance closed 	a) Close drive 
b) New entrance 	b) Modify drive 
c) Modify 	c) New drive 
d) Move entrance 	d) Combine existing drives with new drive 
e) Add curb/define entry 	e) Add curb and develop new cross access 
f) Future non-motorized facility 	f) Cross drive when rear access is placed 
g) Restrict access according to ordinance. 	
 
4.  Permanent access for undeveloped parcels or existing developments. 
a)  Each parcel or lot having a single property tax number, as of the effective date of this Ordinance (hereafter referred to as "the parent parcel"), that shares a lot line for less than 450 feet with right-of-way within the corridor as defined in this plan, shall be entitled to one driveway or road access per parcel onto M-84 or M-58. Where a parcel is divided by M-84 or M-58, the portion of the parcel on each side of M-84 or M-58 shall be entitled to access according to the Ordinance. 
i)  All subsequent land divisions of a parent parcel shall not increase the number of driveways or road accesses beyond those entitled to the parent parcel on the effective date of this Ordinance. 
ii)  Parcels subsequently divided from the parent parcel, either by metes and bounds descriptions, or as a plat under the applicable provisions of the Land Division Act, Public Act 288 of 1967, as amended, or as a condominium project in accord with the Condominium Act, Public Act 59 of 1978, as amended, shall have access by another public road, an approved private road if the township permits, or by a service drive meeting the requirements of section 6 service drives, of this Ordinance. 
iii)  If the parcel is a corner lot and a second driveway is warranted, the second driveway shall have access from the abutting street. 
b)  All driveways or access points located on parcels greater than 450 feet shall be at least 450 feet from the nearest access point on the same or adjacent parcels. Residential and farm access driveways are exempt from this regulation. 
c)  A second driveway may be permitted if a registered traffic engineer determines that topographic conditions on the site, curvature on the road, or sight distance limitations demonstrate a second driveway within a lesser distance is safer or the nature of the land use to be served requires a second driveway for safety. The affected agencies, including the local municipality, MDOT and SCRC or the BCRC, as applicable, must unanimously agree to such deviation. 
d)  For parcels or lots abutting M-58, the provisions of this subsection 2501.4 may be superseded by the M-58 conceptual plan, if the planning commission determines that the conceptual plan's recommendations would better ensure the health, safety, welfare and aesthetics of the M-58 corridor. 
5.  Application review, approval and coordination process. 
a)  All standards of the Michigan Department of Transportation and the Saginaw County and Bay County Road Commissions, as applicable, shall be met prior to approval of an access application under this Article. 
b)  Application, review and approval process applications for driveway or access approval related to M-84 shall be made on a form prescribed by and available at Saginaw Charter Township, Kochville Township, Frankenlust Township, and Monitor Township, the Saginaw County or Bay County Road Commission, and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation - Bay City Transportation Service Center. Application related to M-58 shall be made on a form prescribed by and available at Saginaw Charter Township, Saginaw County Road Commission, and/or the Michigan Department of Transportation - Bay City Transportation Service Center. 
c)  Saginaw Charter Township, Kochville Township, Frankenlust Township, and Monitor Township, the Saginaw/Bay County Planning Department, and the Saginaw/Bay County Road Commission and the Michigan Department of Transportation shall meet at least twice each year, at the initiation of the MDOT, to ensure that there is appropriate coordination of the access management review process and outcomes. 
i)  Applications shall be accompanied by clear, scaled drawings (minimum of 1"=20') in triplicate showing the following items: 
a)  Location and size of all structures proposed on the site. 
b)  Size and arrangement of parking stalls on aisles. 
c)  Proposed plan of routing vehicles entering and leaving the site (if passenger vehicles are to be separated from delivery trucks indicate this on the drawing). 
d)  Driveway placement. 
e)  Property lines. 
f)  Intersecting roads, streets and driveways within 300 feet either side of the property on both sides of the street. 
g)  Width of road surface. 
h)  Type of surface and dimensions of driveway. 
i)  Proposed inside and outside turning radii. 
j)  Show all existing and proposed landscaping, signs, and other structures or treatments within and adjacent to the right-of-way. 
k)  Traffic analysis and trip generation survey results, obtained from a licensed traffic engineer for all developments with over 750 vehicle trips per day or one hundred 100 directional peak hour trips. 
l)  Design dimensions and justification for any alternative or innovative access design. 
m)  Dumpsters or other garbage containers. 
n)  Existing and proposed utility box placement. 
ii)  Applications are strongly encouraged to include the following sources for access designs, the National Access Management Manual, TRB, 2002 and the AASHTO Green Book. The following techniques are addressed in these guidebooks and are strongly encouraged to be used when designing access that includes: 
a)  Not more than one driveway access per abutting road. 
b)  Shared driveways. 
c)  Service drives: front, rear and perpendicular. 
d)  Parking lot connections with adjacent property(ies). 
e)  Other appropriate designs to limit access points on an arterial or collector road. 
iii)  Applications may be accompanied by an escrow fee for professional site plan and/or traffic analysis review to be determined by the township in which the project is located. 
d)  Review and Approval Process. The following process shall be completed to obtain access approval: 
i)  A site plan review access application meeting the requirements of section 5 shall be submitted to the zoning administrator, clerk or other township designee of the township. MDOT form 2205, Driveway Permit, shall be submitted concurrently to the MDOT- Bay City Transportation Service Center. 
ii)  The completed application must be received by the township zoning administrator at least 30 days prior to the planning commission meeting where the application will be reviewed. 
iii)  The township in which the application is being made shall forward a copy of the access management application and the site plan to MDOT and the appropriate county road commission. MDOT and the road commission shall provide written comment to the township and discuss any outstanding issues with the township with the intent of reaching consensus on a recommendation for the access management application and site plan. 
In the event that consensus cannot be reached on access management issues, MDOT or the township shall call a meeting of the appropriate road agencies and municipal planning commission representatives prior to the planning commission meeting to review the document and reach consensus on the issue. Applications not forwarded to MDOT and the road commission shall not have completed the review process and may not be acted on by the township planning commission. 
iv)  The planning commission may obtain professional consultation prior to making a decision on the application. Costs for such review shall be the responsibility of the applicant provided the applicant is made aware of the costs prior to the application being considered by the planning commission. 
v)  The township planning commission in which the development is proposed shall review the application and make its determination regarding the driveway. 
vi)  The zoning administrator shall keep a record of each application that has been submitted, including the written disposition of each application. MDOT shall provide the township with a copy of the written permit or any other disposition of the permit for the township's records. This record shall be a public record. 
vii)  Written approval of an application remains valid for a period of one year from the date it was authorized. If authorized construction is not initiated by the end of one year, the authorization is automatically null and void, unless the township specifically extends the time period during which the application remains valid by planning commission action. Any additional approvals that have been granted by the planning commission or the zoning board of appeals, such as a special use permit or variance, also expire at the end of one year. 
viii)  An approval may be extended for a period not to exceed six months. The extension must be requested, in writing, by the applicant before the expiration of the initial approval. The zoning administrator may approve extension of an authorization provided there are no deviations from the original approval present or planned, there are no violations of applicable ordinances and no development on abutting property has occurred with a driveway location that creates an unsafe condition. If there is any deviation or cause for question, the zoning administrator shall consult a representative of the Saginaw/Bay County Planning Commission staff, the Saginaw and/or Bay County Road Commission as applicable, and the Michigan Department of Transportation for input. 
ix)  Re-issuance of an authorization that has expired requires a new access application form to be filled out and processed independently of any previous action. 
x)  The applicant shall assume all responsibility for all maintenance of such driveway approaches from the right-of-way line to the edge of the traveled roadway. 
xi)  Where authorization has been granted for entrances to a parking facility, said facility shall not be altered or the plan of operation changed until a revised access application has been submitted and approved as specified in this section. 
xii)  Application to construct or reconstruct any driveway entrance and approach to a site requires a permit, but shall also address and achieve the reconstruction or closing of all nonconforming or unused entrances and approaches to the same site at the expense of the property owner. 
xiii)  When a building permit is sought for the modification or reconstruction to the extent that a site plan is required in the municipality or by MDOT's requirements (R 247.214. Processing of permits), all of the existing, as well as proposed driveway approaches and parking facilities shall comply, or be brought into compliance, with all design standards as set forth in this Ordinance and the adopted M-84 or M-58 access management plan and map, as applicable, prior to the issuance of a zoning or occupancy certificate and pursuant to the procedures of this section. 
xiv)  The Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable, shall require a performance bond or cash deposit in any sum of a minimum of $10,000.00 for each such new or reconstructed approach or entrance to a commercial use, to ensure compliance with an approved application. Such performance bond shall terminate and the deposit be returned to the applicant when the term of approval have been met or when the authorization is cancelled or terminated. No performance bond is required for residential uses. 
 
Review and Approval Process Flow Chart 
6.  Service drives. 
a)  The use of shared access, parking lot connections and service drives in conjunction with driveway spacing, is intended to preserve traffic flow along thoroughfares and minimize traffic conflict, while retaining reasonable access to the property. Where noted above, or where the planning commission determines that restricting new access points or reducing the number of existing access points may have a beneficial impact on traffic operations and safety while preserving the property owner's right to reasonable access, then access from a side street, a shared driveway, a parking lot connection, or service drive connection to the arterial or collector street may be required. However, where traffic safety would be improved, and the driveway spacing requirements of this Ordinance can be met, then direct connection to the arterial or collector street may be allowed in addition to a required service drive. 
i)  In particular, shared access, service drives or at least a connection between abutting land uses may be required in the following cases: 
a)  Where the driveway spacing standards of this section within this Ordinance cannot be met. 
b)  Where recommended in the M-84 access management plan and map. 
c)  When the driveway could potentially interfere with traffic operations at an existing or planned traffic signal location. 
d)  The site is along a collector or arterial street with high traffic volume, or along segments experiencing congestion or a relatively high number of crashes. 
e)  The property frontage has limited sight distance. 
f)  The fire or emergency services department recommends a second means of emergency access. 
ii)  In areas where frontage roads or rear service drives are recommended, but adjacent properties have not yet developed, the site shall be designed to accommodate a future road/facility designed according to the standards cited in this Ordinance. The planning commission may approve temporary access points where a continuous service drive is not yet available and a performance bond or escrow is accepted to assure elimination of temporary access when the service road is constructed. (See section 7.) 
7.  Standards for construction. Notwithstanding the requirements of the municipality's land division ordinance, the standards for all service drives shall be as follows: 
a)  Site plan review. The planning commission shall review and approve all service drives to ensure safe and adequate continuity of the service drive between contiguous parcels as part of the site plan review process. 
b)  Front and rear service drives. A front or rear service drive may be established on property that abuts only one public road. The design of a service road shall conform with national design guidelines such as those identified in the National Access Management Manual by TRB, the ASSHTO Greenbook, and National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP), "Access Management Guidelines to Activity Centers" Report 348 and "Impacts of Access Management Techniques" Report 420. 
c)  Location. Service roads shall generally be parallel to the front property line and may be located whether in front of, or behind, principal buildings and may be placed in required yards. In considering the most appropriate alignment for a service road, the planning commission shall consider the setbacks of existing and/or proposed buildings and anticipated traffic flow for the site. 
d)  Width and construction. A service drive shall be within an access easement permitting traffic circulation between properties. The easement shall be recorded with the county register of deeds. This easement shall be at least 32 feet wide. A service drive shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet, measured face to face at the curb with an approach width of a minimum of 27 feet at the intersection. The service drive shall be constructed of a paved surface material that is resistant to erosion and shall meet the Saginaw/Bay County Road Commission standards for base and thickness of asphalt or concrete, unless the community has more restrictive standards. 
e)  Snow storage and landscaping areas. A minimum of six feet of snow storage/landscaping area shall be reserved along both sides of the service drive. 
f)  Stacking. A minimum of 60 feet of storage at the intersection for entering and existing vehicles as measured from the pavement edge must be provided for all frontage roads. At driveways where it can be demonstrated that traffic volumes will exceed 750 vehicles per day or 100 vehicles during the peak hour, a minimum of 80 feet of stacking space shall be required. 
g)  Distance from intersection on service drives. Frontage roads and service drive intersections at the collector or arterial street shall be designed according to the same minimum standards as described for driveways. 
h)  Driveway entrance. The planning commission shall approve the location of all access to the service drive, based on the driveway spacing standards referenced in this Ordinance. Access to the service drive shall be located so that there is no undue interference with the free movement of service drive and emergency vehicle traffic, where there is safe sight distance, and where there is a safe driveway grade as established by the MDOT and Saginaw/Bay County Road Commission. 
i)  Driveway radii. All driveway radii shall be shall be concrete curbs and conform with the requirements of the MDOT Access Management Guidebook. 
j)  Acceleration lanes and tapers. The design of the driveway, acceleration, deceleration or taper shall conform with the requirements of the MDOT Access Management Guidebook. 
k)  Elevation. The elevation of a service drive shall be uniform or gently sloping between adjacent properties. 
l)  Service drive maintenance. No service drive shall be established on existing public right-of-way. The service drive shall be a public street (if dedicated and accepted by the applicable road commission) or a private road if permitted, maintained by the adjoining property owners it serves who shall enter into a formal agreement for the joint maintenance of the service drive. The agreement shall also specify who is responsible for enforcing speed limits, parking and related vehicular activity on the service drive. This agreement shall be approved by the municipality's attorney and recorded with the register of deeds. If the service drive is a private road, the local government shall reserve the right to make repairs or improvements to the service drive and charge back the costs. 
m)  Landscaping. Landscaping along the service drive shall conform to the requirements of the municipality's zoning ordinance. Installation and maintenance of landscaping shall be the responsibility of the developer or a property owners association. 
n)  Parking areas. All separate parking areas (those that do not use joint parking cross access) shall have no more than one access point or driveway on the service drive. 
o)  Parking. The service road is intended to be used exclusively for circulation, and not as parking, loading or unloading aisle. Parking shall be prohibited along two-way frontage roads and service drives that are constructed at the minimum width. One-way roads or two-way roads designed with additional width for parallel parking may be allowed if it can be demonstrated through traffic studies that on-street parking will not significantly affect the capacity, safety or operation of the frontage road or service drive. Perpendicular or angle parking along either side of a designated frontage road or service drive is prohibited. The planning commission may require the posting of "no parking" signs along the service road. 
p)  Directional signs and pavement markings. Pavement markings may be required to help promote safety and efficient circulation. The property owner shall be required to maintain all pavement markings. All directional signs and pavement markings along the service drive shall conform with the current Michigan Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
q)  Assumed width of pre-existing service drives. Where a service drive in existence prior to the effective date of this provision has no recorded width, the width will be considered to be 26 feet for the purpose of establishing setbacks and will be measured an equal distance from the midpoint of the road surface. 
r)  Alternate cross access. In the case of expansion, alteration to redesign of existing development where it can be demonstrated that preexisting conditions prohibit installation of a frontage road or service drive in accordance with these standards, the planning commission shall have the authority to allow and/or require alternate cross access between adjacent parking areas through the interconnection of main circulation aisles. Under these conditions, the aisles serving the parking stalls shall be aligned perpendicularly to the access aisle, with islands, curbing and signage to further delineate the edges of the route to be used by through traffic. (See the MDOT Access Management Guidebook for further detail and sample drawings.) 
8.  Temporary access permits. 
a)  A temporary access permit may be conditionally issued to a property included in this adopted corridor or access management plan that plans road improvements and installation of service drives and shared driveways that would eliminate the need for the temporary driveway. 
b)  A temporary access permit shall be reviewed using the temporary permit form during the site plan review process. Failure to use this form and supply the justification for a temporary permit according to the provisions of the form prohibit a temporary access point on the site. A copy of this completed form shall be kept on file with the approved site plan at the township and recorded with the deed to the property for which it applies. This form is included as an appendix to this Ordinance. 
c)  Conditions may be included in the temporary access permit including but not limited to, a limitation on development intensity on the site until adjoining parcels develop which can provide a shared driveway, shared access via a service drive, and/or cross parking lot connection consistent with the requirements of section 6. 
d)  A site plan for property that cannot meet the access requirements of section 6 and has no alternative means of reasonable access to the public road system may be issued a temporary access permit. When adjoining parcels develop which can provide a shared driveway, shared access via a service drive or a cross parking lot connection, the temporary access permit shall be rescinded and an application for an access permit consistent with the requirements of section 5 and 6 shall be required. 
e)  The municipality and the Michigan Department of Transportation, as applicable, may require a performance bond or cash deposit in any sum of a minimum of $10,000.00 for each temporarily permitted driveway to insure compliance with removal of the driveway at such time as the permit stipulates. Such performance bond shall terminate and deposit be returned to the applicant when the term of approval have been met or when the authorization is cancelled or terminated. 
9.  Nonconforming driveways. 
a)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Ordinance and were constructed before the effective date of this Ordinance and existing driveways granted a temporary access permit, shall be considered legal nonconforming driveways. 
b)  Loss of legal nonconforming status results when a change to the site or use requires a new site plan, according to the township zoning ordinance. Any reuse of the driveway may only take place after the driveway conforms to all aspects of this Ordinance. 
c)  When the owner of a property with an existing nonconforming driveway or driveways applies for a permit to upgrade the property, the planning commission will determine whether it is necessary and appropriate to retrofit the existing driveway or driveways. If the developer is proposing a change in use of the driveway the nonconforming status is no longer valid and a permit for the driveway is required from the Michigan Department of Transportation or the road commission as applicable according to the standards of this Ordinance. 
i)  The property owner may be required to establish a retrofit plan. The objectives of the retrofit plan will be to minimize the traffic and safety impacts of development by bringing the number, spacing, location, and design of driveways into conformance with the standards and requirements of this Ordinance to the extent possible without imposing unnecessary hardship on the property owner. The retrofit plan may include: 
a)  Elimination of driveways. 
b)  Realignment or relocation of driveways. 
c)  Provision of shared driveways and/or cross parking lot connection. 
d)  Access by means of a service drive. 
e)  Restriction of vehicle movements (e.g. elimination of left-turns in and out). 
f)  Relocation of parking. 
g)  Traffic demand management (e.g. a reduction in peak hour trips). 
h)  Signalization based on warrants. 
i)  Such other changes as may enhance traffic safety. 
ii)  The requirements of the retrofit plan shall be incorporated as conditions to the permit for the change or upgrade of use and the property owner shall be responsible for the retrofit. 
d)  Driveways that do not conform to the regulations in this Ordinance and have been constructed after adoption of this Ordinance, shall be considered illegal nonconforming driveways. 
e)  Illegal nonconforming driveways are a violation of this Ordinance. The property owner shall have 30 days in which to correct the violation. The property owner shall be issued a violation notice which may include closing off the driveway until any nonconforming aspects of the driveway are corrected. Driveways constructed in illegal locations shall be immediately closed upon detection and all evidence of the driveway removed from the right-of-way and site on which it is located. The costs of such removal shall be borne by the property owner. 
f)  Nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the repair, improvement, or modernization of lawful nonconforming driveways, provided it is done consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance. 
10.  Variances. 
Variance standards: The following standards shall apply when the board of appeals considers a request for a variance from the standards of this Article. 
a)  The granting of a variance shall not be considered until a temporary access permit under section 7 has been considered and rejected. 
b)  Applicants for a variance must provide proof of practical difficulties unique to the parcel (such as wetlands, steep slopes, an odd parcel shape or narrow frontage, or location relative to other buildings, driveways or an intersection or interchange) that make strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance impractical. This shall include proof that: 
i)  Indirect or restricted access cannot be obtained; and, 
ii)  No reasonable engineering or construction solution can be applied to mitigate the condition; and, 
iii)  No reasonable alternative access is available from a road with a lower functional classification than the primary road; and, 
iv)  Without the variance, there is no reasonable access to the site. 
c)  The board of appeals shall make a finding that the applicant for a variance met their burden of proof under b)ii) above, that a variance is consistent with the intent and purpose of this Ordinance, and is the minimum necessary to provide reasonable access. 
d)  Under no circumstances shall a variance be granted unless not granting the variance would deny reasonable access, endanger public health, welfare or safety, or cause an unnecessary hardship on the applicant. No variance shall be granted where such hardship is self-created. 
(Ord. No. 670, 6-28-2004; Ord. No. 695, 1-22-2007) 
